


1
^*HAV$ P

: > , Google
: > , Google
: > , Google
jpiizsiB, Google
TESS
OF THE D'URBERVILLES
THOMAS HARDY
. HARPER S- BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
• Google
?J9
H W 7 2 £ c Books by
, J 9 2 THOMAS HARDY
■■f-a
own 8vo. Map.
FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD.
'THE MAYOR OF CASTERBRIDGE.
TE3S OF THE D'URBERVILLES. Cr
TWO ON A TOWER. Crown 8vo. It
A PAIR OF BLUE EYES. Crown 8vo.
THE WOODLANDERS. Crown 8vo.
THE HAND OF ETHELBERTA. Cr
THE TRUMPET MAJOR. Crown 8vo.
- THE RETURN OF THE NATIVE. (
WESSEX TALES. Crown 8vo. Map.
- JUDE THE OBSCURE. Crown Svo.
THE WELL-BELOVED. Crown 8vc. j
LIFE'S LITTLE IRONIES. Crown 8vc
A GROUP OF NOBLE DAMES. I[[ust
WESSEX POEMS. First Series. Crowi
WESSEX POEMS. Ssiond Series. Cro
HARPER & BROTHERS, :
right. 1915, 19ZQ. 1921. by Thomas Hardy


CONTENTS.
{tt)aae ttje fvcat.
IHE MAIDEN, I.-XL ]
Dhaee the Second.
MAIDEN NO MORE, XIL-XV. . 81
flt)aee ttje eijiift.
THE RALLY, XVL-XXTV. lit
$)t)aot lift Sowctif.
THE CONSEQUENCE, XXV.-XXXIV. 1TO
yijaae the JFittl).
THE WOMAN PAYS, XXXV.-XLIV. » . J58
Piaee tlje 0i«l).
THE CONVERT, XLV.-LIL 848
Phnse tlje Smenty.
FOIJTLMENT, LI1I.-LIX. . . 480
: > , Google
EXPLANATORY NOTE TO THE FIRST
EDITION
The main portion of the following story appeared — wiJk
slight modifications — in the Graphic newspaper and Har-
per's Bazar; other chapters, more especially addressed to
adult readers, in the Fortnightly Bedew and the National
Observer, as episodic sketches. My thanks are tendered to
the editors and proprietors of those periodicals for enabling
me now to piece the trunk and limbs of the novel together,
and print it complete, as originally written two years ago.
I will just add that the story is sent ont in all sincerity
of purpose, as an attempt to give artistic form to a true
sequence of things ; and in respect of the book's opinions I
would ask any too genteel reader who cannot endure to
have Bald what everybody nowadays thinks and feels, to */*
remember a well-worn sentence of St. Jerome's : " If an
offence come out of the truth, better is it that the offence
•ome than that the troth be concealed.*
T. H. ■
November, ISM.
: > , Google
: > , Google
PREFACE TO THE FIFTH (ENGLISH)
EDITION
This novel being on*, wherein the gre at ca mpaign of tho
heroine begins after an event in her experience whichnaB
usually been treated as extinguishing her, in the aspect of
protagonist at least, and as the virtual ending of her career
an d hopes , i t was qu ite contrary to avowed conve ntions that
the public should welcome the book, and agree " with me in
holding that there was someffifiig more to be said in fiction
than had been said about the shaded side of a well-known
catastrophe. But the responsive spirit in which Teas of the
IPUrbervffles has been received by the readers of England
and America would seem to prove that the plan of laying
down a story on the lines of tacit opinion, instead of mak.
ing it to square with the merely vocal formulae of society,
Is not altogether a wrong one, even when exemplified in so
unequal and partial an achievement as the present. For
this responsiveness I cannot refrain from expressing my
thanks; and my regret is that, in a world where one so
often hungers in vain for friendship, where even not to be
wilfully misunderstood is felt as a kindness, I shall never
meet in person these appreciative readers, male and female,
and shake them by the hand.
I include amongst them the reviewers — by far the ma-
jority — who have bo generously welcomed the tale. Their
words show that they, like the others, have only too largely
repaired my defects of narration by their own imaginative
Intuition.
Nevertheless, though the novel was intended to bo neither
...Coogk
didactic nor aggressive, but in the scenic parts to be rcpTB.
sentatdve simply, and in the contemplative to be oftener
charged with impressions than with opinions, there have
been objectors both to the matter and to the rendering.
Some of these maintain a conscientious difference of
sentiment concerning, among other things, subjects fit for
art, and reveal an inability to associate the idea of the title-
adjective with any bnt the licensed and derivative meaning
which has resulted to it from the ordinances of civilization.
They thus ignore, not only all Nature's claims, all sesthetio
claims on the word, but even the spiritual interpretation
afforded by the finest side of Christianity ; and drag in, as a
vital point, the acts of a woman in her last days of despera-
tion, when all her doings lie outside her normal character.
Others dissent on grounds which are intrinsically no more
than an assertion that the novel embodies the views of life
prevalent at the end of the nineteenth century, and not
those of an earlier and simpler generation — an assertion
which I can only hope may be well founded Let me repeat
th at a no vel is an impression, not an argument } and there
the matter must rest ; as one is reminded by a passage
which occurs in the letters of Schiller to Goethe on judges
of this class i " They are those who seek only theffown ideas
in a representation, and prize that which should be as
higher than what js. The cause of the dispute, therefore,
lies in the very first principles, and it would be utterly im-
possible to come to an understanding with them. " And
again : " As soon as I observe that any one, when judging
of poetical representations, considers anything more im-
portant than the inner Necessity and Truth, I .have dona
with him. "
In the introductory words to the first edition I suggested
the possible advent of the genteel person who would not be
able to endure the tone of these pages. That person duly
appeared, mostly mixed up with the aforesaid objectors.
In another of bis forms he felt upset that it was not possA
Me for hr m to read the book through three times, owing to
my not having made that critical effort which " alone can
prove the salvation of such an one. " In another, he objected
to such vulgar articles as the devil's pitchfork, a lodging-
house carving-knife, and a shame-bought parasol appearing
In a respectable story. In another place he was a gentle-
man who turned Christian for half an hour the better to
express his grief that a disrespectful phrase about the Im-
mortals should have been used; though the same innate
gentility compelled him to excuse the author in words of
pity that one cannot be too thankful for : " He does but give
us of his best. " I can assure this great critic that to exclaim
□logically against the gods, singular or plural, is not such
an original sin of mine as he seems to imagine. True, it
may have some local originality ; though if Shakespeare
were an authority on history, which perhaps he is not, I
could show that the sin was introduced into Wessex as early
as the Heptarchy itself. Says Gk/ster to Lear, otherwise
Ina, king of that country :
" As flies to wanton boys Are we to the gods ;
Tlifiy toll us for their sport. "
The remaining two or three manipulators of Tess were
of the sort whom most writers and readers would gladly
forget i professed literary boxers, who put on their convic-
tions for the occasion; modern " Hammers of Heretics*)
sworn discouragers of effort, ever on the watch to prevent
the tentative half-success from becoming the whole success j
who pervert plain meanings, and grow personal under the
name of practising the great historical method. However
they may have causes to advance, privileges to guard, tra-
ditions to keep going ; some of which a mere tale-teller,
who writes down how the things of the world strike him,
without any ulterior intentions whatever, has overlooked,
and may by pure inadvertence have run foul of when ir
the least aggressive mood. Perhaps some passing percep-
tion, the outcome of a dream-hour, would, if generally acted
on, cause such an assailant considerable inconvenience
with respect to position, interests, family, servant, ox, ass,
neighbor, or neighbor's wife. He therefore valiantly hides
his personality behind a publisher's shutters, and cries
" Shame! " So densely is the world thronged that any shift*
Ing of positions, even the best warranted advance, hurts
somebody's heels. Such shirtings often begin in sentiment,
and such sentiment sometimes begins in a novel,
T. H,
July, 1892.
: > , Google
** Poor wounded name f my bosom, at a bed,
Shall lodge thee, till thy wound be thoroughly heard. "
— -Shakespeare.
: > , Google
: > , Google
TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES
THE MAIDEN
On an evening in the latter part of May a middle-aged
man was walking homeward from Shaston to the village
of Marlotfc, in the adjoining Vale of Blakemore or Black-
moor. The pair of legs that carried him were rickety, and
there was a bias in his gait that inclined him somewhat to
the left of a straight line. He occasionally gave a smart
nod, as if in confirmation of some opinion, though he was
not thinking of anything in particular. An empty egg-
basket was slung apon his arm, the nap of his hat was
ruffled, a patch being quite worn away at its brim where
his thumb came in taking it off. Presently he was met by
an elderly parson astride of a gray mare, who, as he rode
hummed a wandering tune.
" Good-night fye. " said the man with the basket
" Good-night, Sir John, " said the parson.
The pedestrian, after another pace or two, halted, and
turned round.
2 TESS OP THE D-URBEBVILLES
" Now, sir, begging your pardon, we met last market-day
on this road about this time, and I said'Good-night,'and
von made reply,'Good-night, Sir John/ as now. "
" I did, " Baid the parson.
" And once before tbat — near a month ago. "
" I may have. "
" Then what might your meaning be in calling me'Sit
John'these different times, when I be plain Jack Durbev
field, the haggler! "
The parson rode a step or two nearer.
" It was only my whim,''be said ; and, after a moment's
hesitation : " It was on account of a discovery I made some
little time ago, whilst I was bunting up pedigrees for the
new county history. I am Parson Tringham, the antiquary,
of Stagfoot Lane. Don't you really know, Durbeyneld,
that you are tbe lineal representative of the ancient and
knightly family of the D'Urbervilles, who derive their
descent from Sir Pagan DtTrberville, that renowned knight
who came from Normandy witb William the Conqueror,
as appears by Battle Abbey Boll 1'
" Never beard it before, su-. "
" Well, it's true. Throw up your chin a moment, so that
I may catch the profile of your face better. Yes, that's the
D'Urberville nose and chin — a little debased. Tour ances-
tor was one of the twelve knights who assisted the Lord of
Estremavilla in Normandy in his conquest of Glamorgan-
shire. Branches of your family held manors over all this
part of England ; their names appear in the Pipe Rolls in
the time of King Stephen. In the reign of King John one
of them was rich enough to give a manor to the Knights
Hospitallers ; and in Edward the Second's time your fore-
father Brian was summoned to Westminster to attend the
great Council there. You declined a little in Oliver Crom-
well's time, but to no serious extent, and in Charles tbe
Second's reign you were made Knights of the Royal Oak
'or your loyalty. Aye, there have been generations of
THE MAIDEN £
Sir Johns among yon, and if knighthood were hereditary,
like a baronetcy, as it practically was ba old times, when
men were knighted from father to son, you would be Sir
John now. "
" You don't say so I "
" In short, " concluded the parson, decisively smacking
his leg with his switch, " there's hardly such another family
in England! "
" Daze my eyes, and isn't there? " said Durbeyneld.
/And ( here have I been knocking about, year after year,
from pillar to post, as if I was no more than the common*
est feller in the parish. . . . And how long hev this news
about me been knowed, Pa'son Tringham 1 "
The clergyman explained that,, as far as he was aware,
it had quite died out of knowledge, and could hardly be
said to be known at alL His own investigations had begun
on a day in the preceding spring when, having been en-
gaged in tracing the vicissitudes of the IVUrberville family,
he had observed Durbeyneld's name on his wagon, and had
thereupon been led to make inquiries about his father and
grandfather, till he had no doubt on the subject. " At first
I resolved not to disturb you with such a useless piece of
information, " said he. " However, our impulses are too
strong for our judgment sometimes. I thought you might
perhaps know something of it all the while. "
" Well, I have heard once or twice,'tis true, that my
family had seen better days before they came to Black-
moor. Bat I took no notice ot, thinking it to mean that
we had once kept two horses where we now keep only one.
I've got a wold silver spoon at home, too ; and likewise a
graven seal; but, Lord, what's a spoon and seal} . .
And to think that I and these noble lytrrbervilles was one
flesh.'Twas said that my grandfer had secrets,'and didnt
Bare to talk of where he eame from. . . . And where do
we raise our smoke, now, parson, make so bold ; I mean,
where do we lyUrbervilles live I " •
4 TESS OP THE DTJEBERVTLLES
" You don't live anywhere. You are extinct — as a county
family. "
" That's bad. "
" Yes — what the mendacious family chronicles call ex.
tinst in the male line — that is, gone down — gone under. "
" And where do we lie f "
" At Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill : rows and rows of you
in your vaults, with your effigies under Purbeek-marble
" And where be our family mansions and estates 1 "
" You havent any. "
" O ! No lands neither ! "
" None ; though you once had'em in abundance, as I
said, for your family consisted of numerous branches. In
this county there was a seat of yours at Kingsbere, and
another at Sherton, and another at Millpond, and another
at Lullstead, and another at Wellbridge. "
" And shall we ever come into our own again T "
" Ah, that I can't telL "
" And what had I better do about it, sir T " asked Durbey-
field, after a pause.
" O — nothing, nothing; except chasten yourself with
the thought of'how are the mighty fallen.'It is a fact
of some interest to the local historian and genealogist,
nothing more. There are several families among the
cottagers of this county of almost equal lustre. Good-
night. "
" But you'll turn back and have a quart of beer wi'me
on the strength 0% Pa'son Tringham T There's a very
pretty brew in tap at The Pure Drop — though, to be sure,
not so good as at Rolliver's. "
" No, thank you — not this evening, Durbeyfield. You've
nad enough already. " Concluding thus,, the parson rode
on bis way, with doubts as to his discretion in retailing this
curious bit of lore.
When he was gone Durbeyfield walked a few steps in a
THE MAIDEN 9
profound reverie, and then sat down upon tie grassy bank
l»y the roadside, depositing his basket before him. In a
few minutes a yonth appeared in the distance, walking
in the same direction as that which had been pursued by
Ihirbevneld. The latter, on seeing him, held np his hand,
and the lad quickened his pace and came near.
" Boy, take up that basket 1 I want'ee to go on an
errand for me. "
The lath-like stripling frowned. " Who be yon, then,
John Durbeyneld, that order me about and call me boy T
Ton know my name as well as I know yours ! "
" Do yon— do yon ? That's the secret — that's the secret I
Now obey my orders, and take the message I'm going to
charge'ee wi'. . . . Well, Fred, I don't mind telling you
that the secret is that I'm one of a noble race — it has been
just found out by me this present afternoon, P.M. " And
as he made the announcement, Durbeyneld, declining from
his sitting position, luxuriously stretched himself out upon
the bank among the daisies.
The lad stood before Durbeyneld, and contemplated his
length from crown to toe.
" Sir John D'Urberville — that's who I be, " continued the
prostrate man. " That is if knights were baronets— which
they be. Tie recorded in history all about me. Dost
know of such a place, lad, as Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill T "
" Ees. I've been there to Greenhill Fair. "
" Well, under the church of that city there lie "
" Tisn't a city, the place I mean; leastwise'twasn't
when I was there—'twas a little one-eyed, blinking sort o'
place. "
" Never yon mind the place, boy ; that's not the question
before us. Under the church of that parish lie my ances-
tors — hundreds of'em — in coats of mail and jewels, in
great lead coffins weighing tons and tons. There's not a
man in the county tf Wessex that* s got grander and nobler
ekellingtons in his family than L "
C TE88 OP THE TVTTRBWR Vnj.WR
-or "
" Now take up that basket, and go on to Marlott, and
when yon come to The Pure Drop Inn, tell'em to send a
horse and carriage to me immediately, to cany me home.
And in the bottom & the carriage they be to put a noggin
o* rum in a small bottle, and chalk it up to my account
And when you've done that, go on to my house with the
basket, and tell my wife to put away that washing, because I
she needn't finish it, and wait till I come home, as 1 have i
news to tell her. "'
As the lad stood in a dubious attitude, Durbeyfield put
bis hand in his pocket and produced a shilling, one of the
comparatively few that he possessed. " Here's for your
labor, lad. "
This made a real difference in the young man's apprecia-
tion of the position. " Tea, Sir John. Thank you. Any- I
thing else I can do for'ee, Sir Johnf "
" Tell'em at home that I should like for supper — well,
lamb's fry if they can get it ; and if they cant, black-pot ; I
and if they cant get that — well, chitterlings will do. "
" Yes, Sir John. "
The boy took up the basket, and as he set ont the notes j
of a brass band were heard from the direction of the village.
" What's that * " said Durbeyfield. " Not on account o'I T "
" Tie the women's club- walking, Sir John. Why, your
daughter is one tf the members. "
" To be sure; Td quite forgot it in my thoughts of
greater things. Well, vamp on to Marlott, will'ee, and l
order that carriage, and maybe Nl drive round and inspect
the club. "
The lad departed, and Durbeyfield lay waiting on the
grass and daisies in the evening sun. Not a soul passed
that way for a long while, and the faint notes of the band
were the only human sounds audible within the rim of
Hue hills.
The village of Marlott lay amid the northeastern undu-
lations of the beautiful Yale of Blakemore or Blackmoor
aforesaid, an engirdled and secluded region, for the most
part untrodden as yet by tourist or landscape-painter,
though within a four hours'journey from London.
It is a vale whose acquaintance is best made by viewing
it from the summits of the hills that surround it — except
perhaps during the droughts of summer. An unguided
ramble into its recesses in bad weather is apt to engender
dissatisfaction with its narrow, tortuous, and miry ways.
This fertile and sheltered tract of country, in which the ■
fields are never brown and the springs never dry, is
bounded on the south by the bold chalk ridge that embraces
the prominences of Hambledon Hill, Bulbarrow, Nettle-
combe-Tout, Dogbnry, High Stoy, and Bubb Down. The
traveller from the coast, who, after plodding for a score
of miles over calcareous downs and corn-lands, suddenly
reaches the verge of one of these escarpments, is surprised
and delighted to behold, extended like a map beneath him,
a country differing absolutely from that which he has
passed through. Behind him the hills are open, the sun
blazes down upon fields so large as to give an unenclosed
character to the landscape, the lanes are white, the hedges
low and plashed, the atmosphere colorless. Here, in the
valley, the world seems to be constructed upon a smaller
and more delicate scale ; the fields are mere paddocks, so
reduced that from this height their hedge-rows appear a
net-work of dark green threads overspreading the paler
green of the grass. The atmosphere beneath is languorous,
and is so tinged with azure that what artists call the mid-
dle distance partakes also of that hue, while the horizon
S TES8 OP THE D-USBBBVUiES
beyond is of the deepest ultramarine. Arable lands are
few and limited ; with but slight exceptions the prospect is
a broad rich mass of grass and trees, mantling minor hills
and dales within the major. Such is the Yale of Blaekinoor.
The district is of historic, no lees than of topographical
interest. The vale was known in former times as the
Forest of White Hart, from a curious legend of King
Henry the Third's reign, in which the killing by a certain
Thomas de la Lynd of a beautiful white hart which the
King had run down and spared, was made the occasion of
a heavy fine. In those days, and till comparatively recent
times, the country was densely wooded. Even now traces
of its earlier condition are to be found in the old oak copses
and irregular belts of timber that yet survive upon its
slopes, and the hollow-trunked trees that shade so many of
its pastures.
The forests have departed, but some old customs of then-
shades remain. Many, however, linger only in a metamor-
phosed or disguised form. The May-day dance, for in-
stance, was to be discerned on the afternoon under notice,
in the guise of the club revel, or " club-walking, " as it was
there called.
It was an interesting event to the younger inhabitants of
Marlott, though the real interest was not observed by the
participators in the ceremony. Its singularity lay less in
the faet that there was still retained a custom of walking
in procession and dancing on each anniversary than that
the members were solely women. In men's clubs such
celebrations were, though expiring, less uncommon; but
either the natural shyness of the softer sex, or a sarcastic
attitude on the part of male relatives, had denuded such
women's clubs as remained (if any other did) of this their
glory and consummation. The club of Marlott alone lived
to uphold the local Cerealia. It had walked for hundreds
of years, if not as benefit-club, as votive sisterhood of some
«ort ; and it walked still.
The banded ones were all dressed in white gowns — a gay
THE MAIDEN ft
survival from Old Style days, when cheerfulness and May-
time -were synonyms— days before the habit of taking Iong~7
views had reduced emotions to a monotonous averagaj
Their first exhibition of themselves was in a processional
inarch of two and two round the parish. Ideal and real
clashed slightly as the sun lit up their figures against the
green hedges and creeper-laced house-fronts ; for, though the
whole troop wore white garments, no two whites were alike
among them. Some gowns were purely blanched; some
had a bluish pallor; some worn by the older characters
(which had possibly lain by folded for many a year) in-
clined to a cadaverous tint, and to Georgian style.
In addition to the distinction of a white frock, every
woman and girl carried in her right hand a peeled willow
wand, and in her left a bunch of white flowers. The peel-
ing of the former, and the selection of the latter, had been
an operation of personal care.
There were a few middle-aged and even elderly women in
the train, their silver wiry hair and wrinkled faces, scourged
by time and trouble, having almost a grotesque, certainly a
pathetic, appearance in such a jaunty situation. In a true
view, perhaps, there was more to be gathered and told of
these anxious and experienced ones, to whom the years
were drawing nigh when each should say, " I have no
pleasure in them, " than of the juvenile members. But let
the elder be passed over here for those under whose bodices
the life throbbed quick and warm.
The young girls formed, indeed, the majority of the
hand, and their heads of luxuriant hair reflected in the
sunshine every tone of gold and black and brown. Some
had beautiful eyes, others a beautiful nose, others a beauti-
ful mouth and figure ; few, if any, had all. A difficulty of
arranging their lips in this crude exposure to public
scrutiny, an inability to balance their heads and to disasso-
ciate self -consciousness from their features, were apparent
in them, and showed that they were genuine country girls
unaccustomed to many eyes. . _ .'
20 TESS OF THE DTJBDERV1LLES
And as each and all of them were warmed without by
the sun, so each had a private little sun for her soul to
bask in — some dream, some affection, some hobby, at least
some remote and distant hope, which, though perhaps
starving to nothing, still lived on, as hopes will. Thus
they were all cheerful, and many of them merry.
They came round by The Pure Drop Inn, and were
turning out of the high-road to pass through a wicket-gate
into the meadows, when one of the women said :
" The Lord-a-Lord! Why, Tess Durbeyfield, if there
Isn't thy father riding home in a carriage ! "
A young member of the band turned her head at the
exclamation. She was a fine^ handsome girl — not han d-
somerT2iari " 5oTnB " StEers, certalnlj^but^her " mobile peony
mouth andlarge innocent eyes aaaed eloquence.. i£ color
and shape. She wore a rejjLrjhbon in her hair, and was the
only " ofie~5f the white company who could boast of such a
pronounced adornment. As she looked round, Durbeyfield
was seen moving along the road in a chaise belonging
to The Pure Drop, driven by a frizzle-headed, brawny
damsel, with her gown sleeves rolled above her elbows.
This was the cheerful servant of that establishment, who,
in her part of factotum, turned groom and ostler at times.
Durbeyfield, leaning back, and with his eyes closed lux-
uriously, was waving his hand above his head, and sing*
ing, in a slow recitative :
" Fve got a great family vault at Eingsbere, and knighted
forefathers in lead coffins there ! "
The clubbists tittered, exeept the girl called TesB — in
whom a slow heat seemed to rise at the sense that her
father was making himself foolish in their eyes.
" He's tired, that's all, " she said, hastily, " and he has got
a lift home, because our own horse has to rest to-day. "
" Bless thy simplicity, Tess, " said her companions,
* He's got his market-nitch. Haw-haw ! "
" Look here : I won't walk another inch with ye if yol
THE MAIDEN 1]
•ay any jokes about him t " Tese cried, and the color upon
her cheeks spread over her face and neck. In a moment
her eyes grew moist, and her glance dropped to the
ground. Perceiving that they had really pained her, they
said no more, and order again prevailed, Tessa's pride
would not allow her to turn her head again, to learn what
her father's meaning was, if he had any; and thus she
moved on with the whole body to the enclosure where
there was to be dancing on the green. By the time the
spot was reached she had recovered her equanimity, and
tapped her neighbor with her wand and talked as usual.
T-Ymjpnrhpyflnlrl at thift tim? of hat life, was a mere
vessel of emotion, untinctnred by experience. The dialect
was «n her tongue to some extent, despite the village
school ; the characteristic intonation of that dialect for this
district being the voicing approximately rendered by the
syllable ur — probably as rich an utterance as any to be
found in human speech. The pouted up deep red mouth
to which this syllable was native had hardly as yet settled
into its definite shape, and her lower lip had a way of
thrusting the middle of her top one upward, when they
closed together after a word.
Phases of her childhood lurked in her aspect still. As
she walked along to-day, for all her bouncing handsome
womanliness, you could sometimes see her twelfth year in
her cheeks, or her ninth sparkling from her eyes; and
even her fifth would flit over the curves of her mouth now
and then.
Yet few knew, and still fewer considered, this. A small
minority, mainly strangers, would look long at her in casually
passing by, and grow momentarily fascinated by her fresh-
ness, and wonder if they would ever see her again ; but to
almost everybody she was a fine and picturesque country
girl, and no mora
Nothing was seen or heard further of Durbeyfleld in his
triumphal chariot under the conduct of the ostleress, and
12 TES8 OiT THE iyUKBUBVlLiUBS
the club having entered the allotted space, dancing began.
As there were no men in the company, the girls danced at
first with each other, but when the hour for the close o£
labor drew on, the masculine inhabitants of the village, to-
gether with other idlers and pedestrians, gathered round
the spot, and appeared inclined to negotiate for a partner.
Among these lookers-on were three young men of a
superior class, carrying small knapsacks strapped to their
shoulders, and stout sticks in their hands. Their general
likeness to each other and their consecutive ages would al-
most have suggested that they might be, what in fact they
were, brothers. The eldest wore the white tie, high waist-
coat, and thin-brimmed hat of the regulation curate ; the
second was the normal undergraduate ; the appearance of
the third and youngest would hardly have been sufficient
to characterize him ; there was an uncribbed, nncabined
aspect in his eyes and attire, implying that he had hardly
as yet found the entrance to his professional groove. That
he was a desultory, tentative student of something and
everything might only have been predicated of him.
These three brethren told casual acquaintance that they
were spending their Whitsun holidays in a walking tour
through the Vale of Blackmoor, their course being south-
westerly from the town of Shaston on the northeast.
They leant over the gate by the highway, and inquired
as to the meaning of the dance and the white-frocked
maids. The two elder of the brothers were plainly not in-
tending to linger more than a moment, but the spectacle
of a bevy of girls dancing without male partners seemed to
amuse the third, and make him in no hurry to move on.
He unstrapped his knapsack, put it, with his stick, on the
hedge-bank, and opened the gate.
" " What are you going to do, Angel T " asked the eldest.
" 1 am inclined to go and have a fling with them. Why
not all of us — just for a minute or two ; it will not detain
n« long I *
THE MAIDKK II
" No — no; nonsense! " said the first. " Dancing in
public with a troop of country hoydens! Suppose we
should be seen! Come along^or it will be dark before
we get to Stonrcastle, and there's no place we can Bleep at
nearer than that ; besides, we must get through another
chapter of A Counterblast to Agnosticism before we turn in,
now I have taken the trouble to bring the book. "
" All right; Pll overtake you and Cuthbert in five
minutes ; don't stop ; I give my word that I will, Felix. "
The two elder reluctantly left him and walked on, taking
their brother's knapsack to relieve him in following, and
the youngest entered the field.
" This is a thousand pities, " he said, gallantly, to two or
three of the girls nearest him, as soon as there was a pause
in the dance. " Where are your partners, my dears ! "
" They've not left off work yet, " answered one of the
boldest. " They'll be here by-and-by. Till then will you
be one, sir! "
" Certainly. But what's one among so many! "
" Better than none.'Tis melancholy work facing and
footing it to one of your own sort, and no clipsing and
colling at all. Now, pick and choose. "
" S-sh ! Don't be so for'ard ! " said a shyer girl.
The young man, thus invited, glanced them over, and
attempted some discrimination ; but as the group were all
so new to him, he could not very well exercise it. He took
almost the first that came to hand, which was not the
speaker, as she had expected ; nor did it happen to be Tess
Durbeyfleld. Pedigree, ancestral skeletons, monumental
record, the D'Urberville lineaments, did not help Tess in
her life's battle as yet, even to the extent of attracting to
her a dancing partner over the heads of the commonest
peasantry. So much for Norman blood unaided by Vic-
torian tmre.
The name of the eclipsing girl, whatever it was, has not
been handed down ; but Bhe was envied by all as the first
14 TESS OF THE D'UEBEBVILLES
who enjoyed the luxury of a masculine partner that even*
ing. Yet such was the force of example that the village
young men, who had not hastened to enter the gate while
no intruder was in the way, now dropped in quickly, and
soon the couples became leavened with rustic youths to a
marked extent, till at length the plainest woman in the club
was no longer compelled to foot it on the masculine side of
the figure.
The church clock struck, when suddenly the student said
that he must leave — he had been forgetting himself— he
had to join his companions. As he fell out of the dance
Mb eyes lighted on Tess Durbeyfteld, whose own large orbs
wore, to tell the truth, the faintest aspect of reproach that
he had not chosen her. He, too, was sorry then that, owing
to her backwardness, he had not observed her ; and, with
that in his mind, he left the pasture.
On account of his long delay he started in a flying run
down the lane westward, and had soon passed the hollow
and mounted the next rise. He had not yet overtaken his
brothers, but he paused to take breath, and looked back.
He could see the white figures of the girls in the green en-
closure whirling about as they had whirled when he was
among them. They seemed to have quite forgotten him
already.
All of them, except, perhaps, one. This white figure stood
apart by the hedge alone. From her position he knew it
to be the pretty maiden with whom he had not danced.
Trifling as the matter was, he yet instinctively felt that
she was hurt by his oversight. He wished that he had
asked her; he wished that he had inquired her name. She
was so modest, so expressive, she had looked so soft in her
thin white gown that he felt he had acted stupidly.
However, it could not be helped, and turning, and bend-
ing himself to a rapid walk, he dismissed the subject from
his mind.
m
As for Teas Durbeyfield, she did not so easily dislodge
the incident from her consideration. She had no spirit to
dance again for a long time, though she might have bad
plenty of partners ; but, ah ! they did not speak so nicely as
the strange yonng man had done. It was not till the rays
of the sun had absorbed the yonng stranger's retreating
figure on the hill that she shook off her temporary sadness,
and answered her would-be partner in the affirmative.
She remained with her comrades till dusk, and partici-
pated with a certain zest in the dancing ; though, being
heart-whole as yet, she enjoyed treading a measure purely
for its own sake ; little divining when she saw " the soft
torments, the bitter sweets, the pleasing pains, and the
agreeable distresses " of those girls who had been wooed
and won, what she herself was capable of experiencing in
that kind. The struggles and wrangles of the lads for her
hand in a jig were an amusement to her, no more ; and
when they became fierce she rebuked them.
She might have stayed even later, but the incident of her
father's odd appearance and manner returned upon the
girl's mind to make her anxious, and wondering what had
become of him she dropped away from the dancers and
bent her steps towards the end of the village at which the
parental cottage lay. While yet many score yards off,
other rhythmic sounds than those she had quitted became
. ludible to her ; sounds that she knew well — so well. They
were a regular series of thumpings from the interior of the
house, occasioned by the violent rocking of a cradle npon
a stone floor, to which movement a feminine voice kept
time by singing, in a vigorous gallopade, the favorite ditty
of " The Spotted Cow »:
16 TESS OF THE DTTRBERVILLES
C saw her lie do — own in yon — der green gro — ve;
Come, love, and 111 tell you where.
The cradle-rocking and the song would cease for a mo-
ment simultaneously, and an exclamation at highest vocal
pitch would take the place of the melody.
" God bless thy diment eyes ! And thy waxen cheeks t
And thy cherry mouth ! And thy Cubit'a lags ! And
every bit o* thy blessed body 1 "
After this invocation the rocking and the singing would
recommence, and " The Spotted Cow " proceed as before.
So matters stood when Tess opened the door and paused
upon the mat within it, surveying the scene.
The interior, in spite of the melody, struck upon the
girl's senses with an unspeakable dreariness. From the
holiday gayeties of the day — the white gowns, the nose-
gays, the willow wands, the whirling movements on the
green, the flash of gentle sentiment towards the stranger —
to the yellow melancholy of thin ohe-candled spectacle,
what a step ! Besides the jar of contrast, there came to
her a chill feeling of self-reproach that she had not re-
turned sooner, before the dancing began, to help her
mother in these domesticities, instead of indulging herself
out-of-doors.
There stood her mother amid the group of children, as
Tess had left her, hanging over the Monday washing-tub,
which had now, as always, lingered on to the end of the
week. Out of that tub had come the day before — Tess felt
it with a dreadful sting of remorse — the very white frock
upon her back, which she had so carelessly greened about
the skirt on the damping grass ; which had been wrong up
and ironed by her mother's own hands.
As usual, Mrs. Durbeyfleld was balanced on one foot
beside the tub, the other being engaged in the aforesaid
business of rocking her youngest child. The cradle rockers
had done hard duty for so many years, under the weight
THE MAIDEN 17
of bo many children, on that flag-stone floor, that they
were worn nearly flat; in consequence of which a huge
jerk accompanied each swing of the cot, flinging the baby
from side to side like a weaver's shuttle, as Mrs. Durbey-
field, excited by her song, trod the rocker with all the
spring that was left in her after a long day's seething in
the suds.
Nick-knock, nick-knock went the cradle; the candle-
flame stretched itself tall, and began jigging up and
down ; the water dribbled from her mother's elbows, and
the song galloped on to the end of the verse, Mrs. Durbey-
neld regarding her daughter the while. Even now, when
burdened with a young family, Joan Durbeyfleld was a
passionate lover of tune. No ditty floated into Black-
moor Vale from the outer world but Tess's mother caught
up its notation in a week.
There still faintly beamed from the woman's features
something of the freshness and even the prettiness of her
youth, rendering it evident that.the personal charms which
Tess could boast of were in main part her mother's gift,
and therefore unknightly, unhistoricaL
" Pll rock the cradle for'ee, mother, " said the daughter,
gently; " or 111 take off my best frock and help you wring
up f I thought you had finished long ago. "
Her mother bore Tess no ill-will for leaving the house-
work to her single-handed efforts for so long ; and indeed
she seldom upbraided her thereon at any time, feeling the
lack of Tess's assistance but slightly, whilst her chief plan
for relieving herself of her diurnal labors lay in postpon-
ing them. To-night, however, she was even in a blither
mood than usual There was a dreaminess, a preposses-
sion, an exaltation, in the maternal look which the girl
could not understand.
" Well, I'm glad you've come, " her mother said, as soon
as the last note had passed out of her. " I want to go and
fetch your father. But what's more'n thai, I want to teU
18 TESS OF TWW DkjBBERTIIiLBS • -
'ee what have happened. You'll be fess enough, my pop-
pet, when you know ! "
(Mrs. Durbeyfield still habitually spoke the dialect; her
daughter, who had passed the Sixth Standard in the Na-
tional School, under a London-trained mistress, spoke two
languages; the dialect at home, more or less; ordinary-
English abroad and to persons of quality.)
" Since I've, been away? " Teas asked.
" Ay! "
" Had it anything to do with father's making such a
mommet of himself in the carriage this afternoon ! Why-
did he 1 I felt inclined to sink into the ground ! "
" That was all a part of the larry. We've been found to be
the greatest gentlefolk in the whole county, reaching all back
long before Oliver Grumble's time, to the days of the pagan
Turks, with monuments and vaults and crests and scutch-'
eons, and the Lord knows what all ! In Saint Charles's
days we was made Knights of the Royal Oak, our real
name being LVUrberville. . . . Dont that make your bosom
swell T'Twos on this account that your father rode home
in the carriage ; not because he'd been drinking, as people
supposed. "
" I'm glad of that. Will it do us any good, mother 1 "
" Oh yes. Tis thoughted that great things may come
ot. No doubt a string of folk of our own rank will be
down here in their carriages as soon as'tis known. Your
father learnt it on his way home from Stourcastle, and has
been telling me the whole pedigree of the matter. "
" Where is father now ! " asked Tess, suddenly.
Her mother gave irrelevant information by way of answer.
" He called to see the doctor to-day in Stourcastle. It is
not consumption at all, it seems. It is fat around his
heart, he says. There, it is like this. " Joan Durbeyfleld,
as she spoke, curved a sodden thumb and forefinger to the
shape of the letter G, and used the other forefinger as a
inter.'" At the present moment,'he says to your
THE MAIDKN 19
father,'your heart is enclosed all round there, and aU
round there ; this space is still open,'he says.'As soon
as it meets, so'— Mrs. Durbeyfield closed her fingers into a
circle complete —'off you will go like a shadder, Mr. Durbey-
fleld,'he says.'You mid last ten years ; yon mid go off
in ten months, or ten days.'■
Tess looked alarmed. Her father possibly to go behind
the eternal cloud so soon, notwithstanding this sudden
greatness ! " But where is father T " she asked again.
Her mother put on a deprecating look. " Now dont
you be bursting out angry. The poor man — he felt so weak
after his excitement at the news — that he went up to Rolli-
ver's half an hoar ago. He do want to get up his strength
for his journey to-morrow with that load of beehives,
which must be delivered, family or no. Hell have to start
shortly after twelve to-night, as the distance is so long. "
" Get up his strength ! " said Tess, impetuously, the tears
welling to her eyes. " O, my heavens! go to a public
house to get up his strength ! And you as well agreed as
he, mother I * ,
Her rebuke and her mood seemed to fill the whole room,
and to impart a cowed look to the furniture and candle,
and children playing about, and to her mother's face.
" No, " said the latter, touchily, " I am not agreed. I
have been waiting for'ee to bide and keep house while I
go to fetch him. "
" Ml go. "
" Oh no, Tess. You see, it would be no use. "
Tess did not expostulate. She knew what her mother's
Objection meant. Moreover, Mrs. Durbeyfield's jacket and
bonnet were already hanging slyly upon a chair by her
side, in readiness for this contemplated jaunt, the reason
for which the matron deplored more than its necessity.
" And take the Compleat Fortune-teller to the out-house, "
she continued, rapidly wiping her hands and donning tho
garments.
90 TESS OF THE lyUKBERVILLES
The Compleat Fortune-teller was an old thick volume
which lay on a table at her elbow, so worn by pocketing
that the margins had reached the edge of the type. Teas
took it np, and her mother started.
This going to hunt np her shiftless husband at the inn
was one of Mrs. Durbeyfield's still extant enjoyments in
the muck and muddle of rearing children. To discover
him at Kolliver's, to sit there for an hour or two by hip
side, and dismiss all thought and care of the children dur-
ing the interval, made her happy. A sort of halo, an Oc-
cidental glow, came over life then. Troubles and othe*.
realities took on themselves a metaphysical impalpability,
sinking to mere cerebral phenomena for quiet contempla
tion, and no longer stood as pressing concretions which
chafe body and soul The youngsters, not immediately
within sight, seemed rather bright and desirable appur.
benances than otherwise ; the incidents of daily life were
not without hnmorousness and jollity in their aspect there.
She felt a little as she had used to feel when she sat by her
now husband in the same spot during his wooing, shutting
her eyes to his defects of character, and regarding him
only in his ideal presentation as a lover.
Tess, being left alone with the younger children, went
first to the out-house with the fortune-telling book, and
stuffed it into the thatch. A curious f etishistic fear of this
grimy volume on the part of her mother prevented her
ever allowing it to stay in the house all night, and hither
it was brought back whenever it had been consulted. Be-
tween the mother, with her fast-perishing lumber of super-
stitions, folk-lore, dialect, and orally transmitted ballads,
and the daughter, with her trained National teachings and
Sixth Standard knowledge under an infinitely Revised
Code, there was a gap of two hundred years as ordinarily
understood. When they were together the Elizabethan
and the Victorian ages stood juxtaposed.
Returning along the garden path, Tess mused on what
THE MAIDEN 31
the mother could have wished to ascertain from the hook
on this particular day, and readily guessed it to bear upon
the recent discovery. Dismissing this, however, she busied
herself with sprinkling the linen dried daring the daytime
in company with her nine-year-old brother Abraham and
her sister Eliza Louisa of twelve, called'" Liza Ln, " the
youngest ones being put to bed.'There was an interval of
four years between Tess and the next of the family, the
two who had filled the gap having died in their infancy,
and this lent her a deputy-maternal attitude when she was
alone with her juniors. Next in juvenility to Abraham came
two more girls, Hope and Modesty ; then a boy of three ;
and then the baby, who had just completed his first year.
'All these young souls were passengers in the Durbey-
field ship — entirely dependent on the judgment of the two
Durbeyfield adults for their pleasures, their necessities,
their health, even their existence. If the heads of the
Durbeyfield household ehose to sail into difficulty, disaster,
starvation, disease, degradation, death, thither were these
half-dozen little captives under hatches compelled to sail
with them — six helpless creatures, who had never been
asked if they wished for life on any terms, much less if
they wished for it on such hard conditions as were involved
in being of the shiftless house of Durbeyfield. Some peo-
ple would like to know whence the poet whose philosophy is
in these days deemed as profound and trustworthy as his
song is sweet and pure, gets his authority for speaking of
" Nature's holy plan. " }
It grew later, and neither father nor mother appeared.
Tess looked out of the door occasionally, and took a men-
tal journey through Marlott. The village was shutting its
eyes. Candles and lamps were being put out everywhere;'
she could mentally behold the extinguisher and the ex-
tended hand.
Her mother's fetching simply meant one more to fetch
Teas began to perceive that a man in indifferent healt
gg TESS OP TOE D'URBERYILLES
who proposed to start on a journey before one in the n
ing, ought not to be at an inn at this late honr celebrating
his ancient blood.
" Abraham, " she said, presently, to her little brottier, j
" do you put on your hat — yon bain't afraid 1 — and go up
to Rolliver's, and see what has become of father and
mother. "
The boy jumped promptly from his seat and opened the
door, and the night swallowed him np. Half an hoar
passed yet again ; neither man, woman, nor child returned.
Abraham, like his parents, seemed to have been limed and
caught by the ensnaring inn.
" I must go myself, " she said.
'Liza Lu then went to bed, and Teas, locking them all in,
started on her way up the dark and crooked lane or street,
not made for hasty progress; a street laid out before
inches of laud had value, and when one-handed clocks suf-
ficiently subdivided the day.
rv
Rolliver's inn, the single ale-house at this end of the
long and broken village, could boast of only an off-license ;
hence, as nobody could legally drink on the premises, the
amount of overt accommodation for consumers was strictly'
limited to a little board about six inches wide and two yards
long, fixed to the garden palings by pieces of wire, so as to
form a ledge. On this board thirsty strangers deposited
their cnps as they stood in the road and drank, and threw
the dregs on the dusty ground to the pattern of Polynesia,
and wished they could have a restful seat inside.
Thus the strangers. But there were also local customers
■ who felt the same wish; and where there's a will there's a
-ay.
THE MAIDEN 29
In a large bedroom upstairs, the window of which was
thickly curtained with a great woollen shawl, lately dis-
carded by the landlady, Mrs. Bolliver, were gathered on
this evening nearly a dozen persons, all seeking beatitude ;
all old inhabitants of the nearer end of Marlott, and fre-
quenters of this retreat. Not only did the distance to The
Pure Drop, the fully licensed tavern at the further part of
the dispersed village, render its accommodation practically
unavailable for dwellers at this end, but the far more
serious question, the quality of the liquor, confirmed the
opinion prevalent that it was better to drink with Rolliver
In a corner of the house-top than with the other landlord
in a wide house.
A gaunt four-post bedstead which stood in the room af-
forded sitting space for several persons gathered round three
of its sides ; a couple more men had elevated themselves
on a chest of drawers j another rested on the carved-oak
" cwoffer " ; another on the stool ; and thus all were, some-
how, seated at their ease. The stage of mental comfort to
which they had arrived at this hour was one wherein their
souls seemed to expand beyond their skins, spreading their
personalities warmly through the room. In this process
the chamber and its furniture grew more and more digni-
fied and luxurious ; the shawl hanging at the window took
jpon itself the richness of tapestry ; the brass handles of
the chest of drawers were as golden knockers; and the
carved bedposts seemed to have some kinship with the
magnificent pillars of Solomon's temple.
Mrs. Durbeyfield, having quickly walked hitherward
after parting from Tess, opened the front door, crossed the
downstairs room, which was in deep gloom, and then un-
fastened the stair door like one whose fingers knew the
tricks of the latches well. Her ascent of the crooked stair-
ease was a slower process, and her face, as it rose into the
light above the last stall-, encountered the gaze of all the
party assembled in the bedroom.
31 TESS OF THE rcUB-BEBVILLES
" — Being a few private friends Pve asked in to keep up
club-walking at my own expense, " the landlady exclaimed,
at the sound of footsteps, as glibly as a child repeating the
Catechism, while she peered over the stairs. " O,'tis yon,
Mrs. Durbeyfield ! Lard, how you frightened me! I thought
it mid be some gaffer sent by Gover'ment.''
Mrs. Durbeyfield was welcomed with glances and nods
by the remainder of the conclave, and turned to where her
husband sat. He was bumming absently to himself, in a
low tone : " I be as good as some folks here and there !
I've got a great family vault at Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill,
and finer Wellingtons than any man in the county o'
Wessex ! "
" Pve something to tell'ee that's come into my head
about that — a grand project ! " whispered his cheerful wife.
" Here, John, don't'ee see me J " She nudged him, while
he, looking through her as through a window-pane, went
on with his recitative.
" Hush ! Don't'ee sing so lond, my good man, " said the
landlady ; " in case any member of the Gover'ment should
be passing, and take away my licends. "
" He's told'ee whaf s happened to as, I suppose f " asked
Mrs. Durbeyfield.
" Yes — in a way. D'ye think there's any money hanging
byitf
" Ah, that's the secret, " said Joan Durbeyfield, sagely.
* But'tis well to be kin to a coach, even if you don't ride
in en. " She dropped her publie voice, and continued in a
low tone to her husband: " I've been thinking since you
brought the news that there's a great rich lady out by
Trantridge, on the edge o'The Chase, of the name of
D'Urberville. "
" Hey — what's that T " said Sir John.
She repeated the information. " That lady must be our
relation, " she said. " And my project is to send Tess to
claim kin. "
: . , Google
THE MAIDEN 25
" There ts a lady of the name, now you mention it, " said
Durheyfield. " Pa'son Tringham didn't think of that.
But she's nothing beside we — a jurnior branch of us, no
doubt, long since King Norman's day. "
While this question -was being discussed, neither of the
pair noticed, in their preoccupation, that little Abraham
had crept into the room, and was awaiting an opportunity
of asking them to return.
" She is rich, and she'd be sure to take notice o* the
maid, " continued Mrs. Durbeyfield ; " and'twill be a very
good thing. I don't see why two branches of one family
should not be on visiting terms. "
" Yes ; and we'll all claim kin ! " said Abraham, brightly,
from under the bedstead. " And we'll all go and see her
when Tess has gone to live with her ; and well ride in her
coach, and wear black clothes ! "
" How do you come here, child 1 What nonsense be ye
talking I Go away, and play on the stairs till father and
mother be ready. ... Well, Tess ought to go to this other
member of our family. She'd be sure to win the lady,
Tess would ; and likely enough'twould lead to some noble
gentleman marrying her. In short, I know it. "
" Howt "
" I tried her fate in the Fortune-tetter, and it brought out
that very thing. . . . You should ha'seen how pretty she
looked to-day ; her skin is as sumple as a duchess's. "
" What says the maid herself to itl "
" I've not asked her. She don't know there is any such
lady relation yet. But it would certainly put her in the way
of a grand marriage, and she'wont say nay to going. "
" Tess is queer. "
" But she is tractable at bottom. Leave her to me. "
Though this conversation had been private, sufficient of
its import reached the understandings of those around to
suggest to them that the Durbeyfields had weightier con-
cerns to talk of now than common folks had, and that
26 TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLk3
Tees, their pretty eldest daughter, had fine prospects in
store.
" Tess is a fine figure o* fun, as I said to myself to-day
when I zeed her vamping round parish with the rest, " ob-
served one of the elderly boozers in an undertone. " But
Joan Durbeyfield must mind that she don't get green malt
in floor. " It was a local phrase which had a peculiar
meaning, and there was no reply.
The conversation became inclusive, and presently other
footsteps were heard crossing the room below.
" — Being a few private friends asked in to-night to keen
up club-walking at my own expense. " The landlady had
rapidly reused the formula she kept on hand for intruders
before she recognized that the new-comer was Tess.
Even to her mother's gaze the girl's young features
looked sadly out of place amid the alcoholic vapors which
floated here as no unsuitable medium for wrinkled middle
age ; and hardly was a reproachful flash from Tess's dark
eyes needed to make her father and mother rise from their
seats, hastily finish their ale, and descend the stairs behind
her, Mrs. Rolliver's caution following their footsteps :
" No noise, please, if y^ll be so good, my dears ; or I
mid lose my licends, and be summonsed, and I don't know
what all! Nighttfyel "
They went home together, Tess holding one arm of her
father, and Mrs. Durbeyfield the other. He had, in truth,
drunk very little — not a fourth of the quantity which a
systematic tippler could carry to church on a Sunday
morning without a hitch in his eastings or his genuflec-
tions ; but the weakness of Sir John's constitution made
mountains of his petty sins in this kind. On reaching the
fresh air he was sufficiently unsteady to incline the row of
three at one moment as if they were marching to London,
and at another as if they were marching to Bath, which
produced a comical effect, freqnent enough in families on
nocturnal home-goings ; and. like most comical effects, not
'I'HH! MAIDEN 21
quite ao comic, after all. The two women valiantly dis-
guised these forced excursions and countermarches as well
as they could from Durbeyneld, their cause, and from Abra-
ham, and from themselves ; and so they approached by
degrees their own door, the head of the family bursting
suddenly into his former refrain as he drew near, as if to
fortify his soul at sight of the smallness of his present
" I've got a fam — fly vault at Kingsbere ! "
Teas turned the subject by saying what was far more
prominent in her own mind at the moment than thoughts
of her ancestry :
" I am afraid father won't he able to take the journey
with the beehives to-morrow so early. "
" It I shall be all right in an hour or two, " said Dur-
beyneld.
It was eleven o'clock before the Durbeyfields were all in
bed, and two o'clock next morning was the latest hour for
starting with the beehives, if they were to be delivered to
the retailers in Casterbridge before the Saturday market
began, the way thither lying by bad roads over a distance
of between twenty and thirty miles, and the horse and
wagon being of the slowest. At half-past one Mrs. Dur-
beyfleld came into the large bedroom where Tess and all
her little sisters slept
" The poor man can't go, " she said to her eldest daugh-
ter, whose great eyes had opened the moment her mother's
hand touched the door.
Tess sat up in bed, lost in a vague world between a
dream she had just been having and this information.
" But somebody must go, " she replied to her mother.
" It is late for the hives already. Swarming will soon be
over for the year ; and if we put off taking'em till next
week's market, the call for'em will be past, and they'll be
thrown on cnr hands. "
28 TESS OP THE CUHBEBVILLES
Mrs. Durbeyfield looked unequal to the emergency.
" Some young feller, perhaps, would go? One of them
who were bo much after dancing with'ee yesterday, " she
Oh no ; I wouldn't have it for the world ! " declared
Tess, proudly, " And letting everybody know the reason
— such a thing to be ashamed of ! I think I could go if
Abraham could go with me to keep me company. "
Her mother at length agreed to this arrangement. Little
Abraham was aroused from his deep sleep in a corner of
the same apartment, and made to put on his clothes while
still mentally in the other world. Meanwhile Tess had
hastily dressed herself ; and the twain, lighting a lantern,
went out to the stable. The rickety little wagon was al-
ready laden, and the girl led oat the horse Prince, only a
degree less rickety than the vehicle.
The poor creature looked wonderingly round at the night,
at the lantern, at their two figures, as if he could not
believe that at that hour, when every living thing was in-
tended to be at shelter and at rest, he was called upon to
go out and labor. They put a stock of candle-ends into
the lantern, hung the latter to the off side of the road, and
directed the horse onward, walking at his shoulder at first
during the up-hill portion of the way, in order not to over-
load an animal by no means vigorous. To cheer them-
selves as well as they could, they made an artificial morn-
ing with the lantern, some bread and butter, and their
own conversation, the real morning being far from come.
Abraham, as he more fully awoke ^for he had moved in a
sort of trance so far), began to talk of the strange shapes
assumed by the various dark objects against the sky; of
■this tree that looked like a raging tiger springing from a
(lair ; of that which resembled a giant's head.
When they had passed the little town of Stourcastle,
dumbly somnolent under its thick brown thatch, they
reached higher ground. Still higher, on their left, the elo-
THE MAIDEN 29
vation called Bnlbarrow, or Bealbarrow, swelled into the
?ky, engirdled by its earthen trenches. From hereabout
the long road declined gently for a great distance onward.
They mounted in front of the wagon, and Abraham grew
reflective.
" Tess ! " he said, in a preparatory tone, after a silence.
" Yes, Abraham, " said she.
" Bain't you glad that we've become gentlefolk ! *
* Not particular glad. "
" But you be glad that you are going to marry a gentle
BurnT "
" Whatt " said Tess.
" That our great relation will help'ee to marry a gentle-
man. "
" II Our great relation 1 We have no such relation.
What has put that into your head! "
" I heard'em talking about it up at Rolliver's when I
went to find father. There's a rich lady of our family out
at Trantridge, and mother said that if yon claimed kin with
the lady, she'd put'ee in the way of marrying a gentle-
His sister became abruptly still, and lapsed into a pon-
dering silence. Abraham talked on, rather for the pleasure
of expression than for audience, sp that his sister's ab-
straction was of no account He leant back against the
hives, and with upturned face made observations on the
stars, whose cold pulses were beating amid the black hol-
lows above, in serene dissociation from these two wisps of
human life. He asked how far away those twinklers were,
and whether God was on the other side of them. But
ever and anon his childish prattle recurred to what im-
pressed his imagination even more deeply than the won-
ders of creation. If Tess were made rich by marrying a
gentleman, would she have money enough to buy a spy-
glass, to large that it would draw stars as near to her as
Nettlecombe-Toatl
H TESS OF T HK I/UBBBRVILLES
The renewed subject, -which seemed to have impregnated
die whole family, filled Tess with impatience.
" Never mind that now 1 " she exclaimed.
" Did yon say the stars were worlds, Tosb 1 "
" Yes. "
" All like ours ! "
" I don't know ; but I think so. They sometimes seem
to be like the apples on our stnbbard tree. Most of them
splendid and sound — a few blighted. "
" Which do we live on — a splendid one or a blighted
one! "
" A blighted one. "
" Tis very unlucky that we didn't pitch on a sound one,
when there were so many more of'em ! "
" Yes. "
" Is it like that really, Tess? " said Abraham, turning to
her, much impressed, on reconsideration of this rare infor-
mation. " How would it have been if we had pitched on a
sound one f "
" Well, father wouldn't have coughed and creeped abont
as he does, and wouldn't have got too tipsy to go this
journey ; and mother wouldn't have been always washing,
and never getting finished. "
" And you would have been a rich lady ready-made, and
not have to be made rich by marrying a gentleman t "
" Oh, Aby, don't — don't talk of that any more ! "
Left to his reflections, Abraham soon grew drowsy.
Tess was not skilful in the management of a horse, but she
thought that she could take upon herself the entire conduct
of the load for the present, and allow Abraham to go to
sleep, if he wished to do so. She made him a sort of nest
in front of the hives, in such a manner that he could not
fall, and, taking the rope reins into her own hands, jogged
on as before.
Prince required but slight attention, lacking energy for
superfluous movements of any sort. Having no longer a
THE MAIDEN 81
KHttpanion to distract her, Tees fell more deeply into reverie
than ever, her back leaning against the hives. The mute
procession of trees and hedges became attached to fantastic)
tcenes, outside reality, and the occasional heave of the wind
became the sigh of some immense sad soul, conterminous
rith the universe in space, and with history in time.
CThen examining the mesh of events in her own life, she
seemed to see the vanity of her father's views ; the gentle-
manly match of her mother's fancy ; to see him as a grimac-
ing personage, laughing at her poverty and her shrouded
knightly ancestry. Everything grew more and more ex-
travagant, and she no longer knew bow time passed. A
sudden jerk shook her in her seat, and Tess awoke from
the sleep into which she, too, had fallen.)
They were a long way further on than when she had
lost consciousness, and the wagon had stopped. A hollow
groan, unlike anything she had ever heard in her life, came
from tho front, followed by a shout of " Hoi, there I "
The lantern hanging at her wagon had gone out, but
another was shining in her face — much brighter than her
own had been. Something terrible had happened. The
harness was entangled with an object which blocked the
In consternation Tess jumped down, and discovered the
dreadful truth, The groan had proceeded from her father's
poor horse Prince. The morning mail-cart, with its two
noiseless wheels, speeding along these lanes like an arrow,
as it always did, had driven into her slow and unlighted
equipage. The pointed shaft of the cart had entered the
breast of the unhappy Prince like a sword, and from the
wound his life's blood was spouting in a stream, and fall-
ing with a hiss into the road.
In her despair Tess sprang forward and put her hand
upon the hole, with the only result that she became splashed
from face to skirt with the crimson drops. Then she stood
hftbjl«jgly looking on. Prince also stood firm and motion
32 TESS OP THE DTJHBEKVTLLEB
less as long as he could, till he suddenly sank down in ft
heap.
By this time the mail-cart man had joined her, and be-
gan dragging and unharnessing the hot form of Prince.
But he was already dead, and seeing that nothing more
could be done immediately, the mail-cart man returned to
his own animal, which was uninjured.
" I am bound to go on with the mail-bags, " he said, " ■ so
that the best thing for you to do is to bide here with your
load. I'll send somebody to help you as soon as I can. It
will soon be daylight, and yon have nothing to fear. "
He mounted, and sped on his way, while Tess stood and
waited. The atmosphere turned pale; the birds shook
themselves in the hedges, arose, and twittered; the lane
showed all its white features, and Tess showed hers, still
whiter. The huge pool of blood in front of her was already
assuming the iridescence of coagulation ; and when the
sun rose, a million prismatic hues were reflected from it
Prince lay alongside still and stark, his eyes half open, the
hole in his chest looking scarcely large enough to have let
out all that had animated him.
"'Tis all my doing — all mine ! " the distressed girl mur-
mured, gazing intently at the spectacle. " No excuse for
me — none. What will father and mother live on now?
Aby, Aby ! " She shook the child, who had slept soundly
through the whole disaster. " We can't go on with our
load — Prince is killed ! "
When Abraham realized alL the furrows of fifty years
were extemporized on his young face.
" Why, I danced and laughed only yesterday ! " she went
on to herself. " To think that I was such a fool ! "
/ "'Tis because we be on a blighted star, and not a sound
one, isn't it, TeBS ! " murmured Abraham, through his tears.
In stagnant blankness they waited through ah interval^
which seemed endless. At length a sound and an ap-
proaching object proved to them that the driver of the ma'l
THE MAIDEN S3
«art had been as good as his word. A farmer's man from
near Stourcastle came up, leading a strong cob. He was
harnessed to the wagon of beehives in the place of Prince,
and the load taken on towards Casterbridge.
The evening of the same day saw the empty wagon
reach again the spot of the accident. Prince had lain there
in the ditch since the morning; but the place of the blood
pool was still visible in the middle of the road, though
scratched and scraped over by passing vehicles. All that
was left of Prince was now hoisted into the wagon he had
formerly hauled, and with his hoofs in the air, and his
shoes shining in the setting sunlight, he retraced the road
to Marlott.
Tess had gone in front How to break the news wai
more than she could think. It was a relief to her tongue
to find from the faces of her parents that they already
knew of their loss, though this did not lessen the self-re-
proach which she continued to heap upon herself for her
negligence in f allin g asleep.
But the very shiftlessness of the household rendered the
misfortune a less terrifying one to them than it would have
been to a striving family, though in the present case it
meant ruin, and in the other it would only have meant in-
convenience. In the Durbeyfleld countenances there was
nothing of the red wrath that would have burnt upon the
girl from parents more ambitious for her welfare. Nobody
blamed Tess as she blamed herself.
When it was discovered that the knacker and tanner
would give only a very few shillings for Prince's carcass
because of bis decrepitude, Durbeyfleld rose to the occasion.
" No, " said he, stoically, " I won't sell his old body.
When we D'Urbervilles was knighte in the land, we didn't
Bell our chargers for cat's meat. Let'em keep their shil-
lings ! He has served me well in his lifetime, and I won't
part from him now. "
■ He worked harder the next day in digging a grave for
84 TESS OF THE CUBBERVILLES
Prince in the garden than he had worked for months to
grow a crop for his family. When the hole was ready,
Durbeyfield and his wife tied a rope round the horse and
dragged him up the path towards it, the children following.
Abraham and'Liza Lu sobbed, Hope and Modesty dis-
charged their griefs in loud blares, which echoed from the
walla; and when Prince was tumbled in they gathered
round the grave. The bread-winner had been taken away
from them ; what would they do 1
" Is he gone to heaven I " asked Abraham, between the
sobs.
Then Dnrbeyneld began to shovel in the earth, and the
children cried anew. All except Tess. Her face was dry
and pale, as though she regarded herself in the light of a
The higgling business, which had mainly depended on
the horse, became disorganized forthwith. Distress, if not
penury, loomed in the distance. Dnrbeyneld was what
was locally called a slack-twisted fellow; he had good
strength to work at times ; but the times could not be relied
on to coincide with the hours of requirement ; and having
been unaccustomed to the regular toil of the day-laborer,
he was not particularly persistent when they did so co-
incide.
Tess, meanwhile, as the one who had dragged them into
this quagmire, was silently wondering what she could do to
help them out of it; and then her mother broached her
scheme.
" We must take the ups wi'the downs, Tess, " said she ;
" and never could your high blood have been found out
St a more called-f or moment Ton must try your Menus,
•thv: maiden as
Do you know that there is a very rich Mrs. D Urberville
living oat on the edge of The Chase, who must be our
relation ? You most go to her and claim kin, and ask for
some help in our trouble. "
" I shouldn't care to do that, " says Teas. " If there is
such a lady,'twould be enough for as if she were friendly
— not to expect her to give as help. "
" You could win her round to do anything, my dear.
Besides, perhaps there's more in it than you know of. I've
heard what I've heard, good-now. "
The oppressive sense of the harm she had done led Tess
to be more deferential than she might otherwise have been
to the maternal wish; but she could not understand why
her mother should find such satisfaction in contemplating
an enterprise of, to her, such doubtful profit. Her mother
might -ave made inquiries, and have discovered that this
WUj. D kJrbervttte was a lady of unequalled virtues and
charity. But Toss's pride made the part of poor relation
one of particular distaste to her.
" Td rather try to get work, " she murmured.
" Durbeyfield, you can settle it, " said his wife, turning to
where he sat in the background. " If you say she ought to
go, she will go. "
H I don't like my children going and making themselves
beholden to strange kin, " murmured he. " I'm the head of
the noblest branch of the family, and I ought to live up
to it "
Hi s reasons for staying away were worse to Tess than
her own objection to going. " Well, as I killed the horse,
mother, " she said, mournfully, " I suppose I ought to do
something. I don't mind going and seeing her, but you
most leave it to me about asking for help. And don't go
thinking about her making a match for me — it is silly. "
" Very well said, Tess, " observed her father, sententiously.
K Who said I had such a thought f * asked Joan.
u \ fancy it is in your mind, mother. But FU go. "
86 TESS OF TOT. IXUBBKRVILLBS
Rising early next day, she walked to the hill town called
Bhaston, and there took advantage of a van which twice
in the week ran from Shaaton eastward to Chaseborongh,
passing near Trantridge, the pariah in which the vague
and mysterious Mrs. iyUrberville had her residence.
r Teas Durbeyfield's route on this memorable morning lay
/amid the northeastern undulations of the vale in which she
/ had been born, and in which her iife had unfolded. The
{ Vale of Blackmoor was to her the world, and its inhabitants
I the races thereof. From the gates and stiles of Marlott
I she had looked down its length in the wondering days of
J infancy, and what had been mystery to her then was not
i much less than mystery to her now. She had seen daily
! from her chamber window towers, villages, faint white
; mansions; above all, the town of Shaston standing ma-
i jestically on its height; its windows shining like lamps in
1 the evening sun. She had hardly ever visited it, only a
'. small tract even of the vale and its environs being known
, to her by close inspection. Much less had she been far
outside the valley. Every contour of the surrounding hills
i was as personal to her as that of her relatives'faces ; but
i for what lay beyond, her judgment was dependent on the
\ teaching of the village school, where she had held a leading
place in a high standard at the time of her leaving, a year
'or two before this date.
In those early days she had been much loved by others
of her own sex and age, and had used to be seen about the
village as one of three, all nearly of the same year, walking
home from school side by side, Tess being the middle one
— in a pink print pinafore of a finely reticulated pattern,
worn over a stuff frock that had lost its original color for a
nondescript tertiary — marching on upon long stalky legs,
in tight stockings which had little ladder-like holes at the
knees, torn by kneeling in the roads and banks in search
of vegetable and mineral treasures ; her then earth-colored
'■ air hanging like pot-hooks ; the arms of the two outside
THE MAIDEN ST
girls resting round the waist of Tess; her anna on the
shoulders of the two supporters.
As Tess grew older, and began to see how matters stood,
she f elt quite a Malthnsian towards her mother for thought-
lessly giving her so many little sisters and brothers. Her
mother's intelligence was that of a happy child : Joan Dnr-
beyneld was simply an additional one, and that not the
eldest, to her own long family of waiters on Providence.
Tess became humanely beneficent towards the small ones,
and to help them as much as possible, she used, as soon as
she left school, to lend a hand at hay-making or harvesting
on neighboring farms; or, by preference, at milking or
butter making processes, which she had learnt when her
father had owned cows ; and, being deft-fingered, it was a
kind of work at which she excelled.
Every day seemed to throw upon her young shoulders
more of the family burdens, and that Tess should be the
representative of the Durbeyflelds at the D'Urberville man-
sion came as a thing of course. In this instance it must be
admitted that the Durbeyflelds were putting their fairest
side outward.
She alighted from the van at Trantridge Cross, and as-
cended on foot a hill in the direction of the district known
as The Chase, on the borders of which, as she had been
informed, Mrs. D'Urberville's seat, The Slopes, would be
found. It was not a manorial home in the ordinary sense,
with fields and pastures, and a grumbling farmer, out of
which a living had to be dragged by the owner and his
family by hook or crook. It was more, far more, a country
house, built for enjoyment pure and simple, with not an
acre of troublesome land attached to it beyond what was
required for residential purposes, and a little fancy farm
kept in hand by the owner, and tended by a bailiff.
The warm red-brick lodge came first in sight, up to its
eaves in dense evergreens. Tess thought this was the
mansion itself, till, passing through the side wicket wit'-
38 TESS OF THE D-URRERVILLES
some trepidation, and onward to a point at which the drive
took a torn, the honse proper stood in full view. It was
of recent erection — indeed almost new — and of the same
rich crimson color that formed such a contrast with the
evergreens of the lodge. Far behind the bright-hued cor-
ner of the honse, which rose like a red geranium against
the subdued colors around, stretched the soft azure land-
scape of The Chase, a truly venerable tract of forestland,
one of the few remaining woodlands in England, of almost
primeval date, wherein Druidical mistletoe was still found
on aged oaks, and where enormous yew-trees, not planted
by the hand of man, grew as they had grown when they
were pollarded for bows. All this sylvan antiquity, how-
ever, though visible from The Slopes, was outside the im-
mediate boundaries of the estate.
Everything on this snug property was bright, thriving,
and well kept; acres of glass houses stretched down the
inclines to the copses at their feet. Everything looked like
money — like the last coin issued from the Mint. The stables,
partly screened by Austrian pines and evergreen oaks, and
fitted with every late appliance, were as dignified as chapels-
of-ease, and on the extensive lawn stood an ornamental tent,
its door being towards her.
Simple Tees Durbeyfleld stood at gaze, m a half -paralyzed
attitude, on the edge of the gravel sweep. Her feet had
brought her onward to this point before she had quite
realized where she was ; and now all was contrary to her
expectation.
" I thought we were an old family, but thin is all new ! "
she said, in her girlish artlessness. She wished that she
had not fallen in so readily with her mother's plans for
" claiming kin, " and had endeavored to gain assistance
nearer home.
The D'Urbervilles — or Stoke-D'Urbervilles, as they some-
times called themselves — who owned all this, were a some-
what unusual family to find in this old-fashioned part of
THE MAIDEN 30
the country. Parson Trmghara nad spoken truly when
he said that our shambling John Durbeyfield was the only
really lineal representative of the old IVlTrhtryille family
existing in the connty, or near it ; he might have added,
what he knew very well, that the Stoke-DTJrbervilles were
no more DTTrbervilles of the true tree than he was him-
self. Tet it must be admitted that this family formed a
very good stock whereon to regraft a name which sadly
wanted such renovation.
When old Mr. Simon Stoke, latterly deceased, had made
his fortune as an honest merchant (some said money-lender)
In the north, he decided to settle as a county man in the
jonth of England, out of hail of his business district; and
ii doing this he felt the necessity of recommencing with
a name that would not too readily identify him with the
smart tradesman of the past, and that would be less com-
monplace than the original bald stark words. Conning
for an hoar in the British Museum the pages of works de-
voted to extinct, half-extinct, obscured, and lost families
appertaining to the quarter of England in which he pro-
posed to settle, he considered that If UrberviZU looked pnd
sounded as well as any of them ; and D'Urherville accord-
ingly was annexed to his own for himself and his heirs
eternally. Tet he was not an extravagant-minded man in
this, and in constructing his family tree on the new basis
was duly reasonable in framing his intermarriages and
aristocratic links, never inserting a single title above a
rank of strict moderation.
Of this work of imagination poor Tess and her parents
were naturally in ignorance — much to their own discom-
fiture; indeed, the very possibility of such annexation
was unknown to them, who supposed that though to be
w:U favored might be the gift of fortune, a family name
came by nature.
Tess still stood hesitating, like a bather about to mane
uis plunge, hardly knowing whether to retreat or to nci*
40 TESS OF THE DTBBERVH.LES
severe, when a figure came forth from the dark triangulat
door of the tent It was that of a tall young man, smoking.
He had an almost swarthj complexion, with full^lipt^
badly moulded, though " red and smooth, above which wai
a well-groomed black mustache with curled points though
his age could not be more than three- or four-and-twenty.
Yet, despite the touches of barbarism in his contours, there
was a singular force in the gentleman's face, and in his
bold rolling eye.
" Well, my big beauty, what can I do for you 1 " said he,
airily, coming forward. And, perceiving that she stood
quite confounded: " Never mind me. I am Mr. Stoke-
D'Urberville. Have you come to see me or my mother 1 "
This embodiment of a Stoke-DTJrberville and a name-
sake differed even more from what Tess had expected than
the house and grounds had differed. She had dreamed
of an aged and dignified face, the sublimation of all dis-
tinctive IVUrberville lineaments, furrowed with incarnate
memories, representing in hieroglyphic the centuries of hei
family and England's history. But she screwed herself up
to the work in hand, since she could not get out of it, and
answered :
" I came to see your mother, sir. "
" I am afraid you cannot see her — she is an invalid, " re-
plied the present representative of the spurious house ; for
he was Mr. Alec, the only son of the lately deceased gen
tleman. " Cannot I answer your purpose 1 What is th*
business you wish to see her about t "
" It isn't business ; it is — I can hardly say what ! "
" Pleasure T "
" Oh no. Why, sir, if I tell you, it will seem "
Tess's sense of the extreme silliness of her errand wat
now so strong that, notwithstanding her awe of him and
her general discomfort at being here, her rosy lips curved
towards a smile, much to the attraction of the swarthy
Alexander.
u
" It is so very foolish, " she stammered; " I fear 1 caul
tell'eel "
" Never mind; I like foolish things. Try again, my
jear, " said he, kindly.
" Mother asked me to come, " TeBS continued; " and, in-
deed, I was inclined to do so myself, likewise. Bnt I did
not think it would be like this, I came, sir, to tell yon
that we be of the same family as yon. "
" Hoi Poor relations I *
« Stokes *»
" No; IVlTrbervUles. "
" Ay, ay; I mean DTTrbervfllea. "
" Our names are corrupted to Durbeyfleid ; but we hart
several proofs that we be D'Urbervilles. Antiquarians say
we are — and — and we have a very old silver spoon, round
in the bowl, like a little ladle, with a ramping lion on the
handle, and a castle over him. But it is so old that mother
uses it to stir the pea soup. "
" A castle argent is certainly my crest, " said he, blandly.
" And so mother said we ought to make ourselves be-
known to you, as we've lost our horse by a bad accident,
and are the oldest branch ft the family. "
" " Very kind of your mother, I'm sure. And I, for one,
dont regret her step. " Alee looked at Tess as he spoke
in a way that made her blnsh a little. " And so, my
pretty girl, you've come on a friendly visit to us, as rela-
tions! "
" I suppose I have, " faltered Teas, looking round at the
" Well — there's no harm in it. Where do yon livef
What are you ! "
She gave him brief particulars; and, after further in-
quiries, told hiui that she was intending to go back by the
same carrier who had brought her.
" It is a long while before he returns past Trantridgw
VI TESS OF THE IVUBBKK VILLUS
Cross. Supposing we walk round the grounds to pass the
time, my pretty eoz 1 "
Tess wished to abridge her visit as mu'oh'4s possible, but
the young man was pressing, and she consented to accom-
pany him. He conducted her about the lawns and flower-
beds and conservatories, and thence to the fruit-garden,
where he asked her if she liked strawberries.
" Yes, " said Tess, " when they come. "
" They are already here. " iyUrberville began gathering
specimens of the fruit for her, handing them back to her as
be stooped; and presently, selecting a specially fine prod-
uct of the " British Queen " variety, he stood up, and held
it by the stem to her mouth.
" No, no ! ■ she said, quickly, putting her fingers between
his hand and her lips. " I would rather take it, sir, in my
own hand. "
" Nonsense! he insisted; and, in a'slight distress, she
parted her lips and took it in.
They had spent some time wandering desultorily thus,
Tess eating, in a half-pleased, half-reluctant state, whatever
D'Urberville offered her. " When she could consume no
more of the strawberries, he filled her little basket with
them; and then the two passed round to the rose-trees,
whence he gathered blossoms, and gave her to put in hei
bosom. She obeyed like one in a dream, and when she
could affix no more he himself tucked a bud or two into
her hat, and heaped her basket with them, in the prod "
gality of his bounty. At last, looking at his watch, he said 1
" Now, by the time you have had something to eat, it will
be time for you to leave, if you want to catch the carrier "
to Shaston. Come here, and 111 see what grub I can find/
Stoke-DTTrberville took her back to the lawn and into
the tent, where he left her, soon reappearing with a basket
of light luncheon, which he put before her himself. It
was evidently the young gentleman's wish not to be di &
turbed in this pleasant Ute-MHe by the servantry.
THE MAIDEN 43
" Do yon mind my smoking? " be asked.
" Oh, not at all, sir. " *
He watched her pretty and unconscious munching
through the skeins of smoke that pervaded the tent, and
Tess Dnrbeyneld did not divine, as she innocently looked
down at the roses in her bosom, that there, behind the bine v
narcotic haze, was potentially the " tragic mischief " of her
drama! — one who stood fair to be the blood-red ray in the
spectrum of her young life. She had an attribute which
amounted to a disadvantage just now ; and it was this that
caused Alec D'Urberville's eyes to rivet themselves upon
her. It was a luxuriance of aspect, a fulness of growth,
which made her appear more of a woman than she really
was. She had inherited the feature from her mother,
without the quality it denoted. It had troubled her mind
occasionally, till her companions had said that it was a fault
which time would cure.
She soon had finished her lunch. " Now I am going
home, sir, " she said, rising.
" And what do they call you? " he asked, as he accom-
panied her along the drive till they were ont of sight of the
house.
" Tess Durbeyfield down at Marlott, sir. "
" And you say your people have lost their horse 1 *
" I — killed him ! " she answered, her eyes filling with
tears as she gave particulars of Prince's death. " And I
don't know what to do for father on account of it. ! "
" I must think if I cannot do something. My mother
must find a berth for you. But, Tess, no nonsense about
'D'Urberville';'Dnrbeyneld'only, you know — quite an-
other name. "
" I wish for no better, sir, " said she, p almin g herself
well-nigh to dignity.
Tor a momenta-only for a moment — when they were in
the turning of the drive, between the tall rhododendrons
and laurestines, before the lodge became visible, he incline* "
44 TESS OP THE IxUBBRBvnjjES
his face towards her as if— But, no t he thought bettet
ofit, and let her go.
^Thus the thing began. Had she perceived this meeting's
import, she might have asked why she was doomed to bo
seen and marked and coveted that day by the: wrong man,
and not by a certain other man, the right and desired one
in all respects — as nearly as humanity can supply the right
and desired; yet to him who amongst her acquaintance
might have approximated to this kind she was but a tran-
sient impression, half-forgotten^
In the ill-judged execution of the well-judged plan of
things, the call seldom produces the comer, the man to love
rarely coincides with the hour for loving. Nature does not
often say " See ! " to a poor creature at a time when see-
ing can lead to happy doing ; or reply " Here ! " to a body's
cary of " Where! " till the hide-and-seek has become an
irksome, outworn game. We may wonder whether at the
acme and summit of the human progress these anachro-
nisms will become corrected by a finer intuition, a closer
interaction of the social machinery than that which now
jolts ns round and along ; but such completeness is not to
be prophesied, or even conceived as possible. Enough thai
in the present case, as in millions, the two halves of an ap-
proximately perfect whole did not confront each other at
the perfect moment ; part and counterpart wandered inde-
pendently about the earth in the stupidest manner for a
while, till the late time came. Out of which maladroit de-
lay sprang anxieties, disappointments, shocks, catastrophes
— and what was called a strange destiny.
When D'UrberviHe got " oacsTTSTBe tent, he sat down
astride on a chair, reflecting, with a pleased gleam in his
lace. Then he broke into a lond laugh.
" Well, I'm damned 1 What a funny thing I Ha-ha-hat
And what a charming girll "
Google
THE MAIDEN
VI
Tess went down the hill to Trantridge Cross, and auto-
matically waited to take her seat in the van returning from
Chaseborongh to Shaston. She did not know what the
other occupants said to her as she entered, though she an-
swered them ; and when they had started anew she rode
along with an inward and not an outward eye.
One among her fellow-travellers addressed her more
pointedly than any had spoken before? " Why, you be
quite a posy ! And such roses in early June ! "
Then she became aware of the spectacle she presented to
their surprised vision ; roses at her breast ; roses in her
hat; roses and strawberries in her basket to the brim.
She blushed, and said, confusedly, that the flowers had been
given to her ; when the passengers were not looking, she
stealthily removed the more prominent blooms from ber
hat and placed them in the basket, where she covered them
with her handkerchief. Then she fell to reflecting again,
and in looking downwards a thorn of the rose remaining
in her breast accidentally pricked her chin. Like all the
cottagers of Blackmoor Vale, Tess was steeped in fancies
and prefignrative superstitions; she thought this an ill
emeu — the first she had noticed that day.
The van travelled only so far as Shaston, and there were
several miles of pedestrian descent from that mountain
town into the vale to Marlott. Her mother had advised
her to stay here for the night, at the house of a cottage
woman they knew, if she felt too tired to come on; and
this Tess did, not descending to her home till the following
afternoon.
When she entered the house she perceived in a moment
from her mother's triumphant manner that something had
occurred in the interim.
46 TESS OF THE IVUftBEBVIIJJIS
" Oh yes ; I know all about it ! I told yon it would be
all right, and now'tis proved. "
" Since Pve been away I " What hast " said Tess, rather
wearily.
Her mother surveyed the girl up and down with arch
approval, and went on, banteringly, " So yonVe brought
em round ! "
" How do you know, mother t *
" I've had a letter. "
Tess then remembered that there would have been just
time for this.
" They Bay — Mrs. DTJrberville say8 — that she wants you
to look after a little poultry farm which is her hobby.
But this is only her artful way of getting you there with-
out raising your hopes. She's going to acknowledge'ee as
kin — that's the meaning o't. "
" But I didn't see her. "
" You zeed somebody, I suppose? "
" I saw her son. "
" And did he acknowledge'ee T "
" Well — he called me coz. "
" An'I knew it ! Jacky, he called her coz ! " cried Joan
to her husband. " " Well, he spoke to his mother, of course,
and she do want'ee there. "
" But I don't know that I am apt at managing fowls, "
said the dubious Tess.
" Then I don't know who is apt. You've ben born in
the business, and brought np in it. Them thet's born in a
business always know more about it than any'prentice.
Besides, that's only just a show of something for you to
do, that you midn't feel dependent. "
" I don't altogether think I ought to go, " said Tess,
thoughtfully. " Who wrote the letter t Will you let me
look at it T "
" Mrs. IVUrberville wrote it Here it is. "
The letter was in the third person, and brieflv informed
'HTKJ MAIDEN 47
Mrs. Durbeyfleld that her daughter's services would be
useful to tUdt lady in the management of her poultry farm,
that a comfortable room would be provided for her if she
could come, and that the emolument would be on a liberal
scale if they liked her.
" O — that's all, " said Tess.
" Yon eonldnt expect her to throw her arms round'ee.
an'to kiss and to coll'ee all at once. "
Tess looked out of the window. " I would rather stay
here with father and you, " she said.
" But why f
" Pd rather not tell you why, mother ; indeed, I dont
quite know why. "
A week afterwards she came in one evening from an un-
availing search for some light occupation in the immediate
neighborhood. Her idea had been to get together sufficient
money during the summer to purchase another horse.
Hardly had she crossed the threshold before one of the
children danced across the room, saying, " The gentleman
has been here ! "
Her mother hastened to explain, smiles breaking from
every inch of her person. Mrs. D'tjrberville's son had
called on horseback, having been riding by chance in the
direction of Marlott. He had wished to know, finally, in
the name of his mother, if Tess could really come to man-
age the old lady's fowl farm or not, the lad who had
hitherto superintended the birds having proved untrust-
worthy. " Mr. D'Urberville says you must he a good girl
if you are at all as you appear ; he knows you must be
worth your weight in gold. He is very much interested in
'ee — truth to tell. "
Tess seemed for the moment really pleased to hear that
she had won such high opinion from a stranger when, in
her own esteem, she had sunk so low. " It is very good of
him to think that, " she murmured ; " and if I was quite
sore how it would he living ther* > I w«uld go any-when. "
48 TESS OP THE IXUEBEHVILLE8
" He is a mighty handsome man. "
" I don't think so, " said Teas, coldly. V
" Well, there's your chance, whether or no ; and Pm sure
he wears a beautiful diamond ring t *
" Yes, " said little Abraham, brightly, from the window
bench ; " and I seed it ! and it did twinkle when he pat his
hand np to his mistarshers. Mother, why did our noble
relation keep on putting his hand up to his mistarshers ? "
" Hark at that child ! " cried Mrs. Durbeyfleld, with par-
enthetic admiration.
" Perhaps to show his diamond ring, " murmured Sir
John, dreamily, from his chair.
" 111 think it over, " said Tess, leaving the room.
" Well, she's made a conquest o " the junior branch of us,
straight off, " continued the matron to her husband, " and
she's a fool if she don't follow it up. "
" I don't quite like my children going away from home/
said the higgler. " As the head of the family, the res',
ought to come to me. "
" But do let her go, Jacky, " coaxed his poor witless wife
" He's struck wi'her — you can see that. He called her eoz i
He'll marry her, most likely, and make a lady of her ; < wc
then she'll be what her forefathers was. "
John Durbeyneld had more conceit than energy 01
health, and this supposition was pleasant to him. " Well,
perhaps that's what young Mr. D'Urherville means, " he ad-
mitted, " and he really may have serious thoughts about
improving his blood by linking on to the old line. Tess,
the little rogue ! And have she really paid'em a visit to
such an end as this J "
Meanwhile Tess wa» walking thoughtfully among the
gooseberry-bushes in tVe garden, and over Prince's grave.
When she came in, hev mother pursued her advantage.
" Well, what be you going to do t " she asked.
" I wish I had seen Mr*. DtJrberville, " said Tess.
THE MAIDEN 49
* I think you mid as well settle it. Then you'll see her
toon enough.''
Her father coughed in his chair.
" I don't know what to say, " answered the girl, restlessly,
" It is for you to decide. I killed the old horse, and I sup-
pose I ought to do something to get ye a new one. Bat-
lout — x don't quite like Mr. IVtJrberville ! "
The children, who had made use of this idea of Teas
being taken np by their wealthy kinsfolk (as they imagined
the other family to be) as a species of dolorifuge after the
death of the horse, began to cry at Toss's reluctance, and
teased and reproached her for hesitating.
" Tess won't go and be made a la — a — dy of! No, she
says she wo — o — on't ! " they wailed, with square mouths.
" And we shan't have a nice new horse, and lots o* golden
money to buy fairlings ! And Tess won't look pretty in
her best cloze no mo — o — ore t "
Her mother chimed in to the same tune ; a certain way
she had of making her labors in the house seem heavier
than they were by prolonging them indefinitely also weighed
in the argument. Her father alone preserved an attitude
of neutrality.
" I will go, " said Tess at last.
Her mother could not repress her consciousness of the
nuptial Vision conjured up by the girl's consent. " That's
right I For sneh apretty girl, it is a fine chance ! "
" I hope it is a chance for earning money. It is no other
kind of chance. Ton had better say nothing of that silly
sort about parish. "
Mrs. Durbeyfield did not promise. She was not quite
sure that she did not feel proud enough, after the visitor's
remarks, to say a good deal.
Tims it was arranged ; and the young girl wrote, agree-
ing to be ready to set out on any day on which she might
be required. She was duly informed that Mrs. DUrber-
00 TESS OP THE CURBEBVILLES
villi* was glad of her decision, and that a spring cart should
be sent to meet her and her luggage at the top of the Yale
on the day after the morrow, when she must hold herself
prepared to start. Mrs. D'Urberville's handwriting seemed
rather masculine.
" A cartt " murmured Joan Durbeyfleld, doubtingly.
Having at last taken her course, Tess was less restless
and abstracted, going about her business with some self-
assurance in the thought of acquiring another horse for her
father by an occupation which would not be onerous. She
had hoped to be a teacher at the school, but the fates seemed
to decide otherwise. Being mentally older than her mother,
she did not regard Mrs. Durbeyfleld's matrimonial hopes for
her in a serious aspect for a moment. The light-minded
woman had been discovering good matches for her daughter
almost from the year of her birth.
vn.
On the morning appointed for her departure Tess wa*.;
awake before dawn — at the marginal minute of the dart-
when the grove is still mute save for one prophetic bird, who
sings with a clear-voiced conviction that he at least knows
the correct time of day, the rest preserving silence, as if
equally convinced that he is mistaken. She remained up-
stairs packing till breakfast-time, and then eame down in
her ordinary working-clothes, her Sunday apparel being
carefully folded in her box.
Her mother expostulated. " You will never set out to
see your folks without dressing up more the daud than
thatt "
" But I am going to work ! " said Tess.
« Well, yes, " said Mrs. Durbeyfleld ; adding, in a private
tone, " at first there may be a little pretence ot . . . fiat I
think it will be wiser of'ee to put your best side outward, "
she said.
" Very well j I suppose you know best, " replied Tess, with
calm indifference. And to please her parent the girl put
herself quite in Joan's hands, saying, serenely, " Do what
you like with me, mother. "
Mrs. Durbeyneld was only too delighted at this tracta-
bility. First she fetched a great basin, and washed Tess's
hair with such thoroughness that when dried and brushed it
looked twice as much as at other times. She tied it with a
broader red ribbon than usual Then she put upon her the
white frock that Tess had worn at the club-walking, the
airy fulness of which, supplementing her enlarged coiffure, \
imparted to her developing figure an amplitude which be- /
lied her age, and might cause her to be addressed as a'
woman when she was not mnch more than a child.
" I declare, there's a hole in my stocking heel ! " said
Tess.
" Never mind holes in your stockings — they don't speak !
" When I was a maid, so long as I had a pretty bonnet, the
devil might ha'found me in heels. "
Her mother's pride in the girl's appearance led her to step
back, like a painter from his easel, and survey her work as a
whole. " You must see yourself, " she cried. " It is much
better than you was t'other day. "
As the looking-glass was only large enough to reflect a
very small portion of Tess's person at one time, Mrs. Dur-
beyfteld hnng a black cloak outside the casement, and so
made a large reflector of the panes, as it is the wont of be-
decking cottagers to do. After this she went downstairs
to her husband, who was sitting in the lower room.
" ril tell'ee what'tis, Durbeyneld, " said she, exultingly,
" he'll never have the heart not to love her. Bat whatever
you do, don't say too much to Tess of his fancy for her and
this chance she has got. She is such an odd maid that it
62 TESS OF THE IVUSBERVIILES
mid set her against him, or against going there even now,
If all goes well, I shall certainly be for making some return
to that pa'son at Stagfoot Lane for telling us — dear good
man! "
However, as the moment for the girl's setting ont drew
nigh, when the first excitement of the dressing had passed
off, a slight misgiving found place in Joan Durbeyfleld's
mind. It prompted the matron to say that she would walk
a little way — as far as to the point where the acclivity from
the valley began its first Bteep ascent to the onter world.
At the top Tess was going to be met with the spring cart
sent by the D'Urbervilles, and her box had already been
wheeled ahead towards this summit by a lad with trucks,
to be in readiness.
Seeing their mother put on her bonnet, the younger
children clamored to go with her. " I do want to walk a
little ways wi'Sissy, now she's going to marry our gentle-
man cousin, and wear fine cloze ! "
" Now, " said Tess, flushing and turning quickly, " 111 hear
no more o'that ! Mother, how could you ever put such
stuff into their heads f
" Going to work, my dears, for our rich relation, and help
get enough money for a new horse, " said Mrs. Durbeyfleld,
pacifically.
" Good-by, father, " said Tess, with a lumpy throat
" Good-by, my maid, " said Sir John, raising his head from
his breast, as he suspended his nap, induced by a slight
exeess this morning in honor of the occasion. " WelL I
hope my young friend will like such a comely sample of
his own blood. And telPn, Tess, that being reduced quite
from our former grandeur, 111 sell him the title— yes, sell
it — and at no onreasonable figure. "
" Not for less than a thousand pound ! " cried Lady. Dur
beyfleld.
" Tell'n — I'll take a thousand pound. Well, Til take leas,
\en I come to think ot. He'll adorn it better than a
THE MAIDEN SI
poor broken-down feller like myself can. Tell'n he shaft.
hae it for a hundred. Bat I won't stand upon trifles —
tell'n lie shall hae it for fifty — ior twenty pound! Yea,
twenty pound — that's the lowest. Dammy, family honor
is family honor, and I won't take a penny less ! "
Toss's eyes were too full and her voice too choked to
utter the bitter reproaches that were in her. She turned
quickly and went out.
So the girls and their mother all walked together — a
child on each side of Tess, holding her hand, and looking
at her meditatively from time to tune, as at one who was
about to do great things; her mother just behind —'the
group forming a picture of honest beauty flanked by inno-
cence and backed by simple-souled vanity. They followed
the way till they reached the beginning of the ascent, on
the crest of which the vehicle from Trantridge was to re-
ceive her, this limit having been fixed to save the horse
the labor of the slope. Far away behind the first hills the
cliff-like dwellings of Shaston broke the line of the ridge.
Nobody was visible in tho elevated road that skirted the
ascent save the lad whom they had sent on before them,
sitting on the handle of the barrow that contained all Tess's
worldly possessions.
" Bide here a bit, and the cart will soon come, no doubt, "
said Mrs. Dnrbeyfleld'•'Tes ; I see it yonder i n
It had come, appearing suddenly irom bemnd the fore-
head of the nearest upland, and stopping beside the boy
with the barrow. Her mother and the children thereupon
decided to go no farther, ana mailing tnem a nasty good-
by, Tess bent her steps up tne mil.
They saw her white snape draw near to tne spring cart,
on which her box was aireaav Diacea. But Deiore she had
quite reached it. anotner venicie snot out trom a clump
of trees on ■ the summit, came round the bend» > of the road
there, passed the cart, ana naitea Desiae Tess. wno turned
an if in great surprise.
04 TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES
Her mother perceived, for the first time, that the second
vehicle was not an humble conveyance like the first, but
a spick-and-span gig or dog-cart, highly varnished and
equipped. The driver was a young man of one- or two-and-
twenty, with a cigar between his teeth ; wearing a dandy
cap, drab jacket, breeches of the same hue, white neckcloth,
stick-up collar, and brown driving-gloves — in short, he was
the handsome, horsey young buck who had visited her a
week or two before to get her answer about Tess.
Mrs. Durbeyfield clapped her hands like a child. Then
she looked down and stared again. Could she be deceived
as to the meaning of this f
" Is dat the gentleman kinsman who'll make Sissy a
lady! " asked the youngest child.
Meanwhile the musliaed form of Tess coald be seen
standing still, undecided, beside this turnout, whose owner
was talking to her. Her seeming indecision was, in fact^
more than indecision ; it was misgiving. She would have
preferred the humble cart. The young man dismounted,
and appeared to urge her to ascend. She turned her face
down the hill to her relatives, and regarded the little group.
Something seemed to quicken her to a determination ; pos-
sibly the thought that she had killed Prince. She suddenly
stepped up; he mounted beside her, and immediately
whipped on the horse. In a moment they had passed tfc?
slow cart with the box, and disappeared behind the shoulder
of the hill.
Directly Tess was out of sight, and the interest of the
matter as a drama was at an end, the little one's eyes filled
with tears. The youngest child said. " I wish poor Tess
wasn't gone away to be a lady I " and, lowering the corners
of her lips, burst out crying. The new point of view wa»
infectious, and the next child did likewise, and then the
next, till tha whole row of them wailed loud.
There were tears also hi Joan Durbeyfield's eyes as she
turned to go home. Bnt by the time she had got back w
THE MAIDEN 56
the village she was passively trusting to the favor of acci-
dent. However, in bed that night she sighed, and her hus-
band asked her what was the matter.
" O, I don't know exactly, " she said. " I was thinking
that perhaps it would ha'been better if Tess had not gone. "
" Oughtn't ye to have thought of that before 1 "
" Welh'tis a chance for the maid — Still, if'twere the
doing again, I wouldn't let her go till I had found out
whether the gentleman is really a good-hearted young man,
and interested in her as his kinswoman.''
" Yes, you ought, perhaps, to ha'done that, " snored Sir
John.
Joan Durbeyfield always managed to find consolation
somewhere.
" Well, as one of the genuine stock, she ought to make
her way with en, if she plays her trump card aright. And
if he don't marry her afore he will after. For that he's all
afire wi'love for her any eye can see. "
" What's her trump card? Her D'Urberville blood, you
meant "
" No, stupid ; her face — as'twas mine.* •
vni
Having mounted beside her, Alec D'Urberville drove
rapidly along by the crest of the hill, chatting compliments
to Tess as they went, the cart with her box being left far
behind. An immense landscape stretched around them on
every side ; behind, the green valley of her birth ; before, a
gray country of which she knew nothing except from her
first brief visit to Trantridge. Thus they reached the
verge of an incline down which the road stretched in a
long Btraieht descent of nearly a mile.
66 TESS OF THE TVmtKliiR VTT J ,TCH
Ever since the accident with her father's horse, Tees
Durbeyfleld, courageous as she naturally was, had been
exceedingly timid on wheels ; the least irregularity of mo-
tion startled her. She began to get uneasy at a certain
recklessness in her conductor's driving.
" You will go down slowly, sir, I suppose I " she said,
with attempted unconcern.
DTTrberviUe looked round upon her, nipped his cigar
with the tips of his large white centre-teeth, and allowed
his lips to smile slowly of themselves.
" Why, Tess, " he answered, after another whiff or two.
" it isn't a brave, bouncing girl like you who asks that?
Why, I always go down at full gallop. There's nothing
like it for raising your spirits. "
" But perhaps you need not now T "
" Ah, " he said, shaking his head, " there are two to be
reckoned with. It is not me alone. Tib has to be consid-
ered, and she has a very queer temper. "
" Who! "
" Why, this mare. I fancy she looked round at me in a
very grim way just then. Didn't you notice it! "
" Don't try to frighten me, sir, " said Tess, stiffly.
" Well, I dont. If any living man can manage this
horse I can — I won't say any living man can do it — but if
such has the power, I am he. "
" Why do you have such a horse 1 "
" Ah, well may you ask it ! It was my fate, I suppose.
Tib has killed one chap ; and just after I bought her she
nearly killed me. And then, take my word for it, I nearly
killed her. But she's queer still, very queer; and one's
life is hardly safe behind her sometimes.''
They were just beginning to descend ; and it was evident
that the horse, whether of her own will or of his (the latWf
being the more likely) knew so well the reckless perform-
ance expected of her, that she hardly required a. hint from
behind.
TEDS MAIDKN 01
Down, down, they sped, the wheels hamming like a top,
the dog-cart rocking right and left, its axis acquiring a
slightly oblique set in relation to the line of progress ; the
figure of the horse rising and falling in undulations before
them. Sometimes a wheel was off. the ground, it seemed
for many yards ; sometimes a stone was sent spinning over
the hedge, and flinty sparks from the horse's hoofs outshone
the daylight. The fore part of the straight road enlarged
with their advance, the two banks dividing like a splitting
stick ; and one rushed past at each shoulder.
The wind blew through Tess's white muslin to her very
skin, and her washed hair flew out behind. She was deter-
mined to show no open fear, but she clutched D'Urberville's
rein-arm.
" Dont touch my arm ! We shall be thrown out if you
do ! Hold on round my waist ! "
She grasped his waist, and so they reached the bottom.
" Safe, thank God, in spite of your folly ! " said she, her
face on Are.
" Tess — fie I that's temper ! " said IVUrberville.
" Tis truth. "
" Well, you need not let go your hold of me so thank-
lessly the moment you feel yourself out of danger. "
She had not considered what she had been doing ; whether
he were man or woman, stick or stone, in her involuntary
hold on him. Recovering her reserve, she sat without
replying, and thus they reached the summit of another
declivity. " Now then, again ! " said IVUrberville.
" No, no, " said Tess. " Show more sense, do, please,
eir. "
" But when people find themselves on the highest point
in, the county, they must get down again, " he retorted. He
loosened rein, and away they went a second time. D'TJrber-
ville turned his face to her as they rocked, and said, in play-
ful raillery, " Now then, put your arms round my waist
again, as you did before, my beauty ! " a. .00;
68 TESS OF THE I^UBBERVILLES
" Never ! " said Tees, independently, holding on as well
as she could without touching him.
" Let me put one little kiss on those holmberry lips, Teas :
or even on that warmed cheek, and I'll stop— on my honor,
IwiU! "
Tess, surprised beyond measure, slid further hack still
on her seat, at which he urged the horse anew, and rocked
her the more.
" Will nothing else do ! * she cried at length, in despera-
tion, her large eyes staring at him like those of a wild ani-
mal. This dressing her up so prettily by her mother had
apparently been to lamentable purpose.
" Nothing, dear Tess, " he replied.
" O, I don't know — very well ; I don't mind ! " she panted,
miserably.
He drew rein, and as they slowed he was on the point
of imprinting the desired salute, when, as if hardly yet
aware of her own modesty, she dodged aside. His arms
being occupied with the reins, there was left him no power
to prevent her manceuvre.
" Now, damn it — I'll break both our necks ! " swore her
capriciously passionate companion. " So you can go from
your word like that, you young witch, can you? "
" Very well, " said poor Tess, " Til not move since you be
so determined ! But I — thought you would he kind to me,
and protect me, as my kinsman ! "
" Kinsman be hanged ! Now ! "
" But I don't want anybody to kiss me, sir ! " she im-
plored, a big tear beginning to roll down her face, and the
corners of her mouth trembling in her attempts not to cry.
" And I wouldn't ha'come if I had known ! "
He was inexorable, and she sat still, and IVUrberville
gave her the kiss of mastery. No sooner had he done so
than she flushed with shame, took out her handkerchief,
and wiped the spot on her cheek that had been touched by
THE MAIDEN 09
his lips. His ardor was nettled at the sight, for the act on
her part had been unconsciously done.
" You are mighty sensitive for a farm girl! " said the >
young man.'
Teas made no reply to this remark, of which, indeed, she
did not quite comprehend the drift, unheeding the snub she
had administered by her automatic rub upon her cheek.
She had, < n iact, undone the kiss, as far as such a thing
was physically possible. With a dim sense that he was
vexed, she looked steadily ahead as they trotted on, till she
saw, to her consternation, that there was yet another descent
to be undergone.
" You shall be made sorry for that ! " he resumed, his in-
jured tone still remaining, as he flourished the whip anew.
" Unless, that is, you agree willingly to let me do it again,
and no handkerchief. "
She sighed. " Very well, sir ! " she said. " O — let me
get my hat I "
At the moment of speaking, her hat bad blown off intc
the road, then* present speed on the upland being by no
means slow. D'Urberville pulled up, and said he would get
it for her, but Tess was down on the other side.
She turned back and picked up the article. " You look
prettier with it off, upon my soul, if that's possible, " he said,
contemplating her over the back of the vehicle. " Now
then, up again! What's the matter?''
The hat was in place and tied, but Tess had not stepped
forward. " No, sir, " she said, revealing the red and ivory
of her mouth in defiant triumph ; " not again, if I know it ! *
*'What — yon won't get up beside mel "
" No ; I shall walk. "
" Tis five or sue miles yet to Trantridge. "
" I don't care if'tis dozens Besides, the cart is behind. "
" You artful hussy ! Now, tell me — didn't you make that
hat blow off on purpose t HI swear you did 1 "
BO TESS OP THE D'URBERVmjflS
Her guarded silence confirmed his suspicion.
Then D'Urberville cursed and swore at her, and called
her everything he could think of for the trick. Turning
the horse suddenly, he tried to drive back upon her, and so ,
hem her in between the gig and the hedge. But he could
not do this short of injuring her.
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself for using such
wicked words ! " cried Tess, with spirit, from the top of the
hedge into which she had scrambled. " I don't like you
at all ! I hate and detest you ! I'll go back to mother, I
will! "
DTJrberville's bad temper cleared up at sight of hers ;
and he laughed heartily. " WelL I like you all the better, "
he said. " Come, let there be peace. I'll never do it again
against your will. My life upon it now ! "
Still Tess could not be induced to remount. She did not,
however, object to his keeping his gig alongside her ■ and,
in this manner, at a slow pace, they advanced towards the
village of Trantridge. From time to time D'Urberville ex-
hibited a sort of fierce distress at the sight of the tramping
he had driven her to by his misdemeanor. She might, in
truth, have safely trusted him now ; but he had forfeited
her confidence for the time, and she kept on the ground,
progressing thoughtfully, as if wondering whether it would
be wiser to return home. Her resolve, however, had been
taken, and it seemed vacillating even to childishness to
abandon it now, unless for graver reasons. How could she
face her parents, get back her box, and disconcert the whole
scheme for the rehabilitation of her family on such senti-
mental grounds t
A few minutes later the chimneys of The Slopes appeared
in vie-v, and in a snug nook to the right the poultry-farm
and cottage of Tess's destination.
, Google
THE MAIDEN
IX
The community of fowls to which Tees had been ap
pointed as supervisor, purveyor, nurse, surgeon, and friend
made their headquarters in an old thatched cottage stand- „
ing in an enclosure that had once been a garden, hut was
now a trampled and sanded square. The house was over-
ran with ivy, its chimney being enlarged by the boughs of
the parasite to the aspect of a ruined tower. The lowei
rooms were entirely given over to the birds, who walked
about them with a proprietary air, as though the place had
been built by and for themselves, and not by and for cer-
tain dusty copyholders who now lay east and west in the
churchyard. The descendants of these bygone owners felt
it almost as a slight to their family when the house which
had so much of their affection, bad cost so much of their
forefathers'money,'and had been in their possession for
several generations before the D-'Urbervilles came and built
here, was indifferently turned into a fowl-house by Mrs.
Stoke-D'Urberville as soon as the property fell into hand
according to law. "'Twas good enough for Christians in
grandfather's tune, " they said.
The rooms in which dozens of infants had wailed at their
nursing now resounded with the tapping of nascent chicks.
Distracted hens in coops occupied spots where formerly
stood chairs supporting sedate agriculturists. The chimney
corner and once blazing hearth was now filled with inverted
beehives, in which the hens laid their eggs ; while out-of-
doors the plots that each succeeding householder had care-
fully shaped with his spade weie torn by the cocks in wildest
fashion.
The garden in which the cottage stood was surrounded
by a wall, and could only be entered through a door.
tO TESS OF THE LXUItBEETILLES
When Teas had occupied herself about an hoar tn alter
ing and improving the arrangements, according to hex
skilled ideas as the daughter of a professed poulterer, the
door in the wall opened and a servant in white cap and
apron entered. She had come from the manor-house.
" Mrs. IVUrberville wants the fowls as usuaL* she said j
but perceiving that Tess did not quite understand, she ex-
plained, " Mis'ess is a old lady, and blind. "
" Blind ! » said Tess.
Almost before her misgiving at the news could find time
to shape itself, she took, nnder her companion's direction,
two of the most beautiful of the Hamburghs in her arms,
and followed the maid-servant, who had likewise taken two,
to the adjacent mansion, which, though ornate and impos-
ing, showed marks on this side which bore out the surmise
that some occupant of its chambers could bend to the love
of dumb creatures — feathers floating within view of the
front, and hen-coops standing on the grass.
In a sitting-room on the ground-floor, ensconced in an
arm-chair with her back to the light, was the owner and
mistress of the estate, a white-haired woman of not more
than sixty, or even less, wearing a large cap. She had the
mobile face frequent in those whose sight has decayed by
stages, has been laboriously striven after and reluctantly
let go, rather than the stagnant mien apparent in persons
long sightless or born blind. Tess walked up to this lady
with her feathered charges — one sitting on each arm.
" Ah, you are the young woman come to look after my
birds T " said Mrs. D'Urberville, recognizing a new footstep.
" I hope you will be kind to them. My bailiff tells me yon
are quite the proper person. Well, where are theyt Ah,
this is Strut I But he is hardly so lively to-day, is he 1 He
is alarmed at being handled by a stranger, I suppose. And
Phena too — yes, they are a little frightened — aren't you,
dears ! But they will soon get used to you. "
While the old lady had been speaking Tess and the other
THE MAIDEN 63
iiiaid, in obedience to her gestures, had placed the fowls
severally in her lap, and she had felt them over from head
to tail, examining their beaks, their combs, the manes of
the cocks, their wings, and their claws. Her touch enabled
her to recognize them in a moment, and to discover if a
single feather were crippled or draggled. She handled
their crops, and knew what they had eaten, and if too little
or too much ; her face enacting a vivid pantomime of the
criticisms passing in her mind.
The birds that the two girls had brought in were duly
returned to the yard, and the process was repeated till all
the pet cocks and hens had been submitted to the old
woman — Hamburghs, Bantams, Cochins, Brahmas, Dor-
kings, and such other sorts as were in fashion just then —
her perception of each visitor being seldom at fault as she
received the bird upon her knees.
It reminded Tess of a Confirmation, in which Mrs. D'Ur-
berville was the bishop, the fowls the young people pre-
sented, and herself and the maid-servant the parson and y
curate of the parish bringing them up. At the end of the
ceremony Mrs. D'Urberville abruptly asked Tess, wrink-
ling and twitching her face into undulations, " Can you
whistle V
" Whistle, ma'am t "
" Yes, whistle tunes. "
Tess could whistle, like most other eotmtry girls, though
the accomplishment was one which she did not care to pro-
fess in genteel company. However, she blandly admitted
that such was the fact.
" Then you will have to practise it every day. I had a
lad who did it very well, but he has left. I want you to
whistle to my bullfinches ; as I cannot see them I like to
tear them, and we teach'em airs that way. Tell her where
the cages are, Elizabeth. Ton must begin to-morrow, or
they will go back in their piping. They have been neg-
lected these several days. "
64 TESS OF THE ivnB.mcB. VTT JJB
" Mr. D'Urberville whistled to'em this morning, ms/am, "
said Elizabeth.
" He! Pooh! "
The old lady's face creased into furrows of repugnance,
and she made no further reply.
Thus the reception of Teas by her fancied kinswoman
terminated, and the birds were taken back to their quarters.
The girl's (surprise at Mrs. Stoke-D'Urberville's manner was
not great : for since seeing the size of the house she had
expected no more. But she was far from being aware that
the old lady had never heard a word of the so-called kin-
ship. She gathered that no great affection flowed between
the blind woman and her son. But in that, too, she was
mistaken. Mrs. D'Urberville was not the first mother
compelled to love her offspring scornfully, and to aversely
yearn.
In spite of the unpleasant initiation of the day before,
Teas inclined to the freedom and novelty of her new posi-
tion in the morning when the sun shone, now that she was
once installed there ; and she was curious to test her powers
in the unexpected direction asked of her, so as to ascertain
her chance of retaining her post Accordingly, so Boon as
she was alone within the walled garden, she sat herself
down on a coop, and seriously screwed up her month for
. the long-neglected practice. It was with a dismal face that
she found her former ability to have degenerated to the
production of a hollow sepulchral rush of wind through the
lips, and no clear note at all.
She remained fruitlessly blowing and blowing, uttering
impatient expletives, and wondering how she could have so
grown out of the art which had come by nature, till she be-
came aware of a movement among the ivy-boughs which
cloaked the garden wall no less than the cottage. Looking
that way, she beheld a form springing from the coping
to the plot. It was Alee D'Urberville, whom she had
THE MAIDEN 06
not set eyes on since be had conducted her the day before
to the door of the gardener's cottage where she had lodg-
ings.
" Upon my carcass ! " cried he, " there was never before
such, a beautiful thing in Nature or Art as yon look,
'Cousin'Tess. [ " Cousin " had a faint ring of mockery.]
I have been watching you from over the wall — sitting like
impatience on a monument, and pouting up that pretty red
month to whistling shape, and whooing and whooing, and
privately swearing, and never being able to produce a note.
" Why, you are quite cross because you can't do it "
" I am not cross, and I didn't swear. "
" Ah! I understand why you are trying — those bullies !
My mother wants you to carry on their musical education.
How selfish of her ■ As if attending to these curst cocks
and hens here were not enough work for any girl. I would
flatly refuse, if I were you. "
" But she wants me particularly to do it, and to be ready
by to-morrow morning. "
" Does sheT Well then — 111 give yon a lesson or two. "
" Oh no, you wont, " said Tess, withdrawing towards the
door.
" Nonsense ; I don't want to touch you. See — I'll stand
on this side of the wire-netting, and you can keep on the
other ; so yon may feel quite safe. Now, look here ; you
screw up your lips too harshly. There'tis — so. "
He suited the action to the word, and whistled a line of
" Take, O take those lips away. " Bnt the allusion was lost
upon Tess.
" Now try, " said D'Urberville.
She attempted to look reserved; her face put on its ut-;
most phase of sculptural severity. But how much could
she be expected to accomplish of that sort in such circum-
stances T He persisted in his demand, and at last to £ et
rid of him, she did put up her lips as directed, laughing
distressfully, however, before she could succeed in proda*
«6 TESS OF THE D 1 URBERV1LLE8
big a clear note, and then blushing with vexation that sho
had laughed. ,
He encouraged her with " Try again ! "
Tess was quite serious, painfully serious by this time ;
and she tried — ultimately and unexpectedly emitting a, real
round sound. The momentary pleasure of success got the
better of her; her eyes enlarged, and she involuntarily
smiled in his face.
" That's it ! Now I have started you — you'll go on beau-
tifully. There — I said I would not come near you ; and, in
spite of such temptation as never before fell to mortal man,
Pll keep my word. I Bay, Tessie, isnt my mother a queer
old soul I "
" I don't know much of her yet, sir. "
" Youll find her so ; she must be, to make you learn to
whistle to her bullfinches. I am rather out of her books
just now, but you will be quite in favor if you treat her
live-stock well. Good-morning. If you meet with any
difficulties and want help here, don't go to the bailiff, come
to me. "
It was in the economy of this rigime that Tess Dwbey-
field had undertaken to fill a place. Her first day's expe-
riences were fairly typical of those which followed through
many succeeding days. A familiarity with Alec D'Urber-
ville's presence — which that young man carefully cultivated
in her by playful dialogue, and by jestingly calling her his
cousin when they were alone — removed most of her original
shyness of him, without, however, implanting any feeling
which could engender shyness of a new and tenderer kind.
But she was more pliable under his hands than a mere com-
panionship would have made her, owing to her inevitable
dependence upon his mother, and, through her comparative
helplessness, upon him.
She soon found that whistling to the bullfinches in Mrs.
YUrberville'a room was no such onerous business when
THE MAIDEN 67
she bad regained the art, for she had caught from her
musical mother numerous airs that suited those songsters
admirably. A far more satisfactory time than when she
practised in the garden was this whistling by the cages
each morning. Unrestrained by the young man's presence,
she threw up her mouth, put her lips near the bars, and
piped away in easeful grace to the attentive listeners.
Mrs. D'Urberville slept in a large four-post bedstead hung
with heavy damask curtains, and the bullfinches occupied
the same apartment, where they flitted about freely at cer-
tain hours, and made little spots on the furniture. Once
while Tess was at the window where the cages were ranged,
giving her lesson as usual, she thought she heard a rustling
behind the bed. The old lady was not present, and turning
round the girl had an impression that the toes of a pair of
boots were visible below the fringe of the curtains. There-
upon her whistling became so disjointed that the listener, if
such there were, must have discovered her suspicion of his
presence. She searched the curtains every morning after
that, but never found anybody within them. Alec D'Urber-
ville had evidently thought better of his freak to terrify
her by an ambush of that kind.
Evert village has its idiosyncrasy, its constitution, its
own code of morality. The levity of some of the younger
women in and about Trantridge was marked, and was per-
haps symptomatic of the choice spirit who ruled The Slopes
in that vicinity. The place had also a more abiding defect ; (
it drank hard. The staple conversation on the farms
around was on the nselessness of saving money; and
Bmockfrocked arithmeticians, leaning on their ploughs or
hoes, would enter into calculations of great nicety to prove
AS TESS OP THE iyURBEEVlLLEB
that parish relief was a fuller provision for a man in his
old age than any which could result from savings out of
their wages during a whole lifetime.
The chief pleasure of these philosophers lay in going
every Saturday night, when work was done, to Chase-
borough, a decayed market-town two or three miles dis-
tant ; and, returning in the small hours of the next morn-
ing, to spend Sunday in sleeping off the dyspeptic effects
of the curious compounds sold to them as beer by the mo-
nopolizers of the once independent inns.
For a long time Tess did not join in the weekly pilgrim-
ages. But under pressure from matrons not much older
than herself — for marriage before means was the rule here
as elsewhere — Tess at length consented to go. Her first
experience of the journey afforded her more enjoyment
than she had expected, the hilariousness of the others be-
ing quite contagious after her monotonous attention to
the poultry-farm all the week. She went again and again.
Being graceful and interesting, standing moreover on the
momentary threshold of womanhood, her appearance drew
down upon her some sly regards from loungers in the streets
of Chaseborough ; hence, though sometimes her journey to
the town was made independently, she always searched for'
her fellows at nightfall, to have the protection of their
companionship homeward.
This had gone on for a month or two, when a Saturday
came in early September on which a fair and a market
coincided ; and the pilgrims from Trantridge sought double
delights at the inns on that account It was long past
sunset, and Tess waited for the troop till she was quite
weary. " While she stood at a corner by the tavern in which
they sat she heard a footstep, and looking round saw the
red coal of a cigar. D'Urberville was standing there also
He beckoned to her, and she reluctantly went to him.
" My Pretty, what are you doing here at this time of
htr
THE MAIDEN 09
She was so tired after her lon|f day and her walk that
she confided her trouble to him.
" I have been waiting ever so long, sir, to have their
company home, because the road is rather strange to me at
night. Bat I really think I will wait no longer. "
" Do not. I have only a saddle-horse here to-day; but
come to the Flower-de-Luee, and 111 hire a trap, and drive
you home with me. "
Tess had never quite got over her original mistrust of
him, and, with all their tardiness, she preferred to walk
home with the work-folk. So she answered that she was
much obliged to him hut on second thoughts would not
trouble hint. " I have said that I will wait for'em, and
they will expect me to now. "
" Very well, silly ! Please yourself. "
As soon as he had re-lit a cigar and walked away the
Trantridge villagers within began also to recollect how time
was flying, and prepared to leave in a body. Their bundles
and baskets were gathered up, and half an hour later,
when the clock-chime sounded a quarter past eleven, they
were straggling along the lane which led up the hill towards
their homes.
It was a three-mile walk, along a dry white road, made
whiter to-night by the light of the moon.
Tess soon perceived as she walked in the flock, some-
times with this one, sometimes with that, that the fresh
night air was producing staggerings and serpentine courses
among the men who had partaken too freely ; some of the
more careless women also were wandering in their gait —
to wit, a dark virago, Oar Darch, dubbed Queen of Spades,
till lately a favorite of D'Urberville's ; Nancy, her sister,
nicknamed the Queen of Diamonds ; and a young married
woman who had already tumbled down. Tet however ter-
restrial and lumpy their appearance just now to the mean
nnglamonred eye, to themselves the case was different
70 , TESS OP THE D > URBERVII < LES
They followed the road with a knowledge that they were
soaring along in a supporting medium, possessed of origi-
nal and profound thoughts, themselves and surrounding
nature forming an organism of • which all the parts har-
moniously and joyously interpenetrated each other. They
were as sublime as the moon and stare above them, and the
moon and stars were as ardent as they.
Teas, however, had undergone such painfnl experiences
in this kind in her father's house that die discovery of
their condition spoiled the pleasure she was beginning to
feel in the moonlight journey. Tet she stuck to the party,
for reasons above given.
In the open highway they had progressed in scattered
order ; but now their route was through a field-gate, and
the foremost finding a difficulty in opening it, they closed
up together.
This leading pedestrian was Car the Queen of Spades,
who carried a wicker-basket containing her mother's
groceries, her own draperies, and other purchases for the
week. The basket being large and heavy, Car had placed
it for convenience of porterage on the top of her head,
where it rode on in jeopardized balance as she walked with
arms akimbo.
" Well — whatever is that a-creeping down thy back, Car
Darch t " said one of the group suddenly.
All looked at Car. Her gown was a light cotton print,
and from the back of her head a kind of rope eoold be
seen descending to some distance below her waist like a
Chinaman's queue.
''Tis her hair falling down, " said another.
No ; it was not her hair : it was a black stream of some-
thing oozing from her basket, and it glistened like a slimy
snake in the cold still rays of the moon.
"'Tis treacle, " said an observant matron.
Treacle it was. Car's poor old grandmother had a weak-
ness for the sweet stuff. Honey she had in plenty out of
THE MAIDEK ■ 71
Mr own hives, but treacle was what her soul desired, and
Oar had been about to give her a treat of surprise. Hastily
lowering the'basket, the dark girl found that the vessel con-
taining the liquid had been smashed within
By this time there had arisen a shout of laughter at the
extraordinary appearance of Car's back, which irritated the
dark qneen into getting rid of the disfigurement by the first
sudden means available, and independently of the help of
the scoffers. She rushed excitedly into the field they were
about to cross, and flinging herself flat on her back upon
the grass, began to wipe her gown as well as she could by
gyrating horizontally on the herbage and dragging herself
over it upon her elbows.
The laughter rang louder ; they dung to the-gate, to the
posts, rested on their staves, in the weakness engendered
by their convulsions at the spectacle of Car. Our heroine,
who had hitherto held her peace, at this wild moment
could not help joining in with the rest.
It was a misfortune — in more ways than one. No sooner
did the dark queen hear the soberer, richer note of Tess
among those of the other work-people than a long smolder
ing sense of rivalry inflamed her to madness. She sprang
to her feet and closely faced the object of her dislike:
" How darest th'laugh at me, hussy ! " she cried.
" I couldn't really help it when Pothers did, " apologized
Tess, still tittering.
" Ah, th'st think th'beeBt everybody, dostn't, because th'
beest first favorite with He just now I But stop a bit, my
lady, stop a bit t I'm as good as two of such ! Look here
— here's at'ee. "
To Tess's horror the dark queen began stripping off the
bodice of her gown — which for the added reason of its
ridiculed condition she was only too glad to be free of —
till she had bared her plump neck, shoulders, and arms to
the moonshine, under which they looked as luminous and
beautiful as some Praxitelean creation, in their possession
72 TESS OF THE lyURBEBVlLLES
of the faultless rotundities of a lusty country girl. She
closed her fists and squared up at Tess.
" Indeed, then, I shall not fight ! " said the latter, majes-
tically; " and if I had known you was of that sort, 1
wouldn't have so let myself down as to come with such 8
whorage as this is ! "
The rather too inclusive speech brought down a torrent
of vituperation from other quarters upon fair Tes^s un-
lucky head, particularly from the Queen of Diamonds,
who, having stood in the relations to rVlTrberville that Cai
bad also been suspected of, united with the latter against
the common enemy. Several other women also chimed in,
with an animus which none of them would have been so
fatuous as to show but for the rollicking evening they had
passed. Thereupon, finding Tess unfairly browbeaten, the
husbands and lovers tried to make peace by defending her ;
but the result of that attempt was directly to increase the
war.
Tess was indignant and ashamed. She no longer
minded the loneliness of the way and the lateness of the
hour ; her one object was to get away from the whole crew
as soon as possible. She knew well enough that the better
among them would repent of their passion next day. They
were all now inside the field, and she was edging about to
rush off alone when a horseman emerged almost silently
from the corner of the hedge that screened the road, and
Alec IVUrberville looked round upon them.
" What the devil is all this row about, work-folk f- " he
asked.
The explanation was not readily forthcoming ; and, hi
truth, he did not require any. Having heard their voicee
while yet some way off, he had ridden oreepingly forward,
and learned enough to satisfy himself.
Tess was standing apart from the rest, near the gate. He
bent over towards her. " Jump up behind me, " he whis-
kered, " and we/11 get shot of the screaming cats in a jiffy'"
She felt almost ready to faint, so vivid was her sense of
the crisis. At almost any other moment of her life she
would have refused such proffered aid and company, as she
had refused them several times before ; and now the loneli
ness would not of itself have forced her to do otherwise
But coming as the invitation did at the particular juncture
when fear and indignation at these adversaries could he
transformed by a spring of the foot into a triumph over
them, she abandoned herself to her impulse, put her toe
upon his instep, and leaped into the saddle behind him.
The pair were speeding away into the distant gray by the
time that the contentious revellers became aware of what
had happened.
The Queen of Spades forgot the stain on her bodice, and
stood beside the Queen of Diamonds and the new-married,
staggering young woman — all with a gaze of fixity in the
direction in which the horse's tramp was diminishing into
silence on the road.
" What be ye looking at! " asked a man who had not
observed the incident.
" Ho-ho-ho I " laughed dark Gar.
" Hee-hee-hee 1 * laughed the tippling bride, as she
steadied herself on the arm of her fond husband.
" Heu-hen-heu ! " laughed dark Car's mother, stroking
her mustache as she explained laconically; " Out of the
frying-pan into the fire ! "
And then these children of the open air, whom even
excess of alcohol could scarce injure permanently, betook
themselves to the field-path ; and as they went there moved
onward with them, around the shadow of each one's head,
a circle of opalized light, formed by the moon's rays upon
the glistening sheet of dew. Each pedestrian could see no
halo but his or her own, which never deserted the head-
shadow, whatever its vulgar unsteadiness might be; but
adhered to it, and persistently beautified it ; till the erratic
motions seemed an inherent part of the irradiation, and the
74 TESS OF THE D*UBBERVILIiES
fumes of their breathing a component of the night's mist-,
and the spirit of the scene, and of the moonlight, and of
Nature, seemed harmoniously to mingle with the spirit of
XI.
The twain cantered along for some time without speeen,
Tess as she clung to him still panting in her triumph, yet
in other respects dubious. She had perceived that the
horse was not tho spirited one he sometimes rode, and felt
no alarm on that score, though her seat was precarious
enough. She asked him to slow the animal to a walk,
which Alec accordingly did.
" Neatly done, was it not, dear Tesst " he said by-and-by.
11 Yes ! " said she. " I am sure I ought to be much obliged
to you. "
" And are you ! "
She did not reply.
ii ^ eBBj WD y do you always dislike my kissing yon t "
" I suppose — because I don't love you. "
" You are quite sure f "
" I am angry with you sometimes ! "
" Ah, I half feared as much. " Nevertheless, Alec did
not object to that confession. He knew that anything was
better than frigidity. " Why haven't you told me when I
have made you angry! "
" You know very well why. Because I cannot help my
self here. "
" I haven't offended you often by love-making, "
" You have sometimes. "
" How many times t "
" You know as well as I — too many times. "
" Every time I have tried! "
THE'MAIDEN 75
She was silent, and the horse ambled along for a consid-
erable distance, till a faint luminous fog, which had hung
in the hollows all the evening, became general and envel-
oped them. It seemed to hold the moonlight in suspension,
rendering it more pervasive than in clear air. Whether
on this account, or from absent-mindedness, or from sleepi-
ness, she did not perceive that they had long ago passed
the point at which the lane to Trantridge branched from
the highway, and that her conductor had not taken the
Trantridge track.
She was inexpressibly w > jary. She had risen at five
o'clock every morning of that week, had been on foot the
whole of each day, and on this evening had in addition
walked the three miles to Chaseborough, waited three hours
for her neighbors without eating or drinking, her impatience
to start them preventing either; she had then walked a
mile of the way home, and had undergone the excitement
of the quarrel, till it was now nearly one o'clock. Only
onee, however, was she overcome by actual drt wsiness. In
that moment of oblivion she sank gently against him
IHUrberville withdrew his feet from the stirrups, turned
sideways on the saddle, and enclosed her waist with his
arm to support her.
This immediately put her on the defensive, and with one
of those sudden impulses of reprisal to which she was liable
she gave him a little push from her. In his ticklish position
he nearly lost his balance and only just avoided rolling
over into the road, the horse, though a powerful one, being
fortunately the quietest he rode.
" That is devilish unkind ! " he said. " I mean no harm
— only to keep yon from falling. "
She pondered suspiciously ; till, thinking that this might
after all be true, she relented, and said quite humbly, " I
beg your pardon, sir. "
" I wont pardon you unless you show some confidence
in me. Good God I " he buret out, " what am I, to be re
76 TESS OF THE DOIRBEBVILLES
poised so by a mere chit like yon T For neat three mortal
months have you trifled with my feelings, eluded me, and
snubbed me ; and I won't stand it ! "
" 111 leave you to-morrow, sir. "
" No, you will not leave me to-morrow I Will you, I ask
once more, show your belief in me by letting me encircle
you with my armT Come, between us two and nobody
else, now. We know each other well ; and you know that
I love you, and think yon are the prettiest girl in the
world, which you are. May I treat you as a lover t "
She drew a quick pettish breath of objection, writhing
uneasily on her seat, looked far ahead, and murmured, " I
don't know — I wish — how can I say yes or no when *
He settled the matter by clapping his arm round her as
he desired, and Tess expressed no farther negative. Thus
they sidled onward till it struck her they had been advanc-
ing for an unconscionable time — fur longer than was
usually occupied by the short journey from Chaseborough,
even at this walking pace, and that they were no longer on
hard road, but in a mere trackway.
" Why, where be weT " she exclaimed
" Passing by a wood. "
" A wood — what wood Surely we are quite out of the
roadf "
" A bit of The Chase — the oldest wood in England. It
is a lovely night, and why should we not prolong our ride
a little! "
" How could you-be so treacherous ! * said Tess, between
archness and real dismay, and getting rid of his arm by
pulling open his fingers one by one, though at the risk of
slipping off herself. " Just when Pve been putting such
trust in you, and obliging yon to please you, because I
thought I had wronged yon by that push 1 Please set me
down, and let me walk home. "
" You cannot walk home, even if the air were clear.
We are miles away from Trantridge, if I must tell yon, and
THE MAIDEN It
in this growing fog yon might wander for hours among
these trees. "
" Never mind that, " she coaxed. " Put me down, I beg
you. I don't mind where it is ; only let me get down, sir,
please! "
" Very well, then, I will — on one condition. Having
brought you here to this out-of-the-way place, I feel myself
responsible for your safe conduct home, whatever you may
yourself feel about it. As to your getting to Trantridge
without assistance, it is quite impossible ; for, to tell the
truth, owing to this fog, which so disguises everything, I
don't quite know where we are myself. Now, if you will
promise to. wait beside the horse while I walk through the
bushes till I come to some road or house and ascertain
exactly our whereabouts, Til deposit you here willingly.
When I come back I'll give yon full directions, and if you
insist upon walking yon may ; or you may ride — at your
pleasure. "
She accepted these terms, and slid off on the near side,
though not till he had stolen a cursory kiss. He sprang
down on the other side.
" I suppose I must hold the horse T " said she.
" Oh no; it's not necessary, " replied Alee, patting the
panting creature. " He's had enough of it for to-night. "
He turned the horse's head into die bushes, hitched him
on to a bough, and made a sort of couch or nest for her in
the deep mass of dead leaves.
" Now, you sit there, " he said. " T*iat will keep away
the damp. Just give an eye to the horse — it will be quite
sufficient.'*
He took a few steps away from her, but, returning,
said, " By the by, Teas, your father has a new cob to-day.
Somebody gave it to him. "
" Somebody ! Ton ! *
DTJrberville nodded.
* On, how very good of you that is ! * she exclaimed,
78 TESS OP TEM D'URBEKVILIiES
with a painful sense of the awkwardness of having to thank
him just then.
" And the children have some toys. "
" I didn't know — you ever sent them anything! " she
murmured, much moved. " I almost wish you had not—
yes, I almost wish it ! "
" Why, dearf "
" It — hampers me so. "
" Tessie — don't you love me ever so little nowt*
* Pm grateful,''she reluctantly admitted. " But I fear I
do not " The sudden vision of his passion for herself
as a factor in this result so distressed her that, beginning
with one slow tear, and then following with another, she
wept outright.
" Don't cry, dear, dear one! Now sit down here, and
wait till I come. " She passively sat down amid the leaves
that he had heaped, and shivered slightly. " Are yon
cold ! " he asked.
" Not very — a little. "
He touched her with his Angers, which sank into her as
into a billow. " You have only that puffy muslin dress on
— how's that I "
" It's my best summer one, Twas very warm when I
started, and I didn't know I was going to ride, and that it
would be night. "
" Nights grow chilly in September. Let me see. " He
pulled off a light overcoat that he had worn, and put it
round her tenderly. " Thafs it — now you feel warmer, "
he continued. " Now, my Pretty, rest there; I shall soon
be back again. "
Having buttoned the overcoat round her shoulders, be
plunged into the webs of vapor which by this time formed
veils between the trees. She could hear the rustling of the
branches as he ascended the adjoining slope, till his move-
ments were no louder than the hopping of a bird, and
finally died away. With the setting of the moon the pale
THE MAIDEN
light lessened, and Teas became invisible as she fell into
reverie upon the leaves where he had left her.
In the meantime Alee D'Urberville had pushed on up
the slope to clear his genuine doubt as to the quarter of
The Chase they were in. He had, in fact, ridden quite at
random for over an hour, taking any turning that came to
hand in order to prolong companionship with her, and giv-
ing far more attention to Tess's moonlit person than to any
wayside object A little rest for the jaded animal being
desirable, he did not hasten his search for landmarks. A
clamber over the hill into the adjoining vale brought him
to the fence of a highway whose aspect he recognized,
which settled the question of their whereabouts. D'Ur-
berville thereupon turned back ; but by this time the moon
had quite gone down, and partly on account of the fog
The Chase was wrapped in thick darkness, although morn-
ing was not far off. He was obliged to advance with
outstretched hands to avoid contact with the boughs, and
discovered that to hit the exact spot from which he had
started was at first entirely beyond him. Roaming np and
down, round and round, he at length heard a slight move-
ment of the horse close at hand ; and the sleeve of his
overcoat unexpectedly caught his foot.
" Teas ! " said D'Urberville.
There was no answer. The obscurity was now so great
that ha could see absolutely nothing but a pale nebulons-
ness at his feet, which represented the white muslin figure
he had left upon the dead leaves. Everything else was
blackness alike. D'Urberville stooped, and heard a gentle
regular breathing. He knelt and bent lower, till her breath
wanned his face, and in a moment his cheek was in con-
tact with hers. She was sleeping soundly, and upon her
eyelashes there lingered tears.
Darkness and silence ruled everywhere around Above
liiem rose the primeval yews and oaks of The Chase, in
which were poised gentle roosting birds in their last- napj
* TESS OF T UB iyUBBEKVILLiES
y^End around them the hopping rabbits and hares. But
/ where was Toss's guardian angel? where was the Provi-
dence of her simple faith 1 Perhaps, like that other god
of whom the ironical Tishbite spoke, he was talking, or he
was pursuing, or he was in % journey, or peradventure he
was sleeping and was not to be awaked.
kWhy it was that upon this beautiful feminine tissue,
sensitive as gossamer, and practically blank as snow as yet,
there should have been traced such a coarse pattern as it
was doomed to receive ; (.why so often the coarse appro-
priates the finer thus, many thousand years of analytical
philosophy have failed to explain to our sense of orderi
One may, indeed, admit the possibility of a retribution
lurking in the catastrophe. Doubtless some of Tess D'Ur-
berville's mailed ancestors rollicking home from a fray had
dealt the same wrong even more ruthlessly upon peasant
girls of their time. But though to visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children may be a morality good enough
for divinities, it is scorned by average human nature ; and
it therefore does not mend the matter.
As Tes^s own people down in those retreats are never
tired of saying among each other in their fatalistic way:
" It was to be. " There lay the pity of it. An immeasura-
ble social chasm was to divide our heroine's personality
thereafter from that previous self of hers who stepped from
her mother's door to try her fortune at Trantridge poultry-
farm
: > , Google
5BI > ttBt flit %t couO-
MAIDEN NO MORE.
XII
The basket was heavy and the bundle was large, bnt she
logged them along like a person who did not find any espe-
cial burden in material things. Occasionally she stopped
to rest in a mechanical way by some gate or post; and
then, giving the baggage another hitch upon her full round
arm, went steadily on again. t
It was a Sunday morning in late October, about four
months after Tess Durbeyfield's arrival at Trantridge, and
some few weeks subsequent to the night ride in The Chase.
The time was not long past daybreak, and the yellow lumi-
nosity upon the horizon behind her back lighted the ridge
towards which her face was set — the barrier of the vale
wherein she had of late been a stranger — which she would
have to climb over to reach her birthplace. The ascent
was gradual on this side, and the soil and scenery differed
much from those within Blakemore Vale. Even the char-
acter and accent of the two peoples had shades of difference,
despite the amalgamating effects of a roundabout railway ;
so that, though less than twenty miles from the place of
her sojourn at Trantridge, her native village had seemed a
far-away spot. The field-folk shut in there traded north-
ward and westward, travelled, courted, and married north-
ward and westward, thought northward and westward;
82 TESS OF THE DtntBERVILLES
those on this side mainly directed their energies and at
tention to the east and south.
The incline was the same down which iyUrberville had
driven with her so wildly on that day in June. Tess went
up the remainder of its length without stopping, and on
reaching the edge of the escarpment gazed over the f amiliar
green world beyond, now half veiled in mist. It was al-
ways beautiful from here ; it was terribly beautiful to Tess
to-day, for since her eyes last fell upon it she had learned
that the serpent hisses where sweet birds sing, and her
views of life had been totally changed for her by the lesson.
Verily another girl than the simple one she had been at
home was she who, bowed by the thought, stood still here,
and turned to look behind her. She could not bear to look
forward into the Vale.
Ascending by the long white road that Tess herself
had just labored up she saw a two-wheeled vehicle, beside
which walked a man, who held up his hand to attract her
%ttention.
She obeyed the signal to wait for him with unspeculative
repose, and in a few minutes man and horse stopped beside
her.
" Why did you slip away by stealth like this I " said
iyUrberville, with upbraiding breathlessness ; " on a Sun-
day morning, too, when people were all in bed ! I only
discovered it by accident, and I have been driving like the
deuce to overtake you. Just look at the mare. Why go
off like this? You know that nobody wished to hinder
your going. And how unnecessary it has been for you to
toil along on foot, and encumber yourself with this heavy
load': I have followed like a madman, simply to drive yon
the rest of the distance, if you won't come back. "
" I shan't come back, " said she.
" I thought you wouldn't — I said so. WelL then, put up
your baskets, and let me help you on. "
She listlessly placed her basket and bundle within the
MAIDEN NO MORE 83
dog-cart, and stepped up, and they eat side by Bide. She-
had no fear of him now, and in the cause of her confidence
hec-Jiwraw-. k.y.
DTJrberville mechanically lit a cigar, and the journey
was continued with broken unemotional conversation on
the commonplace objects by the wayside. He had quite
forgotten his struggle to kiss her when, in the early sum-
mer, they had driven in the opposite direction along the
same road. But she had not, and she sat now like a puppet,
replying to his remarks in monosyllables. After a space
they came in view of the clump of trees beyond which the
village of Marlott stood. It was only then that her face
still showed the least emotion, a tear or two beginning to
trickle down.
" What are you crying for! " he coldly asked.
" I was only thinking that I was born over there, " mur-
mured Tess.
" Well — we must all be born somewhere. "
" I wish I had never been born — there or anywhere*
else! "
" Pooh I Well, if you didn't wish to come to Trantridge
why did you come t "
She did not reply
" Ton didn't come for love of me, that Til swear. "
" Tis quite true. If I had gone for love o'you, if I had
ever Bineerely loved'ee, if I loved you still, I should not so
loathe and hate myself for my weakness as I do now I . . .
My eyes were dazed by you for a little, and that was all. "
He shrugged his shoulders. She resumed :
" I didn't understand your meaning till it was too
l»te. "
" Thatfs what every woman says, "
" How can you dare to use such words ! " she cried, turn-
ing impetuously upon him, her eyes flashing as the latent
spirit (of which he was to see more some day) awoke in
her. " My God! I could knock you out of the gigl Did
64 TESS OF THE D'URBERVTU.BS
it never strike your mind that what every woman says
some women may feel ! "
" Very well, " he said, laughing; " I am sorry to wound
you. I did wrong — I admit it " He dropped into some
little bitterness as he continued : " Only you needn't be so
everlastingly flinging it in my face. I am ready to pay to
the uttermost farthing. You know you need not work in
the fields or the dairies again. You know you may clothe
yourself with the best, instead of in the bald plain way you
have lately affected, as if yon couldn't get a ribbon more
than you earn. "
Her lip lifted slightly, though there was little scorn, as a
rule, in her large and impulsive nature.
" I have said I will not take anything more from you,
and I will not — I cannot ! I should be your creature to go
on doing that, and I won't! *
" One would think you were a princess from your man-
ner, in addition to a true and original D'Urberville — ha 1 ha 1
'Well, Tess, dear, I can say no more. I suppose I am a bad
fellow — a damn bad fellow. I was born bad, and I have
lived bad, and I shall die bad in all probability. But, upon
my lost soul, I won't be bad towards you again, Tess. And
if certain circumstances should arise — you understand — in
which yon are in the least need, the least difficulty, send
me one line, and you shall have by return whatever you
require. I may not be at Trantridge — I am going to Lon-
don for a time — I eant stand the old woman. But all
letters will be forwarded. "
She said that she did not wish him to drive her farther,
and they stopped just under the clump of trees. D'Urber
ville alighted, and lifted her down bodily in his arms, after
wards placing her articles on the ground beside her. She
bowed to biTn slightly, her eye just lingering in his : and
then she turned to take the parcels for departure.
Alec D'Urberville removed his cigar, bent towards her,
and said;
MAIDKN NO MORE 89
" You are not going to turn away like that, dear!
Come ! "
" If yon wish, " she answered, indifferently. " See now
you've mastered me ! "
She thereupon turned round and lifted her face to his,
and remained like a marble term while he imprinted a kiss
upon her cheek — half perfunctorily, half as if zest had not
yet quite died out. Her eyes vaguely rested upon the re-
motest trees in the lane while the kiss was given, as though
she were nearly unconscious of what he did.
" Now the other side, for old acquaintance'sake. "
She turned her head in the same passive way, as one
might turn at the request of a sketcher or hairdresser, and
he kissed the other side, his lips touching cheeks that were
damp and smoothly chill as the skin of the mushrooms
growing around them.
" You dont give me your mouth and kiss me hack. You
never willingly do that — you'll never love me, I fear. "
'-'I have eaid so, often. It is true. I have never really
and truly loved you, and I think I never can. " She added
mournfully, " Perhaps, of all things, a lie on this thing
would do the most good to me now ; but I have honor
enough left, little as'tis, not to tell that lie. If I did love
you I may have the best o " causes for letting you know it
But I don't. "
He emitted a labored breath, as if the scene were getting
rather oppressive to his heart, or to his conscience, or to
his gentility.
" Well, you are absurdly melancholy, Tess. I have no
reason for flattering you now, and I can say plainly that
yon need not he so sad. You can hold your own for
beauty against any woman of these parts, gentle or simple ;
I say it to you as a practical man and well-wisher. If yon
are wise you will show it to the world more than you do
before it fades. . . . And yet, Tess, will yon come back to
me t Upon my soul I don't like to let yon go like this 1 *
86 TESS OF thbi DTJRBERVILLES
" Never, never ! I made up my mind as soon as I saw—*
what I ought to have seen sooner ; and I won't come. "
" Then good-morning, my four months'cousin — good-
by! "
He leapt np lightly, arranged the reins, and was gone
between the tall red-berried hedges.
Tess did not look after him, but slowly wound along the
crooked lane. It was still early, and though the sun's lower
limb was just free of the hill, his rays, ungenial and peer-
ing, addressed the eye rather than the touch as yet. There
was not a human soul near. Sad October and her sadder
self seemed the only two existences haunting that lane.
As she walked, however, some footsteps approached be-
hind her, the footsteps of a man ; and owing to the brisk-
ness of his advance he was close at her heels and had said
" Good-morning " before she had been long aware of his
propinquity. He appeared to be an artisan of some sort,
and carried a tin pot of red paint in his hand. He asked
in a business-like manner if he should take her basket,
which she permitted him to do, walking beside him.
" It is early to be astir this Sabbath morn/ he said,
cheerfully.
" Yes, " said Tess.
" When most people are at rest from their week's work.*
She also assented to this.
" Though I do more real work to-day than all the week
besides. "
" Do you t "
" AH the week I work for the glory of man, and on Sim-
day for the glory of God. That's more real than the other
— heyt I have a little to do here at this stile. " The man
turned as he spoke to an opening at the roadside leading
into a pasture. " If you'll wait a moment, " he added, " I
shall not be long. "
As he had her basket she could not well do otherwise ;
and she waited, observing him. He set down her basket
MAIDEN NO MOKE 87
find the tin pot, and stirring the paint witn tne crash that
was in it began painting large square letters on the middle
board of the thiee composing the stile, placing a comma
between each word, as if to give pause while that word was
driven well home to the reader's heart —
THY, DAMNATION, SLUMBERETH, NOT
2 Pxt. ii. 3.
Against the peaceful landscape, the pale, decaying tints
of the copses, the blue air of the horizon, and the lichened
stile boards, these staring vermilion words shone forth.
They seemed to shout themselves out and make the atmos-
phere ring Some people might have cried, " Alas, poor
Theology ! " at the hideous defacement — the last grotesque
phase of a creed which had served mankind well in its
time. But the words entered Tess with accusatory horror.
It was as if this man had known her recent history ; yet he
was a total stranger.
Having finished his text he picked np her basket, and
she mechanically resumed her walk beside him.
" Do yon believe what you paint! " she asked in low
tones.
" Believe that tex t Do I believe in my own existence 1 "
" But, " said she, tremulonsly, " suppose your, sin was .not
of your own seeking T "
He shook his head.
" I cannot split hairs on that burning query, " he said.
" I have walked hundreds of miles during this past sum-
mer, painting these texes on every wall, gate, and stile in
the length and breadth of this district. I leave their
application to the hearts of the people who read'em. "
" I think they are horrible, " said Tess. " Crushing I
killing! "
" That's what they are meant to he! " he replied, in a
trade voice. " But yon should read my hottest ones— them
88 TES8 OF THE DTjKBER-VILLES
I kips for slums and seaports. They'd make ye wriggle!
Not but what this is a very good tex for the rural districts.
. . . Ah — there's a nice hit of blank wall up by that barn
standing to waste. I must put one there — one that will be
good for dangerous young females like yourself to heed.
Will you wait, missy I "
" No, " said she ; and taking her basket Tess trudged on.
A little way forward she turned her head. The old gray
wall began to advertise a similar fiery lettering t% the first,
with a strange and unwonted mien, as if distressed at duties
it had never before been called upon to perform. It was
with a sudden flash that she read and realized what was to
be the inscription he was now half-way through —'
THOU, SHALT, NOT, COMMIT
Her cheerful friend saw her looking, stopped his brush,
and sh o 11 ted :
" If you want to ask anything of the sort we was talking
about, there's a very earnest good man going to preach a
charity-sermon to-day in the parish you are going to — Mr.
Clare, of Emminster. Fm not of his persuasion now, bat
he is a good man, and he'll explain as well as any parson I
know.'Twas he began the work in me. "
But Tess did not answer ; she throbbingly resumed her
walk, her eyes fixed on the ground. " Pooh — I don't be-
lieve God said such things ! " she murmured contemptu-
ously when her flush had died away.
A plume of smoke soared up suddenly from her father's
chimney, the sight of which made her heart ache. The
aspect of the interior, when she reached it, made her heart
ache more. Her mother, who had just come downstairs,
turned to greet her from the fireplace, where she was kind-
ling barked-oak twigs under the breakfast kettle. The
young children were still above, as was also her father, it
being Suuday morning, when he felt justified in lying ai
additional half-hour.
MAIDEN NO MORE 89
* Wall ! — my dear Teas I " exclaimed her surprised mother,
jumping up and kissing the girl. " How be ye 1 I didn't
see you till yon was in upon me ! Have yon come home to
be married P
" No, I have not come for that, mother. "
" Then for a holiday 1 "
" Yes — for a holiday ; for a long holiday, " said Teas.
" What, isn't your cousin going to do the handsome
thing f* " > s
" He's not my cousin, and he's not going to marry me. "
Her mother eyed her narrowly.
" Come, yon have not told me all/ she said.
Then Tess went up to her mother, put her face upon
Joan's neck, and told.
" And yet th'st not got him to marry'ee ! " reiterated her
mother. " Any woman would have done it but you ! "
" Perhaps any woman would except me. "
" It would have been something like a story to come back
with, if yon had ! " continued Mrs. Durbeyfield, ready to
burst into tears of vexation. " After all the talk about yon
and him which has reached us here, who would have ex-
pected it to end like this ! Why didn't ye think of doing
some good for your family instead tf thinking only of your-
self t See how I've got to teave and slave, and your poor
weak father with his heart clogged like a dripping-pan. I
did hope for something to come out o* this ! To see what
a pretty pair you and he made that day when yon drove
away together four months ago ! See what he has given
us— all, as we thought, because we were his kin. But if
he's not, it must have been done because of his love for'ee.
And yet you've not got him to marry ! "
Get Alee D'Urberville in the mind to marry her ! He
marry her ! On matrimony he had never once said a word.
And what if he had? How she might have been impelled
to answer him by a convulsive snatching at sociaLsalvation
she could not say. But her poor foolish mother little knew
90 TESS OF THE OTKBERVILLES
her present feeling towards this man. Perhaps ii was un-
usual in the circumstances, unnatural, unaccountable ; bat
there it was ; and this, as she had said, was what made her
detest herself. She had never cared for him, she did not
care for him now. She had dreaded him, winced before
him, succumbed to a cruel advantage he took of her help-
lessness ; then, temporarily blinded by his flash manners,
had been stirred to confused surrender awhile ; had sud-
denly despised and disliked him, and had run away. That
was all. Hate him she did not quite ; but he was dust and
ashes to her, and even for her name's sake she scarcely
wished to marry him.
" You ought to have been more careful if you didn't
mean to get him to make you his wife ! "
" mother, my mother ! " cried the agonized girl, turn
ing passionately upon her parent as if her poor heart
would break. " How could I be expected to know? I
was a child when I left this house four months ago. Why .
didn't you tell me there was danger in men-folk 1 Why
didn't you warn me 1 Ladies know what to fend hands
against, because they read novels that tell them of these
tricks ; but I never had the chance o'learning in that way,
and you did not help me ! "
Her mother was subdued.
" I thought if I spoke of his fond feelings and what they
might lead to, you would be hontish wi'him and lose your
chanee, " she murmured, wiping her eyes with her apron.
" Well, we must make the best of it, I suppose. " lis nater,
after all, and what do please God. "
The event of Tess Durbeyfield's return from the house
of her rich kinsfolk was rumored abroad, if rumor be not
MAIDEN NO MORE fl
too large a word for a space of a square mile. In the after-
noon several young girls of Marlott, former schoolfellows
and acquaintances of Tess, called to see her, arriving dressed
in their best starched and ironed, as became visitors to a
person who had made a transcendent conquest (as they
supposed), and sat round the room looking at her with
great curiosity. For the fact that it was this said thirty-
first cousin, Mr. DTJrberville, who had fallen in love with
her, a gentleman not altogether local, whose reputation as a
reckless gallant and heart-breaker was beginning to spread
beyond the immediate boundaries of Trantridge, lent Tess's
supposed position, by its fearsomeness, a far higher 1860108/
tiou than it would have exercised if unhazardous.
Their interest was so deep that the younger ones whis'
pered when her back was turned :
11 How pretty she is ; and how that best frock do set her
off ! I believe it cost an immense deal, and that it was a
gift from him. "
Tess, who was reaching np to get the tea-things from the
corner cupboard, did not hear these commentaries. If she
had heard them, she might soon have set her friends right
on the matter. But her mother heard, and Joan's simple
vanity, having been denied the hope of a dashing marriage,
fed itself as well as it could upon the sensation of a dash-
ing flirtation. Upon the whole she felt gratified, even
though such a limited and meretricious triumph should
involve her daughter's reputation ; it might end in mar-
riage yet, and in the warmth of her responsiveness to their
admiration she invited her visitors to stay to tea.
Their chatter, their laughter, their good-humored innuen-
does, above all, their flashes and nickelings of envy, revived
Tess's spirits also ; and, as the evening wore on, sue caught
the infection of their excitement, and grew almost gay.
The marble hardness left her face, she moved with some-
thing of her old bounding Btep, and flushed in all her young
beauty.
92 TESS OP THE D > URBERY1LI JES
At moments, in spite of thought, she would reply to theii
inquiries with a manner of superiority, as if recognizing
that her experiences in the field of courtship had, indeed,
been slightly enviable. But so far was she from being, in
the words of Robert South, " in love with her own ruin, "
that the illusion was transient as lightning; cold reason
came back to mock her spasmodic weakness ; the ghastli
nesB of her momentary pride would convict her, and recall
her to reserved listlessness again.
And the despondency of the next morning's dawn, when
it was no longer Sunday, but Monday ; and no best clothes ;
and the laughing visitors were gone, and she awoke alone
in her old bed, the innocent younger children breathing
softly around her. In place of the excitement of her re-
turn, and the interest it had inspired, she saw before her
a long and stony highway which she had to tread, without
aid, and with little sympathy. Her depression was then
terrible, and she could have hidden herself in a tomb.
In the course of a few weeks Tess revived sufficiently to
show herself so far as was necessary to get to church one
Sunday morning. She liked to hear the chanting — such
as it was — and the old Psalms, and to join in the Morning
Hymn. That innate love of melody, which she had in-
herited from her ballad-singing mother, gave the simplest
music a power over her which could well-nigh drag her
heart out of her bosom at times.
To be as much out of observation as possible for reasons
of her own, and to escape the gallantries of the young men,
she set out before the chiming began, and took a back seat
under the gallery, close to the lumber, where only old men
and women came, and where the bier stood on end among
the churchyard tools.
Parishioners dropped in by twos and threes, deposited
themselves in rows before her, rested three-quarters of a
minute on their foreheads as if they were praying, though
l hey were not, then sat up, and looked around. When the
MAIDEN NO MORE 98
chants came on, one of her favorites happened to be chose*
among the rest — the double chant " Langdon " — but she
did not know what it was called, though she would much
have liked to know. She thought, without exactly wording
the thought, how strange and godlike was a composer's
power, who from the grave could lead through sequences
of emotion, which he alone had felt at first, a girl like her
who had never heard of his name, and never would have a
cine to his personality.
The people who had turned their heads turned them
again as the service proceeded ; and at last observing her,
they whispered to each other. She knew what their whis-
pers were about, grew sick at heart, and felt that she could
come to church no more.
The bedroom which she shared with some of the children
formed her retreat more continually than ever. Here,
under her few square yards of thatch, she watched winds,
and snows, and rains, gorgeous sunsets, and successive
moons at their full. So close kept she that at length almost
everybody thought she had gone away.
The only exercise that Tess took at this time was after
dark ; and it was then, when ont in the woods, that she
seemed least solitary. She knew how to hit to a hair's-
breadth that moment of evening when the light and the
darkness are so evenly balanced that the constraint of day
and the suspense of night neutralize each other, leaving
absolute mental liberty. It is then that the plight of being
alive becomes attenuated to its least possible dimensions.
She had no fear of the shadows ;'.'her sole idea seemed to
he to shun mankind — or rather that cold accretion called
the world, which, so terrible in the mass, is so unformida-
Me, even pitiable, in its units.
On these lonely hills and dales her quiescent glide was
of a piece with the element she moved in. Her flexuons
and stealthy figure became an integral part of the scene.
At times her whimsical fancy would intensify natural pro
<
M TES8 OP THE DtTRBEBVILLES
messes around her till they seemed a part of her own story.
Rather they became a part of it ; for the world is only
a psychological phenomenon, and what they seemed they
were. The midnight airs and gnats, moaning among the
tightly wrapped buds and bark of the whiter twigs, were
formula) of hitter reproach. A wet day was the expression
of irremediable grief at her weakness in the mind of some
vague ethical being whom she could not class definitely as
the God of her childhood, and could not comprehend as
any other.
But this encompassment of her own characterization,
based on shreds of convention, peopled by phantoms and
voices antipathetic to her, was a sorry and mistaken crea-
tion of Toss's fancy — a cloud of moral hobgoblins by which
she was terrified without reason. It was they that w«re
ont of harmony with the actual world, not she. Walking
among the sleeping birds in the hedges, watching the skip-
ping rabbits on a moonlit warren, or standing under a
pheasant-laden bough, she looked upon herself as a figure
of Guilt intruding into the haunts of Innocence. But all
the while she was making a distinction where there was no
difference. Feeling herself in antagonism, she was quite
in accord.'She had been made to break an accepted social
taw, but no law known to the environment in which she
fancied herself such an anomaly.)
XIV
It was a hazy sunrise in August. The denser nocturnal
vapors, attacked by the warm beams, were dividing and
shrinking into isolated fleeces within hollows and coverts,
where they waited till they should be dried away to nothing.
The sun. on account of the mist, had a curious sentient
MAIDEN MO KOBE 9S >
personal look, demanding the masculine pronoun for its
adequate expression. His present aspect, coupled with the
lack of all human forms in the scene, explained the old-
time heliolatries in a moment. One could feel that a saner
religion had never prevailed under the sky. The luroi-
nary was a golden-haired, beaming-faced, mild-eyed, god-
like creature, gazing down in the vigor and intentness oJ
youth upon an earth that was brimming with interest for
His light, a little later, broke through chinks of cottage
shutters, throwing stripes like red-hot pokers upon cup-
boards, chests of drawers, and other furniture within, and
awakening harvesters who were not already astir.
Bat of all ruddy things that morning the brightest were
two broad arms of painted wood, which rose from the mar-
gin of a yellow corn-Held hard by Marlott village. They,
with two others below, formed the revolving Maltese cross
of the reaping-machine, which had been brought to the field
on the previous evening to be ready for operations this day.
The paint with which they were smeared, intensified in hue
by the sunlight, imparted to thorn a look of having been
dipped in liquid fire.
The field had already been " opened " ; that is to say, a
lane a few feet wide had been hand-cut through the wheat
along the whole circumference of the field for the first
passage of the horses and machine.
Two groups, one of men and lads, the other of women,
had come down the lane just at the hour when the shadows
of the eastern hedge-top struck the west hedge midway, so
that the heads of the groups were enjoying sunrise while
their feet were still in the dawn. They disappeared from
the lane between the two stone posts which flanked the
nearest field-gate.
Presently there arose from within a ticking like the love-
making of the grasshopper. The machine had begun, and
t. moving concatenation was visible over the gate, a driver
M TESS OP THE DT/BBERVILLEa
Bitting upon one of the hauling horses, and an attendant
on the seat of the implement. Along one Bide of the field
the whole wain went, the arms of the mechanical reaper
revolving slowly, till it passed down the hill quite out of
eight. In a minute it came up on the other side of the field
at the same equable pace, the glistening brass star in the
forehead of the fore horse catching the eye as it rose into
view iver the stubble, then the bright arms, and then the
whole machine.
The narrow lane of stubble encompassing the field grew
wider with each circuit, and the standing corn was reduced
to smaller area as the morning wore on. Rabbits, hares,
snakes, rats, mice, retreated inward as into a fastness, un-
aware of the ephemeral nature of their refuge, and of the
doom that awaited them later in the day when ; their covert
shrinking to a more and more horrible narrowness, they
were huddled together, friends and foes, till the last few
yards of upright wheat fell also under the teeth of the un-
erring reaper, and they were every one put to death by ttie
sticks and stones of the harvesters.
The reaping-machine left the fallen corn behind it in Ht-
Je heaps, each heap being of the quantity for a sheaf; and
< pon these the active binders in the rear laid their hands —
nam ly women, but some of them men in print shirts, and
ta-ousers supported around their waists by leather straps,
•entering useless the two buttons behind, which twinkled
and bristled with sunbeams at every movement of each
nearer, as if they were a pair of eyes in the small of his
back.
Bnt those of the other sex were the most interesting of
ihis company of binders, by reason of the charm which is
acquired by woman when she becomes part and parcel of
outdoor nature, and is not merely an object set down therein
as at ordinary times. A field-man is a personality afield ;
\ field-woman fci a portion of the field ; she has soineh < «»
MAIDEN NO MOB*- Pi
lost her own margin, imbibed tlie essence of her surround
fog, and assimilated herself with it.
The women — or rather girls, for they were mostly young
—wore drawn ootton bonnets with great flapping curtains
to keep off the son, and gloves to prevent their hands be-
ing wounded by the stubble. There was one wearing a
pale-pink jacket ; another in a cream-colored, tight-sleeved
gown; another in a petticoat as red as the arms of the
reaping-machine; and others, older, in the brown-rough
" wrapper " or over-all — the old-established and most ap-
propriate dress of the field-woman, which the young one*
were abandoning. This morning the eye returns involnn
tarily to the girl in the pink cotton jacket, she being thu
most flexuous and finely drawn figure of them all. But
her bonnet is pulled so far over her brow that none of her
face is disclosed while she binds, though her complexion
may be guessed from a stray twine or two of dark-brown
hair which extends below the curtain of her bonnet. Per-
haps one reason why she seduces casual attention is that
she never courts it, though the other women often gaze
around them.
Her binding proceeds with clock-like monotony. Prom
the sheaf last finished she draws a handful of ears, patting
their tips with her left palm to bring them even. Then,
stooping low, she moves forward, gathering the corn with
both hands against her knees, and pushing her left gloved
hand under the bundle to meet the right on the other side,
holding the corn in an embrace like that of a lover. She
brings the ends of the bond together, and kneels on the
sheaf while she ties it, beating back her skirts now and
then when lifted by the breeze. A bit of her naked arm is
visible between the buff leather of the gauntlet and th
sleeve of her gown ; and as the day wears on its feminhr
smoothness becomes scarified by the stubble, and bleeds.
At intervals she stands up to rest, and to re-tie her dfc.
U8 TESS OF THE'D > UHBEBVILIiES |
arranged apron, or to pull her bonnet straight. Then one
can see the oval face of a handsome young woman, with
deep, dark eyes, and long, heavy, clinging tresses, which
seem to clasp . in a beseeching way anything they fall
against. The cheeks are paler, the teeth more regular,, the
red lips thinner than is usual in a country-bred girl.
It is Tess Durbeyfield, otherwise fUrberville, somewhat
changed — the same, but not the same ; at the present stage
of her existence living as a stranger and an alien here,
though it was no strange land that she was in. After A
long seclusion she had come to a resolve, during the week
under notice, to undertake outdoor work in her native vil-
lage, the busiest season of the year in the agricultural world
having arrived, and nothing that she could do within the
house being so remunerative for the time as harvesting in
the fields.
The movemeuts of the other women were more or leea
similar to Tess's, the whole bevy of them drawing together
like dancers in a quadrille at the completion of a sheaf by
each, every one placing her sheaf on end against those of
the rest, till a shock, or " stitch " as it was here called, of
ten or a dozen was formed
They went to breakfast, and came again, and the work
proceeded as before. As the hour of eleven drew near a
person watching her might have noticed that Tess's glance
flitted wistfully to the brow of the hill every now and then,
though she did not pause in her sheafing. On the verge of
the honr the heads of a group of children, of ages ranging
from six to fourteen, rose above the stubbly convexity of
thehilL
The face of Tess flushed slightly, but still she did not
pause.
The eldest of the comers, a girl who wore a triangular
shawl, its corner draggling on the stubble* carried in het
arms what at first sight seemed to be a doll, but proved to
be an infant in long clothes. Another brought some lunch
MAIDEN NO MORE 09
Tke harvesters ceased working, took their provisions, and
Bat down against one of the shocks. Here they fel) to, the
men plying a stone jar freely, and passing round a cup.
Tees Durbeyfield had heen one of the last to suspend her
labors. She sat down at the end of the shock, her face
turned somewhat away from her companions. When she
had deposited herself a man in a rabbit-skin cap and with
a red handkerchief tacked into his belt held the cup of ale
over the top of the shock for her to drink. But she did not
accept his offer. As soon as her lunch was spread she
called np the big girl, her sister, and took the baby of her,
who, glad to be relieved of the burden, went away to the
next shock and joined the other children playing there.
Tess, with a curiously stealthy yet courageous movement,
and with a still rising color, unfastened her frock and be-
gan suckling the child.
The men who sat nearest considerately turned their faces
towards the other end of the field, some of them beginning
to smoke; one, with absent-minded fondness, regretfully
stroking the jar that would no longer yield a stream. AH
the women but Tess fell into animated talk, and adjusted
the disarranged knots of their hair.
When the infant had taken its fill the young mother sat
it upright in her lap, and, looking into the far distance,
dandled it with a gloomy indifference that was almost dis-
like ; then all of a sudden she fell to violently kissing it
some dozens of times, as if she could never leave off, the
child crying at the vehemence of an onset which strangely
combined passionateness with contempt.
" She's fond of that there child, though she mid pretend
not to be, and say she wishes the baby and her too were in
the churchyard,''observed the woman in the red petticoat.
" She'll soon leave off saying that, " replied the one m
buff. " Lord, tis wonderful what a body can get used to
o > that sort in tune ! "
" A little more than persuading had to do wi'the cominf
TESS
OF THE CUBBERVILLES
*■ tft, I reckon. There were they that heard a sobbing one
night last year in The Chase ; and it mid ha'gone hard w?
a certain party if folks had come along. "
" Well, a little more or a little less,'twas a thousand
pities that it should have happened to she, of all others.
Bat'tis always the comeliest 1 The plain ones be as safe
as churches — hey, Jenny f " The speaker turned to one of
the group, who certainly was not ill-defined as plain.
It was a thousand pities, indeed ; it was impossible for
even an enemy to feel otherwise on looking at Teas as she
sat there, with her flower-like mouth and large, tender eyes,
neither black nor blue nor gray nor violet ; rather all those
shades together, and a hundred others, which could be seen
if one looked into their irises — shade behind shade — tint
beyond tint — round depths that had no bottom ; an almost
typical woman, but for the slight incautionsness of charac-
ter inherited from her race.
A resolution whieh had surprised herself had brought
her into the fields this week for the first time during many
months. After wearing and wasting her palpitating heart
with every engine of regret that lonely inexperience could
devise, common-sense had illumined her. She felt that
she would do well to be useful again — to taste anew sweet
independence at any price. The past was past ; whatever
it had been, it was no more at hand. Whatever its conse-
quences, time would close over them ; they would all in a
few years be as if they had never been, and she herself
grassed down and forgotten. Meanwhile the trees were
just as green as before ; the birds sang and the sun shone
as clearly now as ever. The familiar surroundings had not
darkened because of her grief, nor sickened because of her
pain.
She might have seen that what had bowed her head so
profoundly — the thought of the world's concern at her situ-
ation — was founded on an illusion. She was not an exist-
nee, an experience, a passion, a structure of sensations, to
MAIDEN NO MOEK 101
anybody trat herself . To all humankind besides, Tees wai
only a passing thought. It she made herself miserable the
livelong night and day it was only this much to them—
■ Ah, she makes herself unhappy. " If she tried to be cheer-
*■»], to dismiss all care, to take pleasure in the daylight,
le flowers, the baby, she could only be this idea to them—
" Ah, she bears it very welL " Alone in a desert island
would she have been wretched at what had happened to
hert Not greatly. If she could have been but just cre-
ated, to discover herself as a spouseless mother, with no
experience of life except as the parent of a nameless child,
would the position have caused her to despair 1 No, she
Would have taken it calmly, and found pleasures therein.
Most of the misery had been generated by her conventional
aspect, and not by her innate sensations.
Whatever Tess's reasoning, some spirit had induced her
to dress herself up neatly as she had formerly done, and
come out into the fields, harvest-hands being greatly in de-
mand just then. This was why she had borne herself with
dignity, and had looked people calmly in the face at times,
even when holding the baby in her arms.
The harvest-men rose from the shock of corn, and
stretched their limbs, and extinguished their pipes. The
arses, which had been unharnessed and fed, were again at-
tached to the scarlet machine. Tess, having quickly eaten
her own meal, beckoned to her eldest sister to come and
take away the baby, fastened her dress, put on the buft
gloves again, and stooped anew to draw a bond from the
last completed sheaf for the tying of the next
In the afternoon and evening the proceedings of the
morning were continued, Tess staying on till dusk with
the body of harvesters. Then they all rode home in one of
the largest wagons, in the company of a broad tarnished
moon that had risen from the ground to the eastwards, its
face resembling the outworn gold-leaf halo of some worm-
eaten Tuscan saint. Tess's female companions sang songs
MS TBSS 07 THE IVURBERVILLLe)
and showed themselves very sympathetic and glad at hffl
reappearance out-of-doors, though they could not refrain
from mischievously throwing in a few verses of the ballad
about the maid who went to the merry green wood and
came back a changed person. There are counterpoises and
compensations in life ; and the event which had made of
her a social warning had also for the moment made her the
most interesting personage in the village to many. Theii
friendliness won her still further away from herself, theii
lively spirits were contagions, and she became ahnoBt gay.
But now that her moral sorrows were passing away t
fresh one arose on the natural side of her which knew n <
social law. When she reached home it was to learn to hei
grief that the baby had been suddenly taken ill since tha
afternoon. Some such collapse had been probable, so ten-
der and puny was its frame ; bnt the event came as a shock
nevertheless.
The baby's offence against society in coming into the
world was forgotten by the girl-mother; her soul's desire
was to continue that offence by preserving the life of the
child. However, it soon grew clear that the hour of eman-
cipation for that little prisoner of the flesh was to arrive
earlier than her worst misgivings had conjectured. And
when she had discovered this she was plunged into a misery
which transcended that of the child's simple loss. Her
baby had not been baptized.
Tess had drifted into a frame of mind which accepted
passively the consideration that if she should have to burn
for what she hod done, burn she must, and there was an
end of it Like all village girls, she was well grounded in
the Holy Scriptures, and had dutifully studied the historic!
of Aholah and Aholibah, and knew the inferences to be
drawn therefrom. But when the same question arose with
regard to the baby, it had a very different color. Her dar-
ling was about to die, and no salvation.
It was nearly bedtime, but she rushed downstairs and
MAIDEN NO MORE 103
isked if she might send for the parson. The moment hap-
pened to be one at which her father's sense of the antique
nobility of his family was highest, and his sensitiveness to
the smudge which Tess had set upon that nobility most
pronounced, for he had just returned from his evening
booze at Rolliver's Tnn. No parson should come inside his
door, he declared, prying into his affairs just then, when,
by her shame, it had become more necessary than ever
to hide them. He locked the door and put the key in his
pocket.
The household went to bed, and, distressed beyond
measure, Tess retired also. She was continually waking
as she lay, and in the middle of the night found that the
baby was still worse. It was obviously dying; — quietly and
painh > ssly, but none the less surely.
In her misery she rocked herself upon the bed. The
Block " struck the solemn hour of one, that hour when
thought stalks outside reason, and malignant possibilities
stand lock-firm as facts. She thought of the child con-
signed to the nethermost corner of hell, as its double doom
for lack of baptism and lack of legitimacy ; saw the arch-
fiend tossing it with his three-pronged fork, like the one
they used for heating the oven on baking days ; to which
picture Bhe added many other quaint and curious details
of torment taught the young in this Christian country.
The lurid presentment so powerfully affected her imagina-
tion in the silence of the Bleeping house, that her night-
gown became damp with perspiration, and the bedstead
(hook with each throb of her heart.
The infant's breathing grew more difficult, and the
mother's mental tension increased. It was useless to
devour the little thing with kisses -, she could stay in bed
no lor-ger, and walked feverishly about the room.
" O merciful God, have pity ; have pity upon my poor
baby i " she cried. " Heap as much anger as you want to
upon me, and welcome ; but pity the child 1 "
104 TESS OF THE r/CBBEBVILLES
She leant against the chest of drawers, and murmured
incoherent supplications for a long while, till she suddenly
started up.
" Ah! perhaps baby can be saved I Perhaps it will be
just the same ! *
She spoke so brightly that it seemed as though her face
might have shone in the gloom surrounding her.
She lit a candle, and went to a second and a third bed
under the wall, where she awoke her little sisters and
brothers, all of whom occupied the same room. Pulling
out the washing-stand so that she could get behind it, she
poured some water from a jug, and made them kneel
around, putting their hands together with fingers exactly
vertical. While the children, scarcely awake, awe-stricken
at her manner, their eyes growing larger and larger, re-
mained in this position, she took the baby from her bed — a
child's child — so immature as scarce to seem a sufficient
personality to endow its producer with the maternal title.
Tess then stood erect with the infant on her arm beside the
basin, the next sister held the Prayer-Book open before hei%
as the clerk at church held it before the parson ; and thus
the emotional girl set about baptizing her child.
Her figure looked singularly tall and imposing as she
stood in her long white nightgown, a thick cable of twisted
dark hair hanging straight down her back to her waist.
The kindly dimness of the weak candle abstracted from
her form and features the little blemishes which sunlight
might have revealed — the stubble scratches upon her wrists,
and the weariness of her eyes — her high enthusiasm having
a transfiguring effect upon the face which had been hex
undoing, showing it as a thing of immaculate beauty, with
an impress of dignity which was almost regal. The little
ones kneeling round, their sleepy eyes blinking and red,
awaited her preparations full of a suspended wonder which
tneir physical heaviness at that hour would not allow oj
MAIDF.N NO MORE 105
The eldest of them said :
" Be yoo really going to christen him, TessT "
The girl-mother replied in a grave affirmative.
" Whatfs his name going to be 1 "
She had not thought of that, but a name came into her
head as she proceeded with the baptismal service, and now
she pronounced it :
" Sorrow, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. "
She sprinkled the water, and there was silence.
" Say'Amen,'children. "
The tiny voices piped in obedient response : " Amen ! "
Tess went on :
" We receive this child " — and so forth — " and do sign
Lim with the sign of the Cross. "
Here sh« dipped her hand into the basin, and fervently
drew an immense cross upon the baby with her forefinger,
continuing with the customary sentences as to his manfully
fighting against sin, the world, and the devil, and being a
faithful soldier and servant unto his life's end. She duly
went on with the Lord's Prayer, the children lisping it after
her in a thin, gnat-like wail, till, at the conclusion, raising
their voices to clerk's pitch, they again piped into the
silence, " Amen ! "
Then their sister, with much augmented confidence in
the efficacy of this sacrament, poured forth from the bottom
of her heart the thanksgiving that follows, uttering it
boldly and triumphantly in the stopt-diapason note which
her voice acquired when her heart was in her speech, and
which will never be forgotten by those who knew her. The
ecstasy of faith almost apotheosized her; it set upon her
face a glowing irradiation, and brought a red spot into the
middle of each cheek ; while the miniature candle-flame in-
verted in her eye-pupils shone like a diamond. The children
gazed up at her with more and more reverence, and no
longer had a will for questioning. She did not look like
106 TOSS OF THE IVURBEEVILLBS
Sissy to them now, but as a being large, towering, and
awful — a divine personage with whom they had nothing in
common.
Poor Sorrow's campaign against sin, the world, and the
devil was doomed to be of limited brilliancy — luckily per-
haps for himself, considering his beginnings. In the blue
of the morning that fragile soldier and servant breathed
Ms last, and when the other children awoke they cried
bitterly, and begged Sissy to have another pretty baby.
The calmness which had possessed Tess since the christen-
ing remained with her in the infant's loss. In the daylight,
indeed, she felt her terrors about his soul to have been
somewhat exaggerated ; whether well founded or not, she
had no uneasiness now, reasoning that if Providence would
not ratify such an act of approximation she, for one, did
not value the kind of heaven lost by the irregularity — either
for herself or for her child.
So passed away Sorrow the Undesired — that intrusive
creature, that bastard gift of shameless Nature who respects
not jhe._ciyil law v a waif to whom eternal Time had been a
matter of days merely, who knew not that such things as
years and centuries ever were; to whom the cottage interior
was the universe, the week's weather climate, new-born
babyhood human existence, and the instinct to suck human
knowledge.
Tess, who mused on the christening a good deal, won-
dered if it were doctrinally sufficient to secure a Christian
burial for the child. Nobody could tell this but the parson
of the parish, and he was a new-comer, and a very reserved
man. She went to his house after dusk, and stood by the
gate, but could not summon courage to go in. The enter-
prise would have been abandoned if she had not by accident
met him coming homeward as she turned away. In the
gloom she did not mind speaking freely.
" I should like to ask you something, sir. "
He expressed his willingness to listen, and she told the
i MAIDEN NO WOBE 107
story - of the baby's illness and the extemporized ordi-
" And nojw, sir, " she added, earnestly, " can yon tell me
this — will it- be just the same for him as if yon had baptized
hunt " f
Having the natural feelings of a tradesman at finding
that a job he should have been called in for had been un-
skilfully lootched by his customers among themselves, he
was disposed to say no. Yet the dignity of the girl, the
strange tenderness in her voice, combined to affect his
nobler hn)pnlses — or rather those that he had left in him
after ten Vears of endeavor to graft technical belief on
actual scepticism. The man and the ecclesiastic fought
within him, and the victory fell to the man.
" My dear girl " he said, " it will be just the same. "
" Then will vou eive him a Christian burial 1 * she asked,
quickly.
The vicai iers nimself cornered. Hearing of the baby's
illness, he had conscientiously come to the house after
nightfall to perform the rite, and, unaware that the refusal
to admit him had come from Tess's father and not fron*
Tess, he could not allow the plea of necessity.
" Ah — thatf s another matter, " he said.
" Another matter — why 1 " asked Tess, rather warmly.
. " Well — I would willingly do so if only we two were eon.
cerncd. But I must not — for liturgical reasons. "
" Just for once, sir ! "
" Really, T must not ! "
" O sir, for pity's sake ! " She seized his hand as she
spoke.
He withdrew it, shaking his head.
" Then I dont like you ! " she burst out, " and Til never
oome to your church no more ! "
" Don't talk so rashly, Tess. "
" Perhaps it will b* just the same to liim if yon don't f
. , . " Will it be just the same T Dont, for God's sake, speak
iOS TESS OF THE IPURBERYILLES
as saint to sinner, but as you yourself to me myself — poot
me ! "'
How the vicar reconciled his answer with t'ihe strict no-
tions he supposed himself to hold on these subjects it is
beyond a layman's power to tell, though not; to excuse.
Somewhat moved, he said in this case also :
" It will be just the same. "
So the baby was carried in a small deal box,! under an
ancient woman's shawl, to the churchyard that (night, and
buried by lantern-light, at the cost of a shilling fend a pint
of beer to the sexton, in that shabby corner of (Sod's allot-
ment where He lets the nettles grow, and where) all unbap-
tized infants, notorious drunkards, suicides, and others of
the conjecturally damned are laid. In spite of thp untoward
surroundings, however, Tess bravely made a little ctosb of
two laths and a piece of string, and having bound it with
flowers, she stuck it up at the head of the gra,ve one even-
ing when she could enter the churchyard without being
seen, putting at the foot also a bunch of the same flowers
in a little jar of water to keep them alive. What matter
was it that on the outside of the jar the eye of mere ob-
servation noted the words " KeelwelTs Marmalade " t The
eye of maternal affection did not see them in its vision of
higher things.
XV
" By experience, " says Roger Aecham, " we find out a
short way by p long wandering. " Not seldom that long
wandering unfits us for further travei, and of what use is
our experience to us then 1 Tess DurbeyfLeld's experienw
was of this incapacitating kind. At last she had learned
what to do ; but who would now accept her doing I
If before going to the D'Urberviles'she had rigorously
MAIDEN NO MOKE 100
moved under the guidance of sundry gnomic texts and
phrases known to her and to the world in general, no
doubt she would never have been imposed on. But it had
not been in Toss's power — nor is it in anybody's power — to
feel the whole truth of golden opinions when it is possible
to profit by them. She — and how many more — might have
ironically said to God with Saint Augustine, " Thou hast
counselled a better course than Thou bast permitted. "
She remained in her father's house during the winter
months, plucking fowls, or cramming turkeys and geese, or
making clothes for her sisters and brothers out of some
finery whieh D'Urberville had given her, and which she had
put by with contempt. Apply to him she would not. But
she would often clasp her hands behind her head and muse
when she was supposed to be working hard.
She philosophically noted dates as they came past in the
revolution of the year ; the disastrous night of her undo-
ing at Trantridge, with its dark background of The Chase ;
also the dates of the baby's birth and death ; also her own
birthday ; and every other day individualized by incidents
in which she had taken some share. She suddenly thought
one afternoon, when looking in the glass at her fairness,
that there was yet another date, of greater importance to
her than those: that of her own death, when all these
charms would have disappeared ; a day which lay sly and
unseen among all the other days of the year, giving no
sign or sound when she annually passed over it ; but not
the less surely there. When was it ! Why did she not
feel the chill of each yearly encounter with such a Gold re-
lation T She had Jeremy Taylor's thought that some time
in the future those who had known her would say, " It is
the — th, the day that poor Tess Durbeyfield died " ; and
there would be nothing singular to their minds in the
statement. Of that day, doomed to be her terminus in
time through all the ages, she did not know the place in
month, week, season, or year.
110 TESS OF THE D-URBKRVUJJSS
Almost at a leap Teas thus changed from simple girl to
complex woman. Symbols of reflectiveness passed into her
face, and a note of tragedy at times into her voice. Her
eyes grew larger and more eloquent. She became what
would have been called a fine creature ; her aspect was fair
and arresting ; her soul that of a woman whom the turbu-
lent experiences of the last year or two had quite failed to
demoralize, j But for the world's opinion those experiences
would have " been simply a liberal education.
She had held so aloof of late that her trouble, never gen-
erally known, was nearly forgotten in Marlott. But it be-
came evident to her that she could never be really comfort
able'again in a place which had seen the collapse of her
family's attempt to " claim kin " — and, through her, even
closer union — with the rich D'Urbervilles. At least she
could not be comfortable there till long years should have
obliterated her keen consciousness of it. Yet even now
Tess felt the pulse of hopeful life still warm within her;
she might be happy in some nook which had no memories.
To escape the past and all that appertained thereto was to
a nnihilat e it, and to do that she would have to get away.
Was once lost always lost really true of chastity 1 she
would ask herself. She might prove it false if she could
veil bygones. The recuperative power which pervaded or-
ganic nature was surely not denied to maidenhood alone.
She waited a long time without finding opportunity for
a new departure. A particularly fine spring came round,
and the stir of germination was almost audible in the buds ;
it moved her, as it moved the wild animals, and made her
passionate to go. At last, one day in early May, a letter
reached her from an old friend of her mother's, to whom
she had addressed inquiries long before — a dairyman whom
she had never seen — that a skilful milkmaid was required
at his dairy-house, and that he would be glad to have her
for the summer months, if she had found nothing to do in
the interim.
MAIDEN NO MORE 111
It was not quite so far off as could have been wished ;
but it was probably far enough, her radius of movement
and repute having been so small. To persons of limited
spheres, miles are as geographical degrees, parishes as
counties, counties as provinces and kingdoms.
On one point she was resolved : there should be no more
IKUrberville air-castles in the dreams and deeds of her new
life. She would be the dairymaid Tess, and nothing more.
Her mother knew Tess's feeling on this point so well,
though no words had passed between them on the subject,
that she never alluded to the knightly ancestry now.
Yet such is human inconsistency that one of the interests
of the new place to her was the accidental virtue of its lying
near her forefathers'country (for they were not Blakemore
men, though her mother was Blakemore to the bone).
The dairy called Talbothays, for which she was bound,
stood not remotely from some of the former estates of the
iyUrbervilles, near the great family vaults of her grand-
dames and their powerful husbands. She would be able to
look at them, and think not only that D'Urberville, like
Babylon, had fallen, but that the individual innocence of a
humble descendant could lapse as silently. All the while
she wondered if any strange good thing might come of her
being in her ancestral land ; and some spirit within her rose
automatically as the sap in the twigs. It was unexpended
youth, surging up anew after its temporary check, and
bringing with it hope, and the invincible instinct towards
self -delight.
: > , Google
THE RALLY.
XVI
On a thyme-scented, bird-singing morning in May, be-
tween two and three years after the retnrn from Trantridge
■ — two silent reconstructive years for Tess Durbeyfleld—
she left her home for the second time.
Having packed up her luggage so that it could be sent
to her later, she started in a hired trap for the little town
of Stourcastle, through which it was necessary to pass on
her journey, now in a direction almost opposite to that of
her first adventuring. On the curve of the nearest hill she
looked back regretfully at Marlott and her father's house,
although she had been so anxious to get away.
Her kindred dwelling there would probably continue
their daily lives as heretofore, with no great diminution of
pleasure in their consciousness, although she would be far
aff, and they deprived of her smile. In a few days the
children would engage in their games as merrily as ever,
without the sense of any gap left by her departure. This
leaving of the younger children she had decided was for
the best ; were she to remain they would probably gain
less good by her precepts than harm by her example.
She went through Stourcastle without pausing, and on-
ward to a junction of highways, where she could await a
carrier's van that ran to the southwest ; for the railways
which engirdled this interior tract of country had never
THE BA1,LY 113
yet struck across it. While waiting, however, there came
along a farmer in his spring cart, driving approximately in
the direction that she wished to pursue ; though he was a
stranger to her she accepted his offer of a seat beside him,
ignoring that its motive was a mere tribute to her counte-
nance. He was going to Weatherbury, and by accompany-
ing him thither she could walk the remainder of the dis-
tance instead of travelling in the van by way of Casterbridge.
Tess did not stop at Weatherbury, after this long drive,
farther than to make a slight nondescript meal at noon at
a cottage to which the farmer recommended her. Thence
she started on foot, basket in hand, to reach the wide up.
land of heath dividing this district from the low-lying
meads of a farther valley in which the dairy stood that
was the aim and end of her day's pilgrimage.
Tess had never before visited this part of the country,
and yet she felt akin to the landscape. Not so very far to
the left of her she could discern a dark patch in the scenery,
which inquiry confirmed her in supposing to he trees, mark-
ing the environs of Eingsbere — in the ehnrch nf which par-
ish the bones of her ancestors— her useless ancestors — lay
She had no admiration for them now ; she almost hated
them for the dance they had led her ; not a thing of all
that had been theirs did she retain but the old seal and
spoon. " Pooh — I have as much of mother as father in
me ! " she said. " All my prettiness comes from her, and
she was only a dairymaid. "
The journey over the intervening uplands and lowlands
of Egdon, when she reached them, was a more troublesome
Walk than she had anticipated, the distance being actually
but a few miles. In two hours, after sundry wrong turn-
ings, she found herself on a summit commanding the long-
songht-for vale, the valley of the Great Dairies, the valley
in which milk and butter grew to rankness, and were pro-
duced more profusely, if less delicately, than at her home
114 TE8S OP THE IVURBERVILLES
— the verdant plain so well watered by the river Var or
Froom,
It was intrinsically different from the Vale of Little
Dairies, Blackmoor Vale, which, save during her disastrous
sojourn at Trantridge, she had exclusively known till now.
The world was drawn to a larger pattern here. The en-
closures numbered fifty acres instead of ten, the farmsteads
were more extended, the groups of cattle formed tribes
hereabout; there only families. These myriads of cows
stretching under her eyes from the far east to the far west
outnumbered any she had ever seen at one glance before.
The green lea was speckled as thickly with them as a canvas
by Van Alsloot or Sallaert with burghers. The ripe hue
of the red and dun kine absorbed the evening s unlig ht,
which the white-coated animals returned to the eye in rays
almost dazzling, even at the distant elevation on which shc >
stood.
The bird's-eye perspective before her was not so luxuri-
antly beautiful, perhaps, as that other one which she knew
so well ; yet it was more cheering. It lacked the intensely
blue atmosphere of the rival vale, and its heavy soils and
scents ; the new air was clearer, more ethereal, buoyant,
bracing. The river itself, which nourished the grass and
cows of these renowned dairies, flowed not like the streams
in Blackmoor. Those were slow, silent, tinged, flowing over
beds of mud into which the incautious wader might sink
and vanish unawares. The Froom waters were clear as
the pure River of Life shown to the Evangelist, rapid as
the shadow of a cloud, with pebbly shallows that prattled
to the sky all day long. There the water-flower was the
lily ; the crowfoot here.
Either the change in the quality of the air from heavy
to light, or the sense of being amid new scenes where
there were no invidious eyes upon her, sent up her spirits
wonderfully. Her hopes mingled with the sunshine in an
'deal photosphere which surrounded her as she bounded
THE RiLLY US
■long against the soft south wind. She heard a pleasant
voice in every breeze, and in every bird's note seemed to
turk a joy.
Her face had latterly changed with changing states of
mind. It might have been said to be continually fluctu-
ating between beauty and ordinariness, according as the
thoughts were gay or grave. One day she was pink and
flawless ; another die was pale and tragical. When she
was pink she was feeling less than when she was pale;
her morfe perfect beauty accorded with her less elevated
mood ■, her more intense mood with her less perfect beauty.
It was her best face, physically, that was now set against
the south wind.
The irresistible, universal, automatic tendency to find
enjoyment, wh» ^ pervades all life, from the meanest to
the highest, had a. length mastered her, no longer counter.
acted by external pressures. Being even now only a young
and immature woman, one who mentally and sentimentally
had not finished growing, it was impossible that any event
should have left upon Tess an impression that was not at
least capable of transmutation.
And thus her spirits and her thankfulness and her hopes
rose higher and higher. She tried several ballads, but
found them inadequate ; till, recollecting the book that her
eyes had so often wandered over of a Sunday morning be-
fore she had eaten of the tree of knowledge, she hummed,
" ye Sun and Moon ; ye Stars ; ye Green Things upon
the Earth ; ye Fowls of the Air ; Beasts and Cattle ; O all
ye Children of Men ; bless ye the Lord, praise Him and
magnify Him forever. "
She suddenly stopped and murmured, " But perhaps I
4on't quite know the Lord as yet. "
t And probably the half -unconscious rhapsody was a Pan-
theistic utterance in a Monotheistic falsetto ; women, whose
chief companions are the forms and forces of outdoor Na-
ture, retain in their souls far more of the Pagan instincts
116 TESS OF i " HE D'ORBEBYILLES
of their remoter forefathers than of the systematized rel «
ions taught their race at later date. However, Tess fou
at least approximate expression for her feelings in the < tH
Benedimte that she had lisped from infancy ; and it ufas
enough. Such high contentment with such a slight and in-
itial performance as that of having started towaru:-. a means
of independent living was a part of the Durbeyneld tem-
perament Tess really wished to walk nprightly ; -a seek
ont whatsoever things were true and honest, and of good
report, while her father did nothing of the kind ; but she
resembled him with being content with immediate and
small achievements, and in having no mind for laborious
effort towards Buch petty monetary and social advancement
as could alone be effected by a family bo heavily handi-
capped as the once knightly D'UrberviHee were now.
There was, of course, the energy of her mother's nnex
pended family, as well as the natural energy of Tess's years
and frame, rekindled after the experience which had so
overwhelmed her for the time. Let the truth be told—
women do as a rule live through such humiliations, and
regain their spirits, and again look about them with an in-
terested eye. While there's life there's hope, is a conviction ,
not so entirely unknown to the i'deceived " as some amiable
theorists would have us believe/
Tess Durbeyfield, in good heart, and full of zest for life,
descended the Egdon slopes lower and lower towards the
dairy of her pilgrimage.
The marked difference, in the final particular, between
the rival vales now showed itself. The secret of Black-
moor was best discovered from the heights around ; to read
aright the valley before her it was absolutely necessary to
descend into its midst. When Tess had accomplished this
feat she found herself to be standing on a carpeted level
which stretched to the east and west as far as the eye could
reach.
The river had stolen from the higher tracts and brought
THE BALLY »
in particles to the vale all this horizontal land ; and now, — -
exhausted, aged, and attenuated, lay serpentining aloag
through the midst of its former spoils.
Not quite sure of her direction, Tess stood still upon the
hemmed expanse of verdant flatness, like a fly on a billiard*
table of indefinite length, and of no more consequence to
the situation than that fly. The sole effect of her presence
upon the placid valley so far had been to excite the mind
of a solitary heron, which, after descending to the ground
not far from her path, stood, with neck erect, looking at
her.
But suddenly there arose from all parts of the lowland a
prolonged and repeated call —
" Waow I waow ! waow ! "
From the farthest east to the farthest west the cries
spread as if by contagion, accompanied in some cases by
the barking of a dog. It was not the expression of the
valley's consciousness that beautiful Tess had arrived, but
the ordinary announcement of milking-time — half-past
four o'clock, when the dairymen Bet about getting in the
cows.
The red and white herd nearest at hand, which had been
phlegmatically waiting for the call, now trooped towards
the steading in the background, their great bags of milk
swinging under them as they walked. Tess followed slowly
in their rear, and entered the barton by the open gate
through which they had entered before her. Long, thatched
sheds stretched round the enclosure, their slopes encrusted
with vivid greenmoss,and their eaves supported by wooden
posts rubbed to a glassy smoothness by the flanks of in
finite cows and calves of bygone years, now passed to e
oblivion almost inconceivable in its profundity. Betwe
the posts were ranged the milkers, each exhibiting hers m „
at the present moment to an eye in the rear as a circle •
two stalks, down the centre of which a switch moved pei^— _
nlom-w»se ; while the sun, lowering itself behind this j
ue
TESS OW THE D'UBBEB\ 7 1LLE8
" Tient row, threw their shadows accurately inwards upon the
wall. There and tlms it threw shadows of these obscure
and unstudied figures every evening with as much care
■ > ver each contour as it it had oeen the profile of a Court
beauty on a palace wall ; copied them as diligently as it
had copied Olympian shapes on marble facades long ago,
or the outlines of Alexander, Caesar, and the Pharaohs.
They were the less restful cows that were stalled. Those
that would stand still of their own free will were milked in
the middle of the yard, where many of such better-behaved
ones stood waiting now — all prime milchers, such as were
seldom seen out of this valley, and not always within it;
nourished by the succulent feed which the water-meads
supplied at this prime season of the year. Those of them
that were spotted with white reflected the sunshine in daz-
zling brilliancy, and the polished brass knobs on their horns
glittered with something of military display. Their large-
veined udders hung ponderous as sand-bags, the teats stick-
ing out like the legs of a gipsy's crock : and, as each animal
lingered for her turn to arrive, the milk fell in drops to the
ground.
xvn
Tee dairymaids and men had flocked down from their
cottages and out of the dairy-house with the arrival of the
cows from the meads ; the maids walking in pattens, not
in account of the weather, but to keep their shoes abovi
le mulch of the barton. Each girl sat down on her three-
, Tged stool, her face sideways, her right cheek resting
. ainst the cow, and looked musingly along the animal's
ink at Tess as she approached. The male milkers, with
rt-brims turned down, resting on their foreheads and ga &
e on the ground did not observe her. *•-'
/THE BALLY 119
One of these was /a sturdy middle-aged man — whose long
white " pinner " W» somewhat finer and cleaner than the
wraps of the otJhers, and whose jacket underneath had
a presentable marketing aspect — the master-dairyman, of
whom she was An quest, his double character as a working
milker and buAter-maker here during six days, and on the
seventh as a Aian in shining broadcloth in his family pew
at church, basing so marked as to have inspired a rhyme :
/ Dairyman Wok
( All the week —
/ On Sundays Mr. Richard Crick.
/
Seeing Tess standing at gaze, he went across to her.
The majority of dairymen have a cross manner at milfc-
frLg-time, but it happened that Mr. Crick was glad to get a
new hand — for the days were busy ones now — and he re-
ceived her warmly ; inquiring for her mother and the rest
if the family (though this as a matter of form mainly, for
jhe really had quite forgotten Mrs. Durbeyfield's existence till
(reminded of the fact by her daughter's letter),
i " 0 — ay, as a lad I knowed your mother very well, " he
I Baidjterminatively. " And I heard of her marriage, though
'I've never heard of her since. And a aged woman of
ninety that used to live nigh here, but is dead and gone
long ago, once told me that the family yer mother married
into in Blackmoor Tale came originally from these parts,
and that twere a old ancient race that had all but perished
off the earth — though the new generations didn't know it.
But, Lord, I took no notice of the old woman's ramblinge,
not I. "
" Oh no— it is nothing, " said Tess.
Then the talk was of business only.
" Yon can milk'em clean, my maidy t I dont want my
•ows going azew at this time o'year. "
She reassured him on that whit, and he surveyed her nj
1» TESS OF THE D > UEBE. K
IVTLIJES
and down. She had been staying indoo. ... ,
and her complexion had grown delicate. re ^^ *• sabma
" Quite sure you can stand it*'Tis con'. ,
here for rough folk; but we dont live g«°rtaN° ° ao * &
frame. " * a COTreamb *
She declared that she could stand it, ani ,
■ > ,. 3 . • i_- 1 her zest and
willingness seemed to win him over.
" Well, I suppose you'll want a dish o'tay, c ■_*« l «i
aome sort, hey? Not yet 1 Well, do as you if nc r~ !f
But faith, if'twas I, I should be as dry as a kia? e ™ " ™
K *„_„ Wr travel-
fin g so far.
" Fll begin milking now, to get my hand in, " Bait,
She drank a little HiilTr as'temporary refreshment,
surprise — indeed, slight contempt — of Dairyman On,
whose mind it had apparently never occurred that .'
was good as a beverage. " Oh, if ye can swaller that, ek
it so, " he said, indifferently, while holding up the pail that
she sipped from. "'Tis what I hain't touched for years — ;
not I. Rot the stuff; it would lie in my innerds like leadj
You can try your hand upon she, " he pursued, nodding to*
the nearest cow. " Not but what she do milk rattier hard |
We've hard ones and we've easy ones, like other folks.
However, you'll find out that soon enough. "
When Tess had changed her bonnet for a hood, and was
Teally on her stool under the cow, and the milk was squirt-
ing from her fists into the pail, she appeared to feel that
«he really had laid a new foundation for her future. The
conviction bred serenity, her pulse slowed, and she was able
to look about her.
The milkers formed quite a little battalion of men and
maids, the men operating on the hard-teated animals, the j
maids on the kindlier natures. It was a large dairy.
There were more than a hundred milchers under Crick's
management, all told; and of the herd the master-dairy'
man milked six or eight with his own hands, unless aw»y
V»m home. These were the cows that milked hardest ci!
THE BALLY 131
all j for his journey-milkmen being more or less casually
hired, he would not entrust this half-dozen to their treat-
ment, lest, from indifference, they should not milk them
dean ; nor to the maids, lest they should fail in the same
way for lack of finger-grip j with the result that in course
of time the cows would " go azew " — that is, dry up. It
was not the loss for the moment that made slack milking
so serious, but that with the decline of demand there came
decline, and ultimately cessation, of supply.
After Tess had settled down to her cow there was for a
time no talk in the barton, and not a sound interfered with
the purr of the milk- jets into the numerous pails, except a
momentary exclamation to one or other of the beasts request-
ing her to torn round or stand still. The only movements
were those of the milkers'hands up and down and the
swing of the cows'tails. Thus they all worked on, encom-
, " ■ passed by the vast flat mead which extended to either slope
id of the valley — a level landscape compounded of old land-
scapes long forgotten, and, no doubt, differing in character
very greatly from the landscape they composed now.
" To my thinking, " said the dairyman, rising suddenly
from a cow he had just finished off, and snatching up his
three-legged stool in one hand and the pail in the other,
moving on to the next hard-yielder in his vicinity ; " to my
thinking, the cows dont gie down their milk to-day as
usual. Upon my life, if Winker do begin keeping back
like this, she'll not be worth going under by midsummer ! "
" Tis because there's a new hand come among us, " said
Jonathan Kail. " Pve noticed such things afore. "
" To be sure. It may be so. I didn't think o*t. "
" Pve been told that it goes up into their horns at such
times, " said a dairymaid.
" Well, as to going up into their horns, " replied Dairy-
man Crick, dubiously, as though even witchcraft might be
limited by anatomical possibilities, " I couldn't say ; I cer-
tftinlv could not But » nott cows will keep it back as
|88 TESS t > F THE jyuBEEKVILLES
well us the horned ones, I don't quite agree to it. Do ya
know that riddle about the nott cows, Jonathan T Why
do nott cows give less milk in a year than horned ! "
" Idon't! " interposed the milkmaid. " Why do -they T "
" Because there baint so many of'em, " said the dairy-
man. " Howsomever, these gam'sters do certainly keep
back their milk to-day. Folks, we must lift up a stave or
two — that's the only cure fort. "
Songs were often resorted to in dairies hereabout as an
enticement to the cows when they showed signs of with-
holding their usual yield ; and the band of milkers at this
request burst into melody — in purely business-like tones, it
is true, and with no great spontaneity ; the result, accord-
ing to their own belief, being a decided improvement dur-
ing the song's continuance. When they had gone through
fourteen or fifteen verses of a cheerful ballad about a mur-
derer who was afraid to go to bed in the dark because he
saw certain brimstone flames around him, one of the male
milkers said : " I wish singing on the stoop didn't use up
so much of a man's wind t You should get your harp, sir ;
not but what a fiddle is best. "
Tess, who had given ear to this, thought the words were
addressed to the dairyman, but she was wrong. A reply,
in the shape of " Why! " came, as it were, out of the belly
of a dun cow in the stalls ; it had been spoken by a milker
behind the animal, whom she had not hitherto perceived.
" Oh yes ; there's nothing like a fiddle, " said the dairy-
man. " Though I do think that bulls are more moved by
a tune than cows — at least, that's my experience. Once
there was a old man over at Mellstoek — William Dewy by
name — one of the family that used to do a good deal of
business as tranters over there, Jonathan, do ye mind^
I knowed the man by sight as well as I know my own
brother, in a manner of speaking. Well, this man was a*
coming home along from a wedding where he had been
Vying his fiddle, one fine moonlight night, and for short
THE RALLY 128
Dees'sake he took a eat across Forty-acres, a field lying uhat
way, where a boll was oat to grass. The bull seed William
and took after him, horns agronnd, begad; and though
William runned his best, and hadn't much drink in him
(considering'twas a wedding, and the folks well off), he
found he'd never reach the fence and get over in time to
save himself. Well as a last thought, he pulled out his
fiddle as he runned, and struck up a jig, turning to the bull
as he played, and backing towards the corner. The bull
softened down, and stood still, looking hard at William
Dewy, who fiddled on and on ; till a sort of a smile stole
over the bull's face. But no sooner did William stop
his playing and turn to get over hedge, than the bull
would stop his smiling, and lower his horns and step for-
rard. Well William had to turn about and play on, willy-
nilly ; and'twas only three o'clock in the world and'a
knowed that nobody would come .that way for hours, and
he so leery and tired that'a didn't know what to do. When
he'd scraped till about four o'clock he felt that he verily
would have to give over soon, and he said to himself,
'There's only this last tune between me and eternal welfare.
Heaven save me, or I'm a done man.'Well, then he called
to mind how he'd seed the cattle kneel o* Christmas Eves in
the dead o* the night. It was not Christmas Eve then, but
it came into his head to play a trick upon the bull. So he
broke into the Tivity Hymn, just as at Christmas earol-
Bulging ; when, Io and behold, down went the bull on his
bended knees, in his ignorance, just as if twere the true
Tivity night and hour. As soon as his homed friend were
down, William turned, clinked off like a long-dog, and
*nmped safe over hedge, before the praying bull had got
on Ms feet again to take after him. William used to
Bay that he'd seen a man look a fool a good many times,
but never such a fool as that bull looked when he found
his pious feelings had been played upon, and'twas not
(Iristmas Eve — Yes, William Dewy, that was the man's
124 TESS OF THE DTJBBERVHJJH
name ; and I can tell ye to a foot where he's a-lying in
Mellstock Churchyard at this very moment — just between
the second yew-tree and the north aisle. "
f'lt's a curious story; it carries us back to medieeval
times, when faith was a living thing.^ The remark, singu-
lar for a dairy-yard, was murmured by the voice behind the
dun cow ; but as nobody understood lie reference no uotue
was taken, except that the narrator seemed to think it
might imply scepticism as to his tale.
" Well,'tis quite true, sir, whether or no. I knowed tie
man well. "
" Oh yes ; I have no doubt of it, " said the person be-
hind the dun cow.
Tess's attention was thus attracted to the dairyman's in-
terlocutor, of whom she could see but the merest patch,
owing to his burying his head so persistently in the flank
of the milcher. She could not understand why he should
be addressed as " Sir " even by the dairyman himself. But
no explanation was discernible ; he remained under the dun
cow long enough to have milked three, uttering a private
ejaculation now and then, as if he could not get on.
" Take it gentle, sir; take it gentle, " said the dairyman.
"'Tis knack, not strength, that does it. "
" So I find, " said the other, standing up at last and
stretching his arms. " I think I have finished her, how-
ever, though she made my fingers ache. "
Tess could then see him at full length. He wore tw
ordinary white pinner and leather leggings of a dairy-fanner
when milking, and his boots were clogged with the muloh
of the yard ; but this was all his local livery. Beneath it
was something educated, reserved, subtle, sad, differing.
But the details of his corporeal aspect she could not
readily observe, so much was her mind arrested by the
discovery that he was one whom she had seen before.
Such vicissitudes had Tess passed through since that time
that for a moment she could not remember where she hai
THE RALLY 129
seen him ; and then it flashed upon her that he was tiie
pedestrian who had joined in the club-dance at Marlott —
the passing stranger who had come she knew not whence,
had danced with others but not with her, had slightingly
left her and gone on his way with his friends.
The floofi of memories brought back by this revival of
an incident dating from a time anterior to her troubles
produced a momentary dismay lest, recognizing her also,
he should by some means discover her story. But it passed
away when she found no sign of remembrance in him. She
saw by degrees that since their first and only encounter
his mobile face had grown more thoughtful, and had ac-
quired a young man's shapely mustache and beard — the
latter of the palest straw-color where it began upon bis
cheeks, and deepening to a warm brown farther from its
root. Under his milking-pinner and leggings he wore a
dark velveteen jacket, woollen trousers, and a starched
white shirt. Without the milking-gear, nobody could have
guessed what be was. He might with equal probability
have been an eccentric landowner or a gentlemanly plough-
man. That he was but a novice at dairy-work she had
realized in a moment, from the time he had spent upon the
milking of one cow.
Meanwhile, many of the milkmaids had said to one an <
ether, " How pretty she is ! * with something of real gen-
erosity and admiration, though with a half hope that the
auditors would deny the assertion — which, strictly speaking,
they might have done, prettiness being but an inexact defi-
nition of what struck the eye in Tess. When the milking
was finished for the evening they straggled indoors, where
Mrs. Criek, the dairyman's wife — who was too respectable
to go oat milking herself, and wore a hot stuff gown in
warm weather because the dairymaids wore prints — was
giving an eye to the leads and things. Only two or three
of the maids, Tess learnt, slept in the dairy-house besides
herself, most of the helpers going to their homes. She
126 TESS OF THE IVUBBERVILLES
saw nothing at supper-time of the superior milker who hac
commented on the story, and asked no questions about him
the remainder of the evening being occupied in'arranging
her place in the bed-chamber. It was a large room over the
milk-house, some thirty feet long ; the sleeping cots of the
other three indoor milkmaids being in the same apartment
They were blooming young women, and, except one, rather
older than herself. By bedtime Teas was thoroughly tired,
and fell asleep immediately.
But one of the girls who occupied an adjoining bed waa
more wakeful than Tess, and would insist upon relating to
the latter various particulars of the homestead into which
she had just entered. The girl's whispered words mingled
with the shades, and, to Toss's drowsy mind, they seemed
to be generated by the darkness in which they floated.
" Mr. Angel Clare — he that is learning milking, and that
plays the harp — never says much to us. He is a pa'son'f
son, and is too much taken up wi'his own thoughts to notice
girls. He is the dairyman's pupil — learning farming in
all its branches. He has learnt sheep-forming at another
place, and he's now mastering dairy-work. . . . Yes, he is
quite the gentleman-born. His father is the Reverent Mr.
Clare at Emminster — a good many miles from here.*
" O — I have heard of him, " said her companion, now
awake. " A very earnest clergyman, is he not 1 "
" Yes, that he is — the earnestest man in all Wessex, they
say — the last of the old Low Church sort, they tell me — for
all about here be what they call High. All his sons, except
our Mr. Clare, be made pa'sons too. "
Tess had not at this hour the curiosity to ask why the
present Mr. Clare was not made a parson like his brethren.
and gradually fell asleep again, the words of her informant
coming to her along with the smell of the cheeses in the
adjoining cheese-loft, and the dripping of the whey from
the wrings downstairs.
Google
TOE RALLY
XVIII
Angel Clare rises oat of the past not altogether as a
dstinet, figure, but as an appreciative voice, a long regard
of fixed, abstracted eyes, and a mobility of month somewhat
too small and delicately lined for a man's, though with an
unexpectedly firm close of the lower lip now and then ;
enough to do away with any suggestion of indecision.
Nevertheless, something nebulous, preoccupied, vague, in his
bearing and regard, marked him as one who probably had
no very definite aim or concern about his material future.
Yet as a lad people had said of him that he was one who
might do anything if he tried.
He was the youngest son of his father, a poor parson at
the other end of the county, and had arrived at Talbothays
Dairy as a six months'pupil, after going the round of some
ether farms, his object being to acquire a practical still in
the various processes of farming, with a view either to the
Colonies or the tenure of a home-farm, as circumstances
might decide.
His entry into the ranks of the agriculturists and breeders
was a step in the young man's career which had been an-
ticipated neither by himself nor by others.
Mr. Clare the elder, whose first wife Iiad died and left
him a daughter, married a second late in life. This lady
had somewhat unexpectedly brought him three sons, so
that between Angel, the youngest, and his father the vicar,
there seemed to be almost a missing generation. Of these
boys the aforesaid Angel, the child of his old age, was the
only son who had not taken a University degree, though
he was the single one of them whose early promise might
have done full justice to an academical training.
Some year or so before Angel's appearance at the Marlott
dance, on a day when he had left school and was pursuing
128 TESS OF TEE EfUKHH3VILIiE8
his studies at home, a parcel came to the vicarage from the
local bookseller's, directed to the Reverend James Clare.
The vicar having opened it and found it to contain a booh,
read a few pages ; whereupon he jumped up from his seat
and went straight to the shop with the book under bis arm.
" Why has this been sent to my house T " he asked,
peremptorily, holding up the volume.
" It was ordered, sir. "
" Not fay me, or any one belonging to me, I am happy to
say. "
The shopkeeper looked into bis order-book. " Oh, it has
been misdirected, sir, " he said. " It was ordered by Mr.
Angel Clare, and should have been sent to him. "
Mr. Clare winced as if he had been struck. He went
home pale and dejected, and called Angel Into Mb study.
" Look into this book, my boy, " he said. " What do yon
know about itf "
" I ordered it, " said Angel, simply.
" What for! "
" To read. "
" How can you think of reading itt "
" How can I f Why, it is a system of philosophy. There
fe no more moral, or even religious, work published. "
" Yes— moral enough ; I don't deny that. But religions ! |
— and for you, who intend to be a minister of the Gos- j
pel! "
" Since you have alluded to the matter, father, " said the
son, with anxious thought upon his face, " I should like to
say, once for all, that I should prefer not to take Orders in'
the Church. I fear I could not conscientiously do so. I I
love the Church as one loves a parent. I shall always have
the warmest affection for her. There is no institution for
whose history I have a deeper admiration ; but I cannot I
honestly be ordained her minister, as my brothers are,
while she refuses to liberate her mind from an untenable
redemptive theolatry "
THE RALLY 120
It had never occurred to the straightforward and simple-
minded vicar that one of his own flesh and blood could
come to this. He was stultified, shocked, paralyzed. And
if Angel were not going to enter the Church, what was the
use of sending him to Cambridge ! The University as a
step to anything but ordination seemed, to this man of fixed
ideas, a pref acc-without a volume. He was a man not merely
religious, but devout ; a firmlwhever — not as the phrase is
now elnsively construed by theological thimble-riggers in
the Church and out of it, but in the old and ardent sense
of the Evangelical school ; one who could
Indeed opine
That the Eternal and Divine
Did, eighteen centuries ago
In very truth . . .
Angel's father tried argument, persuasion, entreaty.
" No, father ; I cannot underwrite Article Four (leave
alone the rest), taking it'in the literal and grammatical
sense'aa required by the Declaration j and therefore I can't
be a parson, " said Angel. " Sly whole instinct in matters
of religion is towards reconstruction ; to quote your favorite
Epistle to the Hebrews,'the removing of those things that
are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things
which cannot be shaken may remain.'^
His father grieved so deeply that it made Angel quite
fll to see him. " What is the good of your mother and
me economizing and stinting ourselves to give you a Uni-
versify education, if it is not to be used for the honor and
glory of God 1 " his father repeated.
" Why, that I may put it to other uses, father, " pleaded
AngeL
Perhaps if Angel had persevered he might have gone to
Cambridge like his brothers. But the vicar's view of that
seat of learning as a stepping-stone to Orders alone was
quite a family tradition ; and so rooted was Hie idea in his
1BD TESS OP THB r/UBBERVliJJS
mind that perseverance began to appear to the sensitivB
eon akin to an intent to misappropriate a trust, and wrong
the pious heads of the household, who had been and were
in truth, as his father had hinted, compelled to exercise
much thrift to carry out this uniform plan of education for
the three young men,
" I will do without Cambridge, " said Angel at last. " I
feel that I have no right to go there in the circumstances. "
The effects of this decisive debate were not long in show-
ing themselves. He spent two or three years in desultory
studies, undertakings, and meditations ; he began to evince
considerable indifference to social forms and observances.
The material distinctions of rank and wealth he commend-
ably despised. Even the " good old family " (to use a favorite
phrase of a late local worthy) had no aroma for him unless
there were good new resolutions in its representatives. As
a balance to these austerities, when he went to London to
see what the world was like he was carried off his head,
and nearly entrapped by a woman much older than himself,
though luckily he returned not greatly the worse for the
experience.
Early association with country solitudes had bred in him
an unconquerable and almost unreasonable aversion to
modern town life, and shut him out from snch success na
he might have aspired to by entering a mundane profession
in the impracticability of the spiritual one. But something
had to be done; and having an acquaintance who was
starting on a thriving life as a Colonial farmer, it occurred
to Angel that this might be a lead in the right direction.
Farming — either in the Colonies, America, or at home-
farming, at any rate, after becoming well qualified for the
business by a careful apprenticeship — that was a vocation
which would probably afford an independence without the
sacrifice of what he valued even more than a competency—
jLtelleetual liberty.
So we find Angel Clare at eix-and- twenty here at Tal
THE RALLY ffl
^dtfiays as a student of kine, and, as there were no houses
near at hand in which he could get a comfortable lodging,
a boarder at the dairyman's.
His room was an immense attic which ran the whole
length of the dairy-house. It could only be reached by a
ladder from the cheese-loft, and had been closed up for a
long time till he arrived and selected it as his retreat.
Here Clare had plenty of space, and could often be heard
by the dairy-folk pacing up and down when the household
had gone to rest. A portion was divided off at one end by
a curtain, behind which was his bed, the outer part being
famished as a homely sitting-room.
At first he lived tip above entirely, reading a good deal,
and strumming upon an old harp which he had bought at a
sale, saying when in a bitter humor that he might have
to get a living by it in the streets some day. But he soon
preferred to read human nature by taking his meals down-
stairs in the general dining-kitchen, with the dairyman and
his wife, and the maids and men, who all together formed
a lively assembly ; for though but few milking hands slept
in the house, several joined the family at meals. The
longer Clare resided here the less objection had he to his
company, and the more did he like to share quarters with
them in common.
Much to his surprise, he took, indeed, a real delight ir
their companionship. The conventional farm-folk of his
imagination — personified by the pitiable dummy known as
Hodge — were obliterated after a few days'residence. At
dose quarters no Hodge was to be seen. At first, it is true,
when Clare's intelligence was fresh from a contrasting
society, these friends with whom he now hobnobbed seemed
a little strange. Sitting down as a level member of the
dairyman's household seemed at the outset an undignified
proceeding. The ideas, the modes, the surroundings, ap-
peared retrogressive and unmeaning. But with living on
there, day after day, the acute sojourner became consciou
4
|82 TESS OP THE DTniBEHVIIiIJSS
of a new aspect in the spectacle. Without any objective
change whatever, variety had taken the place of monoto-
uousneBs. TTia host and his host's household, his men and
his maids, as they became intimately known to Clare, be-
gan to differentiate themselves as in a chemical process.
The thought of Pascal's was brought home to him " A
mesure qu'on a plus d'esprit, on trouve qu'il y a plus
d'hommes originaux. Les gens du commun no trouvent
pas de difference entre les hommes. " The typical and un-
varying Hodge ceased to exist. He had been disintegrated
into a number of varied fellow-creatures — beings of many
minds, beings infinite in difference; some happy, many
serene, a few depressed, one here and there bright oven to
genius, some stupid, others wanton, others austere ; some
mutely Miltonic, some potentially Cromwellian ; into men
who had private views of each other, as he had of his
friends ; who could applaud or condemn each other, amuse
or sadden themselves by the contemplation of each other's
foibles or vices; men every one of whom walked in his
own individual way the road to dusty death.
Unexpectedly he began to like the outdoor life for its
own sake, and for what it brought, apart from its bearing
on his own proposed career. Considering his position, he be-
came wonderfully free from the chronic melancholy which
is taking hold of the civilized races with the decline of be-
lief in a beneficent power. For the first time of late years
he could read as his musings inolined him, without any eye
to cramming for a profession, since the few farming hand-
books which he deemed it desirable to master occupied him
bnt little time.
He grew away from old associations, and saw something
new in life and humanity. Secondarily, he made close ac-
quaintance with phenomena which he had before known
bnt darkly — the seasons in their moods, morning and even-
ing, night and noon in their temperaments, winds in their
weral dispositions, trees, waters and clouds, shades and
f HE RALLY 133
silences, ignea-fatui, constellations, and the voices of inani-
mate things.
The early mornings were still sufficiently cool to render
a fire acceptable in the large room wherein they break-
tasted ; and by Mrs. Crick's orders, who held that he was
too genteel to mess at their table, it was Arigel Clare's
custom to sit in the yawning chimney-corner during the
meal, his cnp and saucer and plate being placed on a hinged
bracket at his elbow. The light from the long, wide,
mullioned window opposite shone in upon his nook, and,
assisted by a secondary light of cold bine quality which
shone down the chimney, enabled him to read there easily
whenever disposed to do so. Between Clare and the win-
dow was the table at which his companions sat, their
munching profiles rising sharp against the panes ; while to
the rear was the milk-house door, through which were visi-
ble the rectangular leads in rows, full to the brim with the
morning's milk. At the farther end the great churn could
be seen revolving and its slip-slopping heard — the moving
power being discernible through the window in the form of
a spiritless horse walking in a circle and driven by a boy.
For several days after Tess's arrival Clare, sitting ab-
stractedly reading from some book, periodical, or piece of
music just come by post, hardly noticed that she was present
at tabic She talked so little, and the other maids talked
so much, that the babble did not strike him as possessing
a new note, and he was ever in the habit of neglecting the
particulars of an outward scene for the general impression.
One day, however, when he had been conning one of his
music scores, and by force of imagination was hearing the
tone in his head, he lapsed into listlessness, and the music-
sheet rolled to tile hearth. He looked at the fire of logs,
with its one name pirouetting on the top in a dying dance
after the breakfast cooking and boiling ; and it seemed to
jig to his inward tune; also at the two chimney crocks
dmgfipg down from the cross-bar, plumed with soot which
134 TESS OF THE r/UBBEBVmLES
quivered to the same melody ; also at the half-empty kettle
whining an accompaniment. The conversation at toe table
mixed in with Mb phantasmal orchestra till he thought,
" What a fluty voice one of those milkmaids has ! I sup
pose it is the new one. " Clare looked round upon her,
seated with the others.
She was not looking towards him. Indeed, owing to his
long silence, his presence in the room was almost forgotten.
" I don't know about ghosts, " she was saying ; " bet I do
know that our souls can be made to go outside our bodies
when we are alive. "
'Jhc dairyman turned to her with his mouth full, his eyes
charged with serious inquiry, and his great knife and fork
(breakfasts were breakfasts here) planted erect on the table,
like the beginning of a gallows. " What — really nowt
And is it so, maidy t " he said.
" A very easy way to feel'em go, " continued Tess, " is to
lie on the grass at night and look straight up at some big
bright star ; and, by fixing your mind upon it, you will
soon find that you are hundreds and hundreds o " miles
away from your body, which you don't seem to want at all. "
The dairyman removed his hard gaze from Tess, and
fixed it on his wife.
" Now that's arum thing, Christianner — heyf To think
o'the miles IVe vamped o'nights these last thirty year,
courting, or trading, or for doctor, or for nurse, and yet
never had the least notion o'that till now, or feeled my soul
rise so much as an inch above my shirt-collar. "
The general attention being drawn to her, including that
of the dairyman's pupil, Tess flushed, and remarking indif-
ferently that it was only a fancy, resumed her breakfast
Clare continued to observe her. She soon finished her
eating, and having a consciousness that Clare was regard-
ing her, began to trace imaginary patterns on the table-
cloth with her forefinger with the constraint of a domestic
animal that perceives itself to be watched.
THE RALLY 13S
" What afresh and virgin daughter of Nature that milk-
maid is t " he said to himself .
And then he seemed to discern in her something that
was familiar, something which carried him back into a
joyous and onforeaeeing past, before the necessity of tak-
ing thought had made the heavens gray. He concluded
that he had beheld her before ; where, he could not telL
A casual encounter during some country ramble it certainly
had been, and he was not greatly curious about it. But
the circumstance was sufficient to lead him to select Tess
in preference to the other pretty milkmaids when he wished
to contemplate contiguous womankind.
In general the cows were milked as they presented them-
selves, without fancy or choice. But certain cows will
show a fondness for a particular pair of hands, sometimes
carrying this predilection so far as to refuse to stand at all
except to their favorite, the pail of a stranger being un-
ceremoniously kicked over.
It was Dairyman Crick's rule to insist on breaking down
these partialities and aversions by constant interchange,
since, in the event of a milkman or maid going away from
tiie dairy, he was otherwise placed in ^ difficulty. The
maids'private aims, however, were the reverse of the dairy-
man's rule, the daily selection by each dams :1 of the eight
or ten cows to which she had grown accustomed rendering
the operation on their willing udders surprisingly easy and
effortless.
Teas, like her compeers, soon discovered which of the
cows had a predilection for her style of manipulation, and
her lingers having become delicate from the long domiciliary
136 TE8S OP THE DTJKBERV1LLES
imprisonments to which she had subjected herself at intea
vals during the last two or three years, she would have
been glad to meet the milchers* views in this respect. Out
of the whole hundred and five there were eight in particu-
lar — Dumpling, Fancy, Lofty, Mist, Old Pretty, Young
Pretty, Tidy, and Loud — who, though the teate of one or two
were as hard as carrots, gave down to her with a readiness
that made her work on them a mere touch of the fingers.
Knowing, however, the dairyman's wish, she endeavored
conscientiously to take the animals just as they came, ex-
cepting the very hard yielders, which she could not yet
But she soon found a cnrions correspondence between
the ostensibly chance position of the cows and her wishes
in this matter, till at length she felt that their order could
not be the result of accident. The dairyman's pupil had
lent a hand in getting the cows together of late, and at the
fifth or sixth time she turned her face, as it rested against
the cow, full of sedate inquiry upon him.
" Mr. Clare, yon have ranged lie cows ! " she said, blush-
ing ; and in making the accusation symptoms of a smile
lifted her upper lip gently in the middle in spite of her, so
as to show the tips of her teeth, the lower Up remaining
severely still.
" Well — it makes.no difference, " said he. " Ton will al-
ways be here to milk them. "
" Do yon think so T I hope I shall. But I don't hum. "
She was angry with herself afterwards, thinking that he,
not aware of her grave reasons for liking this seclusion,
might have mistaken her meaning. She had spoken so
earnestly to him, as if his presence were somehow a factor
in her wish. Her misgiving was such that at dusk, when
the milking was over, she walked in the garden alone, re.
gretting that she had disclosed to bim her discovery of bis
It was a typical summer evening in June, the atrao*
THE HAIJiT 1ST
phere being in such delicate equilibrium and so transmis-
give that inanimate objects SMmad endowed with two 01
three senses, if not five. There was no distinction between
the near and the far, and an auditor felt close to every-
thing within the horizon. The Boundlessness impressed
her as a positive entity rather than as the mere negation of
noise. It was broken by the strumming of strings.
Tess had heard those notes in the attic above her head.
Dim, flattened, constrained by their confinement, they had /
never appealed to her as now, when they wandered in the
still air with a stark quality like that of nudity. To speak
absolutely, both instrument and execution were poor ; but
the relative is all, and as she listened, Tess, like a fasci- ^
nated bird, could not leave the spot. Far from leaving, she /
drew up towards the performer, keeping behind the hedge
that he might not guess her presence.
The outskirt of the garden in which Tess found herself /
had been left uncultivated for some years, and was now
damp and rank with juicy grass which sent up mists of
pollen ; and tall blooming weeds, emitting offensive smells
—weeds whose red and yellow and purple hues formed a
polychrome as dazzling as that of cultivated flowers. She
went stealthily as a cat through this profusion of growth,
gathering cuckoo-spittle on her skirts, brushing off snails
that were climbing the apple-tree stems, staining her hands
with thistle-milk and slng-slime, and rubbing oft* upon her
naked arms sticky blights that, though snow-white on the
tree-trunks, made blood-red stains on her skin ; thus she
drew quite near to Clare, though stall unobserved of him.
Tess was conscious of neither time nor space. The exal-
tation which she had described as being producible at will
by gazing at a star, came now without any determination
of hers ; she undulated upon the thin notes as upon billows,
and their harmonies passed like breezes through her, bring-
ing tears into her eyes. The floating pollen seemed to be
his notes made visible, and the dampness of the garden
138 TES3 OF t hm DTJREERYILIJES
Hie weeping of the garden's sensibility. Though near
nightfall, the rank-smeitag weed-flowers glowed as if they
would not close for intentness, and the waves of color mixed
with the waves of sound.
The light which still shone was derived entirely from a
large hole in the western hank of cloud ; it was like a piece
of the day left behind by accident, dusk having closed
in elsewhere. He concluded his plaintive melody, a very
simple performance, demanding no great skill; and she
waited, thinking another might be begun. But, tired of
playing, he had desultorily come round the fence, and was
rambling up behind her. Tess, her cheeks on fire, moved
away furtively, as if hardly moving at all.
Angel, however, saw her light summer gown, and he
spoke ; his low tones quite reaching her, though he was
some distance off.
" " What makes you draw off in that way, Tess t * said he.
" Are you afraid 1 "
" Oh no, sir. . . . That is, not of outdoor things, es-
pecially just now, when the apple-blooth is falling, and
everything so green. "
" But you have your indoor fears— eh 1 "
" Well — yes, sir. "
" What of! "
" I couldnt quite say. "
" The milk turning sour! "
" No. "
" Life in general 1 *
" Yes, sir. "
" Ah — so have L very often. This hobble of being alivf
Is rather serious, don't you think so f "
" It is — now you put it that way, sir. "
" All the same, I shouldnt have expected a young girl
like you to see it so just yet. How is it you do I "
She maintained a hesitating silence.
" Come, Tess, tell me in confidence. "
THE RALLY 139
She thought that he meant what were the aspects of/
things to her, and replied shyly: " The trees have inquisK
tive eyes, haven't they? — that is, seem as if they had.
And the river says,'Why do ye trouble me with your
looks!'And you seem to see numbers of to-morrows just
all in a line, the first of'em the biggest and clearest, the
others getting smaller and smaller as they stand farther
away ; but they all seem very fierce and cruel and as if they
said,'I'm coming ! Beware o'me ! Beware o " me !'. . ,
But you, sir — y»M, H she exclaimed, with almost bitter envy ;
''you can raise up dreams with your music, and drive all
such horrid fancies away ! "
He was surprised to find this young woman — who, though
but a milkmaid, had just that touch of rarity about her
which might make her the envied of her housemates — shap-
ing such sad imaginings. But he was more surprised when
he considered that she was expressing in her own native
phrases — assisted a little by her Sixth Standard training — >
feelings which might almost have been called those of th &
age, th e ache of modernism. The perception arrested him
less when he reflected that what are called advanced ideas
are really in great part but the latest fashion in definition
— a more accurate expression, by words in logy and ism, of
sensations which men and women have vaguely grasped for
centuries.
Still, it was strange that they should have come to her
while yet so young ; more than strange — it was impressive,
interesting, pathetic. Not guessing the cause, there was
nothing to remind him that experience is as to intensity,
and not as to duration. He did not know that Tess's pass-
ing corporeal blight had been her mental harvest.
Toss, on her part, could not understand why a man of
clerical family and good education, and above physical
want, should look upon it as a mishap to be alive. For
the unhappy pilgrim herself there was very good reason.
But how could this admirable and poetic man ever have
340 TESS OF THE ECURBERVILLES
descended into the Valley of Humiliation, have felt with
the man of Uz — as she herself had felt two or three years
ago — " My soul ehooseth strangling and death rather than
my life. I loathe it ; 1 would not live alway. "
It was true that he was at present out of his class. But
she knew that was only because, like Peter the Great in a
shipwright's yard, he was studying what he wanted to know.
He did not milk cows because he was obliged to milk cows,
but because he was learning how to be a rich and prosperous
dairyman, landowner, agriculturist, and breeder of cattle.
He would become an American or Australian Abraham,
commanding like a monarch his flocks and his herds, his
spotted and his ring-straked, his men-servants and his
maids. At tunes, nevertheless, it did seem unaccountable
to her that a decidedly bookish, musical, thinking young
man should have chosen deliberately to be a farmer, and
not a clergyman, like his father and brothers.
Thus, neither having the due to the other's secret, they
were mutually puzzled at what each revealed, and awaited
new knowledge of each other's character and moods with-
out attempting to pry into each other's history.
Every day, every hour, brought to him one more little
stroke of her nature, and to her one more of his. Tess
was trying to lead a repressed life, but she little recked the
intensity of her own vitality.
At first Tess seemed to regard Angel Clare as an intelli-
gence rather than as a man. And as sueh she compared
him with herself ; and at every discovery of the abundance
of his illuminations, of the immense distance between her
own poor mental standpoint and the immeasurable, Andean
altitude of his, she became quite dejected, humiliated, dis-
heartened from all further effort on her own part whatever.
He observed her dejection one day, when he had casually
mentioned something to her about the pastoral life in an-
THE BALLY 141
dent Greece. She was gathering the buds called " lords and
ladies " from the hank while he spoke.
" Why do you look so woebegone all of a sadden J * he
asked.
" Oh, tie only — about my own self, " she said, with a frail
laugh of sadness, fitfully beginning to peel " a lady * mean-
while. " Just a flash of a sense of what might have been
with me ! My life looks as if it had been wasted for want
of chanees ! When I see what you know, what you have
read, and seen, and thought, I feel what a nothing I am !
Fm like the poor Queen of Sheba who lived in the Bible.
There is no more spirit in me. "
" Bless my souL dont go troubling about that ! Why, "
he said, with some enthusiasm, " I should be only too glad,
my dear Tess, to help you to anything in the way of history,
or any line of reading you would like to take up "
" It is a lady again, " interrupted she, holding out the bud
she had peeled.
" WhatT "
" I meant that there are always more ladies than lords
when yon come to peel them. "
" Never mind about the lords and ladies. Would you
like to take up any line of study — history, for example f "
" Well sometimes I feel I dont want to know anything
more about it than I know already. "
" Why not t "
" Because what's the use of learning that I am one of a
long row only — finding out that there is set down in some
old book somebody just like me, and to know that I shall
only act her part ; making me sad, that's all. The best is
not to remember that your nature and your past doings
have been just like thousands and thousands, and that
your coming life and doings 11 be like thousands and
thousands. "
" What^ really, then, you don't want to learn anything? "
142 TESS OF THE IVUBBEEVILLES
" I shouldn't mind learning why — why the son shines on
the just and on the unjust alike, " she answered, with a alight
quaver in her voice. " But that is what books will not
tell me 1 "
" Teas, fle for such bitterness I " Of course he spoke with
a conventional sense of duty only, for that sort of wonder-
ing had not been unknown to himself in bygone days.
And as he looked at the unpractised mouth and lips, he
thought that such a dew-fresh daughter of the aoil could
only have caught up the sentiment by rote. She went on
peeling the lords and ladies till Clare, regarding for a mo-
ment the wave-like curl of her lashes as they drooped with
her bent gaze, lingeringly went away. When he was gone
she stood awhile, thoughtfully peeling the last bud ; and
then, awakening from her reverie, flung it, and all the
crowd of floral nobility, impatiently on the ground, in an
ebullition of displeasure with herself for her niaiseries, and
with a quickening warmth in her heart of hearts.
How stupid he must think her ! In an access of hunger
for his good opinion she bethought herself of what she had
latterly endeavored to forget, so unpleasant had been its
issues : the identity of her family with that of the knightly
D'Urbervilles. Barren attribute as it was, disastrous as its
discovery had been in many ways to her, perhaps Mr. Clare,
as a gentleman and a student of history, would respect her
sufficiently to forget her childish conduct with the lords
and ladies if he knew that those Purbeck-marble and ala-
baster people in Kingsbere church really represented her
own lineal forefathers ; that she was no spurious D'TJrber*
ville, compounded of money and ambition like those at
Trantridge, but true D'Urberville to the bone.
But before venturing to make the revelation poor Tess
indirectly sounded the dairyman as to its possible effect
upon Mr Clare, by asking the former if Mr. Clare had any
great respect for old county families when they had lost all
heir money and land-
THE RALLY US
" Mr. dare, " said the dairyman, emphatically, Q'is one of
the most rebellest rozums yon ever knowed — not a bit like
the rest of his family ; and if there's one thing that he do
hate more than another'tis the notion of what's called an
old family. He says that it stands to reason that old fam-
ilies have done their spurt of work in past days, and can't
have anything left in'em now. There's the Billetts, and
the Drenkhards, and the Greys, and the St. Quintins, and
the Hardy s, and the Goulds, who used to own the lands for
miles down this valley ; you could buy'em all up now for
an old song a'most. Why, our little Retty Priddle here,
you know, is one of the Paridelles — the old family that
used to own lots & the lands out by King's-Emtock now
owned by the Earl o'Wessex, afore even he and his was
heard of. Well, Mr. Clare found this out, and spoke quite
scornful to the poor girl for days.'Ah t'he says to her,
*you11 never make a good dairymaid I All your skill was
used up ages ago in Palestine, and you must lie fallow for
a thousand years to git strength for more deeds !'A boy
eame here t'other day asking for a job, and said his name
was Matt, and when we asked him his surname, he said
he'd never heard that'a had any surname, and when we
asked why, he said he supposed his folks hadn't been'stab-
nehed long enough.'Ah 1 you're the very boy I want ! *
gays Mr. Clare, jumping up and shaking hands wi'en ;
'Pve great hopes of you ;'and gave him half-a-crown. Oh
no, he can't stomach old families ! " )
After hearing this caricature of Clare's opinions, poor
Teas was glad that she had not said a word in a weak mo-
ment — even though her family was so unusually old as
almost to have gone round the circle and become a new
one. Besides, another dairy-girl was as good as she, it
seemed, in that respect. She held her tongue about the
jyUrberville vault, and the Knights of the Conqueror, one
of whose names she bore. A flash of insight into Clare's
character suggested to her that it was largely owing to her
144 TESS OP THE IVUItBERYILLES
supposed untraditional newness that she had won interest
n his eyes.
XX
The season developed and matured. Another year's in-
stalment of flowers, leaves, nightingales, thrashes, finches,
and other creatures, took up their positions where only a
year ago others had stood in their place, and they were
nothing more than germs and inorganic particles. Bays
straight from the sunrise drew forth the bnds and stretched
them into long stalks, lifted np sap in noiseless streams,
opened petals, and brought out scents in invisible jets and
breathings.
Dairyman Crick's household of maids and men lived on
comfortably, placidly, even merrily. Their position was
perhaps the happiest of all positions in the social scale, that
is to say, above the line at which neediness ends, and below
the line at which the convenances begin to cramp natural
feeling, and the stress of threadbare modishness makes too
little of enough.
Thus passed the leafy time, when arborescence seems to
be the one thing aimed at out-of-doors. Tess and Clara
unconsciously studied each other, ever balanced on the
edge of a passion, yet apparently keeping out of it. All
the while they were none the less converging, under the
force of irresistible law, as surely as two streams in one
vale.
Tess had never in her recent life been so generally happy
as she was now, probably never would be so happy again-
She was, for one thing, physically and socially at ease
among these new surroundings. The sapling which had
rooted down to a poisonous stratum on the spot of its so*
tag had been transplanted to a deeper soiL Moreover she.
THE RALLY 145
and Clare also, stood as yet on the debatable land between
predilection and love, where no profundities have been
reached, no reflections have set in, awkwardly inquiring
" Whither does this new current tend to carry me t what
docs it mean to my future f how does it stand towards my
past? "
Tess was the merest ideal phenomenon to Angel Clare
as yet — a rosy, warming apparition, which had hardly ac-
quired the attribute of persistence in his consciousness. So
he allowed his mind to be occupied with her, yet would
not own his preoccupation to be more than a philosopher's
regard of an exceedingly novel, fresh, and interesting speci-
men of womankind.
They met continually; they could not help it. They
met daily in that strange and solemn interval of time, the
twilight of the morning, in the violet or pink dawn ; for
it " was necessary to rise early, so very early, here. Milking
was done betimes ; and before the milking came the skim-
tiling, which began at a little past three. It usually fell to
the lot of some one or other of them to wake the rest, the
first one being aroused by an alarm-clock ; and as Tess was
the latest arrival, and they soon discovered that she could
be depended upon not to sleep through the alarm as the
others did, this task was thrust most frequently upon her.
No sooner had the hour of three struck and whizzed than
she left her room and ran to the dairyman's door ; then np
the ladder to Angel's, calling him in a loud whisper ; then
woke her fellow-milkmaids. By the time that Tess was » .
dressed, Clare was downstairs and out in the humid air ;Y V
the remaining maids and the dairymen usually gave them- "
selves another turn on the pillow, and did not appear till ai7
Quarter of an hour later. r
The gray half-tones of daybreak are not the gray half
tones of the day's close, though the degree of their shade
may be the same. In the twilight of the morning light
0eems active, darkness passive ; in the twilight of evening
140 TESS OF THE D-UBBEEVILLES
ft is the darkness which is active and crescent, and the light
which is the drowsy reverse.
Being so often — possibly not always by chance — the first
two persons to get up at the dairy-house, they seemed to
themselves the first persons up of all the world. In these
early days of her residence here Tess did not skim, but
went out-of-doors at once after rising, where he was gener
ally awaiting her. The spectral, half-compounded, aqueous
light which pervaded the open mead impressed them with
a feeling of isolation, as if they were Adam and Eve. At
this dim, inceptive stage of the day, Tess seemed to Glare
to exhibit a dignified largeness, both of disposition and
physique, and almost regnant power 1 — possibly because he
knew that at that preternatural time hardly any woman so
well endowed in person as she was likely to be walking in
the open air within the boundaries of his horizon ; very
few in all England. Fair women are usually asleep at mid-
summer dawns. She was close at hand, and the rest were
nowhere.
The mixed, singular, luminous gloom in which they
walked along together to the spot where the cows lay often
made him think of the Resurrection hour. He little thought
that the Magdalen might be at his side. Whilst all the
landscape was in neutral shade, his companion's face, which
was the focus of his eyes, rising above the mist stratum,
seemed to have a sort of phosphorescence upon it. She
looked ghostly, as if she were merely a soul at large. In
reality her face, without appearing to do so, had caught the
cold gleam of day from the northeast ; his own face, though
he did not think of it, wore the same aspect to her.
It was then, as has been said, that she impressed him
most deeply. She was no longer the milkmaid, but a vis-
ionary essence of woman — a whole sex condensed into one
typical form. He called her Artemis, Demeter, and other
fanciful names, half-teasingly, which she did not like be
rase she did not understand them.
THE RALLY 147
" Gall me Teas, " she would say, askance ; and he did.
Then it would grow lighter, and her features would be-
come simply feminine; they had changed from those of
a divinity who could confer bliss to those of a being who
craved it.
At these non-human hours they could get quite close to
the water-fowl Herons came, with a great bold noiae as
of opening doors and shutters, out of the boughs of a plan-
tation which they frequented at the aide of the mead ; or,
if already on the spot, maintained their standing in the
water as the pair walked by, merely watching them by
moving their heads round in a slow, horizontal, passionless
wheel, like the turn of puppets by clockwork.
They could then see the faint summer fogs in layers,
woolly, level, and apparently no thicker than counterpanes,
spread about the meadows in detached remnants of small
extent. On the gray moisture of the grass were marks
where the cows had lain through the night — dark islands
of dry herbage the size of their carcasses in the general sea
of dew. From each island proceeded a serpentine trail, by
which the eow had rambled away to feed after getting up,
at the end of which trail they found her; the snoring
breath from her nostrils, when she recognized them, mak-
ing an intenser little fog of her own amid the prevailing
one. Then they drove the animals back to the barton, or
sat down to milk them on the spot, as the case might re-
quire.
Or perhaps the summer fog was more general, and the
meadows lay like a white sea, out of which the scattered
trees rose like dangerous rocks. Birds would rise through
it into the upper radiance, and hang on the wing sunning
themselves, or alight on the wet rails subdividing the
meads, which now shone like glass rods. Minute diamonds
of moisture from the mist hung, too, upon Tess's eyelashes,
and drops upon her hair like seed pearls. When the day
grew quite strong and commonplace these dried off her:
4 48 TESS OP THE IHTIRBEIiVILliES *
moreover, Teas then lost her isolated and ethereal beauty,
and was again the dazzlingly fair dairymaid only, who had
to hold her own against the other women of the world.
About this time they would hear Dairyman Crick's voice,
lecturing the non-resident milkers for arriving late, and
speaking sharply to old Deborah Fyander for not washing
her hands.
" For Heaven's sake, pop thy hands under the pump,
Deb ! Upon my soul, if the London folk only knowed of
thee and thy slovenly ways, they'd swaller their milk and
butter more mincing than they do a*ready } and that's say-
ing a good deaL "
The milking progressed till, towards the end, Tess and
Clare, in common with the rest, could hear the heavy break*
fast-table dragged out from the wall in the kitchen by Mrs.
Crick, this being the invariable preliminary to each meal ;
the same horrible scrape accompanying its return journey
when the table had-been cleared.
There was a great stir in the milk-house just after break-
fast. The churn revolved as usual, but the butter would
not come. Whenever this happened the dairy was para*
lyzed. " Squish ! squash I " echoed the milk in the great
cylinder, but never arose the sound they waited for.
Dairyman Crick and his wife, the milkmaids Tess, Mar-
ian, Eetty Priddle, Izz Huett, and the married ones from
the cottages, also Mr. Clare, Jonathan Kail, old Deborah,
and the rest, stood gazing hopelessly at the churn ; and
the boy who kept the horse going outside put on moon-like
eyes to show his sense of the situation. Even the melan
'loly horse him self seemed to look in at the window in
uiring despair at each walk round.
THE RALLY MB
" Tis years since I went to Conjuror Trendle's son in
Bgdon — years, " said the dairyman, bitterly. " And he was
nothing to what his father had been. I have said fifty
times, if I have said once, that I don't believe in him. And
I don't believe in him. But I shall have to go to'n. Oh
yes, I shall have to go to'n, if this sort of thing continnys ! *
Even Mr. Clare began to feel tragical at the dairyman's
desperation.
" Conjuror Fall, tother side of Casterbridge, that they
used to call'Wide-O,'was a very good man when I was a
boy, " said Jonathan KaiL " But he's rotten as touchwood
by now. "
" My grandfather used to go to Conjuror Mynterne, out
it Owlscombe, and a clever man'a were, so I've heard
prandf or say, " continued Mr. Crick. " But there's no snch
genuine folk about nowadays t "
Mrs. Crick's mind kept nearer to the matter in hand.
* Perhaps somebody in the house is in love, " she said, ten-
tatively. " Fve heard tell in my younger days that that will
cause it Why, Crick — that maid we knew years ago, do
ye mind, and how the butter didn't come then "
" Ah yes, yes! — but that isnt the rights o't It had
nothing to do with the love-making. I remember all about
it — twas the damage to the churn. " He turned to Clare.
" Jack Dollop, a'hore'a-bird of a fellow we had here as
milker at one time, sir, courted a young woman over at
Mellstock, and deceived her as he had deceived many afore.
But he had another sort o'woman to reckon with this time,
and it was not the girl herself. One Holy Thursday, of all
days in the almanac, we was here as we mid be now, only
there was no churning in hand, when we saw the girl'a
mother coming np to the door, with a great brass-mounted
umbrella in her hand that would have felled an ox, and
saying,'Do Jack Dollop work here J — because I want him !
I have a big bone to pick with he, I can assure *n !'And
some Tray behind her mother walked Jack's young woman.
]fiO TESS OF THK r/UBBERVTLLE8
crying bitterly into her handkeroher.'Lard I hero's a
time !'said Jack, looking out o'winder at'em.'Shell
murder mel Where shall I get — where shall I — Don't
tell her where I be I'and with that he scrambled into the
chum through the trap-door, and shut himself inside, just
as the young woman's mother busted into the milk-house,
■The villain — where is het'says she;'111 claw his face
for " n, let me only catch him !'Well, she hunted about
everywhere, ballyragging Jack by side and by seam, Jack
lying a'most stifled inside the churn, and the poor maid
standing at the door crying her eyes out. I shall never
forget it, never 1'Twould have melted a marble stone.
But she couldn't find him nowhere at all I "
The dairyman paused, and one or two words of comment
came from the listeners.
But Dairyman Crick's stories often seemed to be ended
when they were not really so, and strangers were betrayed
into premature interjections of finality, though old friends
knew better. The narrator went on :
" Well, how the woman should have had the wit to guess it
I could never toll, but she found out that he was inside that
there churn. Without saying a word she took hold of the
winch (it was turned by hand-power then), and round she
swung- him, and Jack began to flop about inside.'O Lard !
stop the churn t let me out !'says he, popping out his head ;
'I shall be churned into a pummy !'(He was a cowardly
chap in his heart, as such men mostly be.)'Not till yon
make amends for ravaging her trustful innocence !'says
the old woman,'Stop the churn, you old witch !'screams
he.'You call me old witch, do ye, you deceiver,'says she,
'when ye ought to ha'been calling me mother-in-law these
last five months!'And on went the churn, and Jack's
bones rattled round again. Well, none of us ventured to
interfere : and at last'a promised to make it right by mar-
Tying her.'Yes — I'll be as good as my word I'he said.
And so it ended that day. "
THE RALLY 151
While the listeners were smiling their comments there
was a quick movement behind their becks, and they looked
round. Teas, pale-faced, had gone to the door.
" How warm it is to-day 1 " she said, almost inaudibly.
It was warm, and none of them connected her withdrawal
with the reminiscences of the dairyman. He went forward
and opened the door for her, saying with tender raillery,
u Why, maidy " (he frequently, with unconscious irony, gave
her tJua-pet'Wwie), " the prettiest milker " TVe got in my
dairy ; you mustn't get so fagged as this at the first breath
of summer weather, or we shall be finely put to for want of
'ee by dog-days ; shan't we, Mr. Clare ! "
" I was faint — and — I think I am better out-of -doors, "
she said, mechanically, and disappeared outside. Fortu-
nately for her, the milk in the revolving churn at that mo-
ment changed its squashing for a decided flick-flack.
"'Tis coming ! " cried Mrs. Crick, and the attention of all
was called off from Tess.
/That fair sufferer soon recovered herself externally ; but
she remained much depressed all the afternoon. When the
evening milking was done she did not care to be with the
rest of them, and went outof-doors, wandering along she
knew not whither. She was wretched — oh, so wretched —
at the perception that to her companions the dairyman's
story had been rather a humorous narration than other-
wise ; that none of them but herself seemed to see the sor-
row of it ; to a certainty, not one knew how cruelly it
touched the tender place in her experience. The evening
sun was now ugly to her, like a great inflamed wound in
the sky. Only a solitary cracked-voiced reed-sparrow
greeted her from the bushes by the river, in a sad, machine-
like tone, resembling that of a past friend whose friend-
ship she had now outworn.
In these long June days the milkmaids, and indeed most
of the household, went to bed at sunset, or sooner, the
uw ming work before milking being so early and heavy at
IS?,'TESS OF THE ffUBBERVILLES
this time of foil pails. Teas usually accompanied her fel-
lows upstairs. To-night, however, she was the first to go
to their common chamber ; and she had dozed when the
other girls came in. She saw them undressing in the orange
light of the vanished sun, which flushed their forms with
its color ; she dozed again, but she was reawakened by their
voices, and quietly turned her eyes towards them.
Neither of her three chamber companions had got into
bed. They were standing in a group, in their nightgowns,
barefooted, at the window, the last red rays of the west still
warming their f aees and necks, and the walls around them.
AH were watching somebody in the garden with deep in-
terest, their three faces close together : a jovial and round
one, a pale one with dark hair, and a fair one whose tresses
were auburn.
" Dont push ! You can see as well as I, " said Eetty, the
auburn-haired and youngest girl, without removing her eyes
from the window.
"'Tis no use for you to be in love with him any more
than me, Eetty Priddle, " said jolly-faced Marian, the eldest,
dyly. " His thoughts be of other cheeks than thine. "
Betty Priddle still looked, and the others looked again.
" There he is again ! " cried Izz Huett, the pale girl, with
dark, damp hair, and keenly cut lips.
" You needn't say anything, Izz, " answered Retty. " For
I seed you kissing his shade. "
" What did you see her doing? " asked Marian.
" Why, he was standing over the whey-tub to let off the
whey, and the shade of his face came upon the wall behind,
close to Izz, who was standing there filling a vat. She put
her mouth against the wall and kissed the shade of his
•uouth; I seed her, though he didn't. "
" O Izz HuettI " said Marian.
A rosy spot came into the middle of Izz Huett's cheek.
" Well, there was no harm in it, " she declared, wi*h at <
THE RALLY 163
tempted coolness. " And if I be in love with him, so is
Ketty, too ; and so be you, Marian, come to that. "
Marian's full face could not blush past its chronic pink-
ness. " 11 " she said. " What a tale ! Ah, there he is again I
Dear eyes — dear face — dear Mr. Clare ! "
" There — you've owned it ! "
" So have you — so have we all, " said Marian, with the
dry frankness of complete indifference to opinion. " It is
silly to pretend otherwise amongst ourselves, though we
need not own it to other folks. I would just marry'n to-
" So would I, " murmured Izz Huett, slowly.
" And I, too, " whispered the more timid Retty.
The listener grew warm.
" We can't all have him, " said Izz.
" We shan't, either of us, which is worse stall, " said the
eldest. " There he is again ! " They all three blew him a
silent kiss.
" Why! " asked Retty, quickly.
" Because he likes Tess Durbeyfleld best, " said Marian,
lowering her voice. " I have watched him every day, and
have found it out "
There was a reflective silence.
" But she dont care anything for him! " at length
breathed Retty.
" Well, I sometimes think that, too. "
" But how silly all this is ! " said Izz Huett, impatiently.
" Of course he wouldn't marry any one of us, or either 1 —
a gentleman's son, who's going to be a great landowner
and farmer abroad ! More likely to ask us to come wi'en
as farm-hands at so much a year ! *
One sighed, and another sighed, and Marian's plump
figure sighed most of all. Somebody in bed hard by sighed
too. Tears came into the eyes of Retty Priddle, the pretty
rod haired youngest — the last bud of the Paridelles, so im >
1M TESS OF THE WTRBERVILLES
portant in the county history. They watched silently %
little longer, their three faces still close together as before,
aad the triple hues of their hair mingling. But the uncon-
scious Mr. Clare had gone indoors, and they saw him no
more ; and, the shades beginning to deepen, they crept into
their beds. In a few minutes they heard him ascend the
ladder to his own room. Marian was soon snoring, but Izz
did not drop into forgetfulness for a long time. Retty
Priddle cried herself to sleep.
The deeper-passioned Tess was very far from sleeping
even then. This conversation was another of the bitter
pills she had been obliged to swallow that day. Scarce the
least feeling of jealousy arose in her breast. For that
matter, she knew herself to have the preference. Being
more finely formed, better educated, more woman than
either, she perceived that only the slightest ordinary care
was necessary for holding her own in Angel Clare's heart
against these her candid friends. But the grave question
was, ought she tp do this T There was, to be sure, hardly a
ghost of a chance for either of them, in a serious sense ;
but there was, or had been, a chance of one or the other
inspiring him with a passing fancy for her, and enjoying
the pleasure of his attentions while he stayed here. Such
unequal attachments had led to marriage; and she had
heard from Mrs. Crick that Mr. Clare had one day asked,
in a laughing way, what would be the use of his marrying
a fine lady, and all the while a thousand acres of Colonial
pasture to feed, and cattle to rear, and corn to reap. A
farm-woman would be the only sensible kind of wife for
him. But whether Mr. Clare had spoken seriously or nol^
why should she, who could never conscientiously allow any
man to marry her now, and who had religiously deter-
mined that she never would be tempted to do so, draw off
Mr. Clare's attention from other women, for the brief hap-
piness of sunning herself in his eyes while he remained at
lbothavsT

THE BALLY
They came downstairs yawning next morning; bnt
skimming and milking were proceeded with as usual, and
they went indoors to breakfast. Dairyman Crick was dis-
covered stamping about the house. He had received a
letter, in which a customer had complained that the butter
had a twang.
" And begad, so*t have ! " said the dairyman, who held in
Mb left hand a wooden slice, on which a lump of butter
was stuck. " Yes — taste for yourself ! "
Several of them gathered round him; and Mr. Clare
tasted, Tees tasted, also the other indoor milkmaids, one
or two of the milking-men, and last of all Mrs. Crick, who
came out from the waiting breakfast-table. There certainly
was a twang.
The dairyman who had thrown himself into abstraction
to better realize the taste, and so divine the particular spe-
cies of noxious weed to which it appertained, suddenly ex-
claimed,'" Tis garlic'and I thought there wasn't a blade
left in that mead ! "
Then all the old hands remembered that a certain dry
mead, into which a few of the cows had been admitted of
late, had in years - gone by spoilt the butter in the same
way. The dairyman had not recognized the taste at that
time, and thought the batter bewitched.
" We must examine that mead, " he resumed; " this
mustn't continny. "
All having armed themselves with old pointed knives,
they went out together. As the inimical plant could only
be present in very microscopic dimensions to have escaped
ordinary observation, it seemed rather a hopeless attempt
to find it in the stretch of rich grass before them. How-
ever, they formed themselves into line, all assisting, owing
106 TKSS OP THE DTJBBERVILLES
to th« importance of the search ; the dairyman at the upper
end with Mr. dare, who had volunteered to help ; then
Tess, Marian, Izz Huett, and Hetty; then Bill Lewell, Joa-
athan, and the married dahywomen — namely, Beck Knibbs,
with her woolly black hair and rolling eyes, and flaxen
Frances, consumptive from the winter damps of the water
meads — who lived in their respective cottages.
With eyes fixed upon the ground, they crept slowly
across a strip of the field, returning a little further down
in such a manner that, when they should have finished,
not a single inch of the pasture but would have fallen
under the eye of some one of them. It was a most tedious
business, not more than half a dozen shoots of garlic being
discoverable in the whole field ; yet such was the herb's
pungency that probably one bite of it by one cow had been
wufficient to season the whole dairy's produce for the day.
Differing one from another in natures and moods so
greatly as they did, they yet formed a curiously uniform
tow — automatic, noiseless ; and an alien observer passing
down the neighboring lane might well have been excused
for massing them as " Hodge. " As they crept along, stoop-
ing low to discern the plant, a soft, yellow gleam was re-
flected from the buttercups into their shaded faces, giving
them an elfish, moonlit aspect, though the sun was pouring
upon their backs in all the strength of noon.
Angel Clare, who communistically stuck to his rule of
lejdng part with the rest in everything, glanced up now
and then. It was not, of course, by accident that he walked
awxt to Tess.
" Well, how are you t * he murmured.
" Very well, thank you, sir, " she replied, demurely.
As they had been discussing a score of personal matters
only half an hour before, the introductory style seemed a
little superfluous. But they got no further in speech just
then. They crept and crept, the hem of her petticoat just
touching his foot, and his elbow sometimes brushing hers.
TUB RALLY 157
At last the dairyman, who came next, could stand it no
longer.
" Upon my soul and body, this here stooping do fairly
make my back open and shut ! " he exclaimed, straightening
himself slowly with an excruciated look till quite upright
" And you, maidy Tess, yon wasn't well a day or two ago —
this will make your head ache finely. Don't do any more,
if you feel f flinty ; leave the rest to finish it. "
Dairyman Crick withdrew, and Tess dropped behind.
.Air. Clare also stepped out of line, and began privateering
about for the weed. When she found him near her, her
rery tension at what she had heard the night before made
her the first to speak.
" Don't they look pretty t " she said.
" Who! "
" Izzy Huett and Retty. "
Tess had moodily decided that either of these maidens
would make a good farmer's wife, and that she ought to
recommend them, and obscure her own wretched charms.
" Pretty ! Well, yes, they are pretty girls — fresh-looking.
I have often thought so. "
" Though, poor things, prettiness won't last long. "
" Oh no, unfortunately. "
" They be excellent dairywomen. "
" Tes ; though not better than you. "
" They skim better than I. "
" Do they I "
Clare remained observing them — not without their ot > .
serving him.
" She is coloring up, " continued Tess, heroically,
" Who! "
" Retty Priddle. "
" O! Whyisthat! "
" Because you are looking at her. "
Self-sacrificing as her mood might be, Tess could not
well go further and say, " Marry one of them, if you really
IBS TE8S OF THE D'UBBERVCLLES
do want a dairywoman and Dot a lady ; and don't think of
marrying me. " She followed Dairyman Crick, and had the
mournful satisfaction of seeing that Clare remained behind.
From this day she forced herself to take pains to avoid
him — never allowing herself, as formerly, to remain long
in his company, even if their juxtaposition was purely ac-
cidental. She gave the other three every chance.
Tess was woman enough to realize from their avowals to
herself that Angel Clare had the honor of all the dairy-
maids in his keeping, and her perception of his care to
avoid compromising the happiness of either in the least
degree bred a tender respect in Tess for what she deemed,
rightly or wrongly, the self -controlling sense of duty shown
by him, a quality which she had never expected to find in
one of the opposite sex, and in the absence of which more
than one of the simple hearts who were his housemates
might have gone weeping on her pilgrimage.
The hot weather of July had crept onward upon them
unawares, and the atmosphere of the flat vale hung heavy
as an opiate over the dairy folk, the cows, and the trees.
Hot steaming rains fell frequently, making the grass where
the cows fed yet more rank, and hindering the late hay-
making in the other meads.
It was Sunday morning; the milking was done; tho
outdoor milkers had gone home. Tess and the other three
were dressing themselves rapidly, the whole four having
agreed to go together to Mellstock Church, which lay some
three miles distant from the dairy-house. She had now
been two months at Talbothays, and this was her first ex
ursion.
THE RALLY 156
AH the preceding afternoon and night heavy thunder-
storms had hissed down upon the meads, and washed some
of the hay into the river ; but this morning the sun shone
out ail the more brilliantly for the deluge, and the air was
balmy and clear.
The crooked lane leading from their own parish to Mell-
stock ran along the lowest levels in a portion of its length,
and when the girls reached the most depressed spot they
found that the result of the rain had been to flood the lane
over shoe to a distance of some fifty yards. This would
have been no serious hindrance on a week-day ; they would
have clicked through it in their high pattens and boots
quite unconcerned ; but on this day of vanity, this Sun's-
day, when flesh went forth to coquet with flesh while hypo-
critically affecting business with spiritual things ; on this
occasion for wearing their white stockings and thin shoes,
and their pink, white, and lilac gowns, on which every
mud-spot would be visible, the pool was an awkward im-
pediment. They could hear the church-bell calling — as yet
nearly a mile off.
" Who would have expected such a rise in the river in
summer-time ! " said Marian, from the top of the roadside
bank on which they had climbed, and were maintaining a
precarious footing in the hope of creeping along its slope
till they were past the pool.
" We cant get there anyhow, without walking right
through it, or else going round Stone Bridge way; and
that would make as bo very late ! " said Eetty, pausing
hopelessly.
" And I do color up so hot, walking into church late, and all
the people staring round, " said Marian, " that I hardly cool
down again till we get into the'That-it-may-please-Thees.'■
While they stood clinging to the bank they heard a
splashing round the bend of the road, and presently ap-
peared Angel Clare, advancing along the lane towards them
through the water.
160 TK88 OF TOE D UKBERVILr.ES
Four hearts gave a " big throb simultaneously.
His aspect was probably as un-Sabbatarian a one as a
dogmatic parson's son often presented, being attired in his
dairy clothes and long wading boots, with a thistle-spud to
finish him off.
" He's not going to church, " said Marian.
" No — I wish he was, " murmured Tess.
AngeL in fact, rightly or wrongly (to adopt the safe
phrase of evasive controversialists), preferred sermons in
stones to sermons hi churches and chapels on fine summer
days. This morning, moreover, he had gone out to see if
the damage to the hay by the flood was considerable or not.
On his walk he observed the girls from a long distance,
'though they had been so occupied with their difficulties of
passage as not to notice him. He knew that the water had
risen at that spot, and that it would quite check their prog-
ress. So he had hastened on, with a dim idea of how he
could help them — one of them in particular.
The rosy-cheeked, bright-eyed quartet looked so charm-
ing in their light summer attire, clinging to the roadside
bank like pigeons on a pent-roof, that he stopped a moment
to regard them before coming close. Their gauzy skirts
had brushed up from the grass during their promenade
innumerable flies and butterflies which, unable to escape,
remained caged in the transparent tissue as in an aviary.
Angel's eye at last fell upon Tess, the hindmost of the four ;
and, being full of suppressed laughter at their dilemma, she
could not help meeting his glance radiantly.
He came beneath them in the water, which did not rise
over his long boots, and stood looking at the entrapped
flies and butterflies.
" Are you trying to get to chnrcht " he said to Marian,
who was in front, including the next two in his remark,
but avoiding Tess.
" Yes, sir ; and'tis getting late ; and my colors do eofM
THE RALLY Iflt
" Ml carry you through the pool— every Jill of yon. "
The whole four flushed as if one heart beat through
them.
" I think you can't, sir, " said Marian.
" It is the only way for you to get past. Stand still.
Nonsense, you are not too heavy ! I'd carry you all four
together. "
" Now, Marian, attend, " he continued, " and put your
arms round my shoulders, so. Now! Hold on. That's
well done. "
Marian had lowered herself upon his arm and shouldei
as directed, and Angel strode off with her, his slim figure,
as viewed from behind, looking like the mere stem to the
great nosegay suggested by hers. They disappeared round
the curve of the road, and only his sousing footsteps and
the top ribbon of Marian's bonnet told where they were.
In a few minutes he reappeared. Izz Huett was the next
in order upon the bank.
" Here he comes, " she murmured, and they could hear
that her lips were dry with emotion, " and I have to put
my arms round his neck and look into his face as Marian
did. "
" There's nothing in that, " said Teas, quickly.
" There's a time for everything, " continued Izz, unheed-
ing. " A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from em*
bracing j ;the first is now going to be mine. "
" Fie — it is Scripture, Izz ! "
" Yes, " aaid Izz, " I've always a'ear at church for good
verses*
Angel Clare, to whom three-quarters of this performance
was a commonplace act of kindness, now approached Izz ;
she quietly and dreamily lowered herself into his arms, and
Angel methodically marched off with her. When he was
heard returning for the third time, Betty's throbbing heart
eould be almost seen to shake her. He went up to the red-
haired girl, and, while he was seizing her he glanced a'.
182 TESS OF THB D > UBBERTILLES
Tess. His lips could not have pronounced more plainly,
" It " will soon be you and V Her comprehension appeared
in her face ; she could not help it. There was an under-
standing between them.
Poor little Retty, though by far the lightest weight, was
the most troublesome of Clare's burdens. Marian had been
like a sack of meal, or dead weight of plumpness undei
which he had literally staggered. Izz had ridden sensibly
and calmly. Retty was a bunch of hysterics.
However, he got through with the disquieted creature,
deposited her, and returned. Tess could see over the hedge
the distant three in a group, standing as he had placed
them on the next rising ground. It was now her turn.
She was embarrassed to discover that the excitement at the
proximity of Mr. Clare's breath and eyes, which she had
contemned in her companions, was intensified in herself ;
and as if fearful of betraying her secret, she paltered with
him at the last moment.
" I may be able to dim'along the bank, perhaps, sir — I can
dim'better than they. Tou must be so tired, Mr. Clare ! *
" No, no, Tess I " said he, quickly. And almost before she
was aware she was seated in his arms and resting against
his shoulder.
" Three Leahs to get one Rachel, " he whispered.
" They are better women than I, " she replied, magnani-
mously sticking to her resolve. ,
" Not to me, " said AngeL
He felt her grow warm at this ; and they went some
steps in silence.
" I hope I am not too heavy, " she said, timidly.
" Oh no. Yon should lift Marian ! Such a lump 1 Tou
are like an undulating billow warmed by the sun. And all
this fluff of muslin about you is the froth. "
" It is very pretty — if I seem like that to you. "
" Do you know that I have undergone three quarters of
this labor entirely for the sake of the fourth quarter} "
THE RALLY 1«S
«No.»
" I did not expect such an event to-day. "
" Nor I. . . . The water came up so sudden.* .
That the rise in the water was what she understood him
to refer to, the state of her breathing belied. Clare stood
still, and inclined his face towards hers.
" O Tessie I " he said, pressing close against her.
The girl's cheeks burned to the breeze, and she could not
look into his eyes for her emotion. It reminded Angel that
he was somewhat unfairly taking advantage of an acci-
dental position, and he went no further with it No definite
words of love had crossed their lips as yet, and suspension
at this point was desirable now. However, he walked
slowly, to make the remainder of the distance as long as
possible ; but at last they came to the bend, and the rest
of their progress was in full view of the other three. The
dry land was reached, and he set her down.
Her friends were looking with round, thoughtful eyes at
her and him, and she could see that they had been talking
of her. He hastily Dade them farewell, and splashed back
along the stretch of submerged road.
The four moved on together as before, till Marian broke
the silence by saying, " No — in all truth, we have no chance
against her ! D She looked joylessly at Tees.
" What do you mean I * asked the latter.
« He likes'ee best — the very best I We could see it as
he brought'ee. He would have kissed'ee if you had en •
couraged him to do it, ever so little. "
" No, no, " said she.
The gaiety with which they had set out had somehow
vanished ; and yet there was no enmity or malice between
them. They were generous young souls ; they had been
reared in the lonely country nooks where fatalism is a
strong sentiment, and they did not blame her. Such sup-
planting was to be.
Toss's heart ached. There was no concealing from her-
r
tti TES8 OP THE D > UBBERVILLES
self the fact that she loved Angel Clare, perhaps all the
more passionately from knowing that the others had also
Lost their hearts to him . There is contagion in this senti-
ment, especially among women. And yet that same hungry
heart of hers compassionated her friends. Toss's honest
nature had fought against this, but too feebly, and th»
natural result had followed,
" I will never stand in your way, nor in the way of
either of'ee I " she declared to Betty that night in the bed-
room {her tears running down). " I cant help this, my
dear ! I don't think marrying is in his mind at all ; but if
be were even to ask me I should refuse him, as I should
refuse any man. "
" O ! would you f Why f " said wondering Refcty.
" It cannot be. But I will be plain. Putting myself
quite on one side. I don't think he will choose either of you. "
" I have never expected it — thought of it I * moaned
Itetty. " But O I I wish I was dead ! *
The poor child, torn by a feeling which she hardly under-
stood, turned to the two other girls who came upstairs just
then.
" We be friends with her again, " she said to them. ** She
thinks no more of his choosing her than we do. " So the
reserve went off, and they were confiding and warm.
" I don't seem to care what I do now, " said Marian, whose
mood was tuned to its lowest bass. " I was going to marry
a dairyman at Stickleford, who's asked me twice ; but — my
word — I would put an end to myself rather'n be his wife
now ! Why don't ye speak, Izz ! "
" To confess, then, " said Izz, " I made sure to-day that
he was going to kiss me as he held me ; and I stayed still
against his shoulder, hoping and hoping, and never moved
at all. But he did not, I dont like biding here at Talbo-
thays any longer. I shall go home. "
The air of the sleeping-chamber seemed to palpitate with
the hopeless passion of the girls. They writhed feverishly
THE R4LT.Y 16S
under the oppressiveness of an emotion thrust on them by
ernel Nature's law — an emotion which they had neither
expected nor denied. The incident of the day had fanned
the flame that was burning the inside of their hearts out,
and the torture was almost more than they could endure.
The differences which distinguished them as individuals
were abstracted by this passion, and each was but portion
of one organism called sex There was so much frankness
and so little jealousy because there was no hope. Each one
was a girl of fair common sense, and she did not delude
herself with any vain conceits, or deny her love, or give
herself airs, in the idea of outshining the others. The full
recognition of the futility of their infatuation, from a social
point of view ; its purposeless beginning ; its self -bounded
outlook ; its lack of everything to justify its existence in
the eye of civilization (while lacking nothing in the eye of
Nature) ; the one fact that it did exist ecstasizing them to a
killing joy — all this imparted to them a resignation, a dig-
nity, which a practical and sordid expectation of winning
him as a husband would have destroyed^
They tossed and turned on their little beds, and the
cheese-wring dripped monotonously downstairs.
" B'you awake, TesB f " whispered one, half an hour later.
It was Izz Huett's voice.
Teas replied in the affirmative; whereupon also Eetty
and Marian suddenly flung the bedclothes off them, and
" , " So be we 1 "
'I wonder what she is like —'the lady they say his family
have looked out for him. "
" I wonder, " said Izz.
" Some lady looked out for him 1 " gasped Tess, starting.
* I have never heard & that ! *
" Oh yes,'tis whispered, a young lady of his own rank,
ehosen by his family, a Doctor of Divinity's daughter near
his father's parish of Emminster; he don't much care for
her, they say. But he is sure to marry her. "
1(10 .TCaa OF THE DTJBBEBVIIJjKS
They had heard so very little of this, yet it was enough
to build up wretched dolorous dreams upon, there in the
shade of tie night. They pictured all the details of bis
being won round to consent, of the wedding preparations,
of the bride's happiness, of her dress and veil, of her bliss-
ful home with him, when oblivion would have fallen upon
themselves as far as he and their love were concerned.
Thus they talked, and ached, and wept till sleep oharmed
their sorrow away.
After this disclosure Tess nourished no further foolish
thought that there lurked any grave and deliberate import
in Clare's attentions to her. It was a passing summer love
of her face, for love's own temporary sake — nothing more.
And the thorny crown of this sad conclusion was that she
whom he really did prefer in a cursory way to the rest, she
who knew herself to be more impassioned in nature, clev-
erer, more beautiful than they, was in the eyes of society
far less worthy of him than the homelier ones whom he
ignored.
XXIV
Amid the oozing fatness and warm ferments of the Var
Vale, at a season when the rush of juices could almost be
heard below the hiss of fertilization, it was impossible that
the most fanciful love should not grow passionate. The
ready hearts existing there were impregnated by their sur-
roundings.
July passed over their heads, and the Thermidorean
weather which came in its wake seemed an effort on the
part of Nature to match the state of hearts at Talbothays
Dairy. The air of the place, so fresh in the spring and
early summer, was stagnant and enervating now. Its
heaw scents weighed upon them, and at midday the land*
THE RALLY IS?
scape seemed lying in s swoon. Ethiopia scorchings
browned the upper slopes of the pastures, bnt there was
still bright green herbage here where the water-courses
purled. And as Clare was oppressed by the outward heats,
so was he burdened inwardly by a waxing fervor of passion
for the soft and silent Toss.
The rains having passed, the uplands were dry. The
wheels of the dairyman's spring cart, as he sped home from
market, licked up the pulverized surface of the highway,
and were followed by white ribands of dust, as if they had
set a thin powder-train on fire. The cows jumped wildly
over the five-barred barton-gate, maddened by the gadfly ;
Dairyman Crick kept his shirt-sleeves permanently rolled
np past his elbows from Monday till Saturday ; open win-
dows produced no effect in ventilation without open doors,
and in the dairy-garden the blackbirds and thrushes crept
about under the currant-bushes, rather in the manner of
quadrupeds than of winged creatures. The flies in the
kitchen were lazy, teasing, and familiar, crawling about in
unwonted places, on the floor, into drawers, and over the
backs of the milkmaids'hands. Conversations were con.
eerning sunstroke, while butter-making, and still more,
butter-keeping, was a despair.
They milked entirely in the meads for coolness and con-
venience, without driving in the cows. During the day
the animals obsequiously followed the shadow of the small-
est tree at hand, as it moved round the stem with the diur-
nal roll; and when the milkers came they could hardly
stand still for the flies.
On one of these afternoons four or five unmilked cows
chanced to stand apart from the general herd, behind the
corner of a hedge, among them being Dumpling and Old
Pretty, who loved Tes^s hands above those of any other
maid. When she rose from her stool under a finished
eow, Angel Clare, who had been musingly observing her
for some time as she milked, asked her if she would take
l6fe TESS OF THE DTJBBERVILLES
the aforesaid creatures next She Bilently assented, and
with her stool at arm's length, and the pail against her
knee, she went round to where they stood. Soon the wound
of Old Pretty's milk fizzing into the pail came through the
hedge, and then Angel felt inclined to go round the corner
also, to finish off a hard-yielding milcher who had strayed
there, he being now as capable of this as the dairyman
himself.
All the men, and some of the women, when milking, dug
their foreheads into the cows and gazed into the paiL'But
a few-— mainly the younger ones — rested their heads side-
ways. This was Tess Durbeyfleld's habit, her temple press-
ing the milcher's flank, her eyes fixed on the far end of the
meadow with the gaze of one lost in meditation. She was
milking Old Pretty thus, and the sun chancing to be on the
milking side, it shone flat upon her pink-gowned form, and
her white curtain-bonnet, and upon her profile, rendering
it dazzlingly keen, as a cameo cut from the dun background
of the cow.
She did not know that Glare had followed her round,
and that he sat under his cow watching her. The abso-
lute stillness of her head and features was remarkable ; she
might have been in a trance, her eyes open, yet unseeing.
Nothing in the picture moved but Old Pretty's tail and
Tess's pink hands, the latter so gently as to be a rhythmic
pulsation only, conveying the fancy that they were obeying
a merely reflex stimulus, like a beating heart.
How very lovable her face was to him! There was
nothing ethereal about it ; all was real vitality, real warmth,
real incarnation. Yet when all. was thought and felt that
could be thought and felt about her features in general, it
was her month which turned out to be the magnetic pole
thereof. Eyes almost as deep and speaking he had seen
before, and cheeks perhaps as fair'; brows as arched, a chin
and throat almost as shapely; her month he had seen
\othing at all to equal on the face of the earth. To a
THE RALLY 169
young man vith the least fire in him, that little upward
lift in the middle of her top lip was distracting, infatuating,
maddening. He had never before seen a woman's lips and
teeth which forced upon Ms mind, with such persistent
iteration, the old Elizabethan simile of roses filled with
snow. Perfect, he, as a lover, might have called them off-
hand. But no ; they were not perfect. And it was the
touch of the imperfect upon the intended perfect that gave
the sweetness, because it was that which gave the humanity
Clare had studied the curves of those lips so many hours
that he could reproduce them mentally with comparative
ease ; and now, as they again confronted him, clothed with
color and life, they sent an aura over his flesh, a cold
breeze through his nerves, which well-nigh produced a
qualm ; and actually produced, by some mysterious physi-
ological process, a prosaic sneeze.
She then became conscious that he was observing her >
but she would not show it by any change of position, though
the curious dream-like fixity disappeared, and a close eye
might easily have discerned that the rosiness ct her face
slowly deepened, and then faded till only a tinge of it was
left.
The stimulus that had passed into Clare like an annun-
ciation from the sky did not die down. Resolutions, reti-
cences, prudences, fears, fell back like a defeated battalion.
He jumped up from his seat, and, leaving his pail to be
kicked over if the milcher had such a mind, went quickly
towards the desire of his eyes, and, kneeling down beside
her, clasped her in his arms.
Tess was taken completely by surprise, and she yielded J^
to his embrace with unreflecting inevitableness. Having ~^\
seen that it was really her lover who had advanced, and no
one else, her lips parted, and she sank upon him in her mo-
mentary joy, with something very like an ecstatic cry.
He had been on the point of kissing that too tempting
month of hers, but he checked himself, even for tender eon*
170 TESS OF THE lyURBERTILI.ES
science'sake. u Forgive me, TesB dear, " he whispered, " 1
ought to have asked. I— did not know what I was doing.
I do not mean it as a liberty at all — I — am devoted to you,
Teseie, dearest, with all my soul. "
Old Pretty by this time had looked round, puzzled ; and
seeing two people crouching under her where, according
to immemorial custom, there should have been only one,
lifted her hind leg crossly.
" She is angry — she doesnt know what we mean — she'll
kick over the milk 1 " exclaimed Tess, gently striving to free
herself, her eyes concerned with the quadruped's actions,
her heart more deeply concerned with herself and Clare.
" Let me lift you up— lean upon me. "
He raised her from her seat, and they stood together, his
arm still encircling her, Tess's eyes, fixed on distance, be-
gan to fill.
" Why do you cry, my darling T " he said.
" — I dont know I " she murmured regretfully. As she
saw and felt more clearly the position she was in, she be-
came agitated, and tried to withdraw.
" Well, I have betrayed my feeling, Tess, at iast^'said
he, with a curious sigh of desperation, signifying, uncon-
sciously, that his heart had outrun his judgment. " That
I love you dearly and truly I need not say. But I — it shall
go no further now — it distresses you — I am as surprised as
you are. Tou will not think I have presumed upon your
def encelessness — been too quick and unreflecting, will yon f *
" I don't know 1 "
He had reluctantly allowed her to free herself ; and in a
minute or two the milking of each was resumed. Nobody
had beheld the unpremeditated gravitation of the two into
one ; and when the dairyman came round by that screened
nook a few minutes later there was not a sign to reveal
that the markedly sundered pair were more to each other
/than mere acquaintance. Yet, in the interval since Crick's
last view of them, something had occurred which changed
THE BALL - * 171
fiie pivot of the universe for their two natures — whilst it
should last ; something which, had he known its quality,
the dairyman would have despised, as a practical man, yet
which was based upon a more stubborn and resistless ten-
dency than a whole heap of so-called practicalities. A veil
had been whisked aside j the trace of each one's outlook
was to have a new horizon thenceforwvd — for a short
time or f or a loiig.
: > , Google
etou m tomb.
THE CONSEQUENCE
XXV
Clare, restless, went out into the dusk as soon as even-
ing drew on, she who had won him having retired to hep
chamber.
The night was as sultry as the day. There was no cool-
ness after dark unless on the grass. Roads, garden paths,
the house fronts, the barton walls were warm as hearths,
and reflected the noontide temperature into the noctam-
bulistfs face.
He sat on the east gate of the dairy-yard, and knew not
what to think of himself. Feeling had indeed smothered
judgment that day.
Since the sudden embrace, three hours before, the twain
had kept apart She seemed fevered, almost alarmed, at
what had occurred, while the novelty, unpremeditation,
mastery of circumstances disquieted him — palpitating, con-
templative being that he was. He could hardly realize
their true relations to each other as yet, and what their
mutual bearing should be before third parties thencefor-
ward.
Angel Clare had come as pupil to this dairy in the idea
that bis temporary existence here was to be the merest
episode in his life, soon passed through and early forgotten ;
he had come as to a place from which as from a screened
aluove he could calmly view the absorbing world Barging
without, and, apostrophizing it with Walt Whitman —
Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes,
How curious you are to roe ! —
resolve upon a plan for plunging into that world anew.
But, behold, the absorbing scene had been imported hither,
and what had been the engrossing world had dissolved
into an uninteresting, outer dumb show ; while here, in this
apparently dim and nnimpassioned place, novelty had vol-
canically started up, as it had never, for him, started up
elsewhere.
Every window of the house being open, Clare could hear
across the yard each faint and trivial sound of the retiring
household. That dairy-house, so humble, so insignificant,
so purely, to him, a place of constrained sojourn that he
had never hitherto deemed it of sufficient importance to be
reconnoitred as an object of any quality whatever in the
landscape — what was it now I The aged and lichened brick
gables breathed forth " Stay ! " The windows smiled, the
door coaxed and beckoned , tie creeper blushed confederacy
A personality within it was so far-reaching in her influence
as to spread into and make the bricks, mortar, and whole
overhanging sky throb with a burning sensibility. Whose
was this mighty personality 1 A milkmaid's.
It was amazing, indeed, to find how great a matter the
life of the obscure dairy had become to him. And though
new love was to be held partly responsible for this, it was
not solely so. Many besides Angel Clare have learnt that
the magnitude of lives is not as to their external displace*
ments, but as to their subjective experiences. The impres-
sionable peasant leads a larger, fuller, more dramatic life
than the pachydermatous king. Looking at it thus, he
found that life had much the same magnitude here as else-
where.
174 TESS OF THE D»UBBEEVILLES
Despite his heterodoxy, faults, and weaknesses, Clara
was a man with a conscience. Tess was no insignificant
creature to toy with and dismiss ; bat a woman living her
precious life — a life which to herself, who endured or en-
joyed it, possessed as great a dimension as the life of the
mightiest to himself. Upon her sensations the whole world
depended to Tess; through her existence all her fellow-
Dreatnres existed, to her. The universe itself only came
into being for Tess on the particular day in the particular
year in which she was born.
This consciousness npon which he had intruded was the
single opportunity of existence ever vouchsafed to Tess by
an unsympathetic First Causes — her all ; her every and only
chance. How then should he look upon her as of less con-
sequence than himself ; as a pretty trifle to patronizingly
caress and grow weary of; and not deal in the greatest
seriousness with the affection which he knew that he had
awakened in her— so fervid and so impressionable as she
was under her reserve ; in order that it might not agonize
and wreck her!
To encounter her daily in the accustomed manner would
be to develop what had begun. Living in such close rela-
tions, to meet meant to fall into endearment ; flesh and
blood could not resist it ; and, having arrived at no conclu-
sion as to the issue of such a tendency, he decided to hold
aloof for the present from occupations in which they would
be mutually engaged. As yet the barm done was small.
But it was not easy to carry oat the resolution never to
approach her. He was continually burning to be with her ;
driven towards her by every impulse within him.
He thought he would go and see his friends. It might
be possible to sound them npon this. In less than five
months his term here would have ended, and, after a few
additional months spent upon other farms, he would be
" ally equipped in agricultural knowledge, and in a position
start on his own account Would not a farmer want a
THE CONSEQUENCE 170
wife, and should a farmer's wife be a drawing-room wax
figure, or a woman who understood farming? Notwith-
standing the pleasing answer returned to him by the silence,
he resolved to go his journey.
One morning when they sat down to breakfast at Tal*
bothays Dairy, some maid observed that she had not seen
anything of Mr. Clare that day.
" Oh no, " said Dairyman Crick. " Mr. Clare has gone
home to Emminster to spend a few days wi'Ms relations. "
For four impassioned ones around that table the sun-
shine of the morning went out at a stroke, and the birds
muffled their song. But neither girl, by word or gesture,
revealed her inner blankness.
" He's getting on towards the end of Mb time wi'me,*
added the dairyman, with a pMegm which unconsciously
was brutal ; " and so I suppose he is beginning to see about
his plans elsewhere. "
" How much longer is he to stay here 1 " asked Izz Huett,
the only one of the gloom-stricken bevy who could trust her
voice with the question.
The others waited for the dairyman's answer as if their
lives hung npon it ; Betty, with parted lips, gazing on the
table-cloth, Marian with heat added to her redness, Tess
throbbing and looking ont at the meads.
" Well, I cant mind the exact day without looking at my
memorandum-book, " replied Crick, with the same intoler-
able unconcern. " And even that may be altered a bit.
Hell bide to get a little practice in the calving, out at the
straw-yard, for certain. Hell hang on to the end of the
year, I should say. "
Four months or so of torturing ecstasy in Ms society —
of " pleasure girdled about with pain. " After that th«
blackness of unutterable night.
At this moment of the morning Angel Clare was riding
along a narrow lane ten miles distant from the breakfasters,
[76 TESS OP T UB D'URBEBVIJjLES
In the direction of his father's vicarage at Emminster, oar
Tying as well as he could a little basket which contained
some black puddings and a bottle of mead, sent by Mrs
Crick, with her kind respects, to his parents. The white
lane stretched before him, and his eyes were upon it ; bat
they were staring into next year, and not at the lane. He
loved her ; ought he to marry her f Dared he to marry
her 1 What would his parents and his brothers say I What
would he himself say a couple of years after the event I
That would depend upon whether the germs of staunch
comradeship (without which no marriage should be made)
underlay the temporary emotion, or whether it were a sen-
suous joy in her form only, with no substratum of ever-
lastingness.
His father's hill-surrounded little town, the Tudor church-
tower of red stone, the clump of trees near the vicarage,
came at last into view beneath him, and he rode down to-
wards the well-known gate. Casting a glance in the direc-
tion of the church before entering his home, he beheld
standing by the vestry-door a group of girls, of ages be-
tween twelve and sixteen, apparently awaiting the arrival
of some other one, who in a moment became visible in the
shape of a figure, somewhat older than the schoolgirls, wear'
ing a broad-brimmed hat and highly starched cambric morn-
ing-gown, with a couple of books in her hand.
Clare knew her well. He could not be sure that she ob-
served him ; he hoped she did not, so as to render it un-
necessary that he Bhonid go and speak to her, blameless
creature that she was. An overpowering reluctance to
greet her made him decide that she had not seen him. The
yonng lady was Miss Mercy Chant, the only daughter of
his father's neighbor and friend, whom it was his parents'
quiet hope that he might wed some day. She was great at
Antinomianism and Bible-classes, and was plainly going to
hold a class now in the vestry. Clare's mind for a moment
flew back to the impassioned, snn-flusbed, summer-saturated'
THE CONSEQUENCE IT,
heathens in Yar Yale, and to the most living, tenderest, in
tensest of them all.
It was on the impulse of the moment that he had resolved
to trot over to Emminster, and hence had not written to
apprise his mother and father, aiming, however, to arrive
about the breakfast hour, before they should have gone out
to their parish duties. He was a little late, and they had
already sat down to the morning meal. The group at table
jumped up to welcome him as soon as he entered. They
were his father and mother, Ms brother, the Reverend Felix
— curate at a town in the adjoining county, home for the
inside of a fortnight — and his other brother, the Reverend
Cnthbert, the classical scholar, and Fellow and Dean of his
college, down from Cambridge for the long vacation. His
mother appeared in a cap and silver spectacles, and his
father looked what in fact he was — an earnest, God-fearing
man, somewhat gaunt, in years about sixty-five, his pale
face lined with thought and purpose. Over their heads
hung the picture of Angel's half-sister, the eldest of the
family, sixteen years his senior, who had married a mission-
ary and gone out to Africa.
Old Mr. Clave was a clergyman of a type which, within
the last twenty years, has dropped out of contemporary
Hfe with well-nigh startling suddenness. A spiritual de-
scendant in the direct line from Wycliff, Hnss, Luther, Cal-
vin ; an Evangelical of the Evangelicals, a Conversionist,
a man of Apostolic simplicity in life and thought, he had
in his youth made up his mind once for all on the deeper
questions of existence, and admitted no further reasoning
on them thenceforward. He was regarded even by those
of his own date and school of thinking as extreme ; while,
on the other hand, those totally opposed to him were un-
willingly won to admiration for his thoroughness, and for
the remarkable power he showed in dismissing all question-
ing as to principles in his energy for applying them. He
loved Pan! of Tarsus, liked Saint John, hated Saint James
178 TESS OF THE DTJRBERVILLE8
as much as he dared, and regarded with mixed feelings
Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. The New Testament was
less a Christiad than a Panliad to his intelligence — less an
argument than an intoxication. His creed of determinism
was such that it almost amounted to a vice, and quite
amounted, on its negative side, to a renunciative philosophy
which had cousinship with that of Schopenhauer and Leo-
pardi. He despised the Canons and Rubric, swore by the
Articles, and deemed himself consistent with the whole cate-
gory — which in a way he might have been. One thing he
certainly was — sincere.
To the aesthetic, sensuous, pagan pleasure in natural life
and womanhood which his son Angel had lately been experi-
encing in Var Vale, his temper would have been antipathetic
in a high degree had he either by inquiry or imagination been
able to apprehend it. Once upon a time Angel had been
so unlucky as to say to his father, in a moment of irritation,
that it might have resulted far better for mankind if Greece
had been the source of the religion of modern civilization,
and not Palestine ; and his father's grief was of that blank
description which could not realize that there might lurk a
thousandth part of a truth, much less a half truth, or a
whole truth, in such a proposition. He had simply preached
austerely at Angel for a long time after. But the kindness
of his heart was such that he never resented anything for
long, and welcomed his son to-day with a smile which was
as candidly sweet as a child's.
Angel sat down, and the place felt like home-, yet he did
not so much as formerly feel himself one of lie family
gathered there. Every time that he returned thither he
was conscious of this divergence, and since he had last
shared in the vicarage life it had grown even more dis-
tinctly foreign to his own than usual. Ite transcendental
aspirations — still unconsciously based on the geocentric
view of things, a zenithal paradise, a nadiral hell — were as
emote from his own as if they had been the dreams of
THE CONSEQUENCE 179
people on ar.oth.er planet. Latterly he had seen only Life,
felt only the great passionate pulse of existence, un warped,
uncontorted, untrammelled hy those creeds which futUely
attempt to check what wisdom would he content to disci-
pline.
On their part they saw a great difference in him, a grow-
ing divergence from the Angel Clare of former times. It
was chiefly a difference in his manner that they noticed just
now, particularly his brothers. He was getting to behave
like a farmer ; he flung his legs about ; the muscles of his
face had grown more expressive ; his eyes looked as much
information as his tongue spoke, and more. The manner
of the scholar had nearly disappeared ; still more, the man-
ner of the drawing-room young man. A prig would have
said that he had lost culture, and a prude that he had be-
come coarse. Such was the contagion of domiciliary fel-
lowship with the Talbothays nymphs and swains.
(After breakfast he walked with his two brothers, non-
Evangelical, well-educated, hall-marked young men, correct
to their remotest fibre ; such unimpeachable models as are ;
turned out yearly by the lathe of a systematic. tuition.) They'
were both somewhat short-sighted, and when it was the cus-
tom to wear a single eyeglass and string they wore a single
eyeglass and string ; when it was the custom to wear a dou-
ble glass they wore a double glass ; when it was the custom
to wear spectacles they wore spectacles straightway, all
without reference to the particular variety of defect in their
own vision. When " Wordsworth was enthroned they carried
pocket copies ; and when Shelley was belittled they allowed
him to grow dusty on their shelves. When Correggio's
Holy Families were admired they admired Correggio's Holy
Families ; when he was decried in favor of Velasquez they
sedulously followed suit without any personal objection.
If these two noticed Angel's growing social ineptness, he
noticed their growing mental limitations. Felix seemed to
him all Church ; Cuthbert all College. His Diocesan Synod
180 TESS OF THE D»URBERVILLES
and Visitations were the mainsprings of the world to the
one ; Cambridge to the other. Each brother candidly recog-
nized that there were a few unimportant scores of millions
of outsiders in civilized Bociety, persons who were neither
University men nor Churchmen ; but they were to be pitied
and tolerated rather than reckoned with and respected.
They were both dutiful and attentive sons, and were reg-
ular in their visits to their parents. Felix, though an off-
shoot from a far more recent point in the devolution of
theology than his father, was less self-sacrificing and disin-
terested. More tolerant than his father of a contradictory
opinion, in its aspect as a danger to its holder, he was less
ready than his father to pardon it as a slight to his own
teaching. Cuthbert was, upon the whole, the more liberal-
minded, though, with greater subtlety, be had not so much
heart.
As they walked along the hill-side, Angel's former feeling
revived in him — namely, that whatever their advantages by
comparison with himself, neither saw or set forth life as it
really was lived. Perhaps, as with many men, their oppor-
tunities of observation were not so good as their opportuni-
ties of expression. Neither had an adequate conception of
the complicated forces at work outside the smooth and
gentle current in which they and their associates floated.
Neither saw the difference between local truth and univer-
sal truth ; that what the inner world said in their clerical
and academic hearing was quite a different thing from
what the outer world was thinking.
" I suppose it is farming or nothing for you now, my
dear fellow, " Felix was saying, among other things, to his
youngest brother, as he looked through his spectacles at
the distant fields with sad austerity. " And, therefore, we
must make the best of it. But I do entreat you to endeavor
to keep as much as possible in touch with moral ideals,
/Farming, of course, means roughing it literally ; but high
thinking may go with plain living, nevertheless. "
THE CONSEQUENCE 181
" Of course it may, " Baid Angel. " Was it not proved
nineteen hundred years ago — if I may trespass upon your
domain a little t Why should you think, Felix, that I am
likely to drop my high-thinking and moral ideals 1 "
" Well, I fancied, from the tone of your letters and our
conversation — it may be fancy only — that you were some-
how losing intellectual grasp. Hasn't it struck you, Cuth-
bert!''
" Now, Felix, " said Angel, dryly, " we are very good
friends, you know, each of us treading our allotted circles ;
but if it comes to intellectual grasp, I think you, as c con-
tented theologian, had better leave mine alone, and inquire
what has become of yours. "
They returned down the hill to dinner, which was fixed
at any time at which their father's and mother's morning
work in the parish usually concluded. Convenience as re-
garded afternoon callers was the last thing to enter into
the consideration of unselfish Mr. and Mrs. Clare ; though
the three sons were sufficiently in unison on this matter to
wish that their parents would conform a little to modern
notions.
The walk had made them hungry, Angel in particular,
who was now an outdoor man, accustomed to tie profuse
dapes inempUe of the dairyman's somewhat coarsely laden
table. But neither of the old people had arrived, and it
was not till the sons were almost tired of waiting that their
parents entered. The self-denying pair had been occupied
in coaxing the appetites of some of their sick parishioners
whom they, somewhat inconsistently, tried to keep impi-it
oned in the flesh, and had totally forgotten their own.
The family sat down to table, and a frugal meal at cold
viands was deposited before them. Angel looked round for
Mrs. Crick's black puddings, which he had directed tc be
nicely grilled, as they did them at the dairy, and of which
he wished his father and mother to appreciate the marvel-
tons herbal savors as highly as he did himself.
182 TESS OP THE ICUBBERVILLE8
" All ! yon are looking for the black puddings, my dear
toy, " observed Clare's mother. " But I am sure you will
not mind doing without them, as I am sure your father and
I shall not^ when you know the reason. I suggested to
him that we should take Mrs. Crick's kind present to the
children of the man who can earn nothing just now because
of his attacks of delirium tremens ; and he agreed that it
would be a great pleasure to them ; so we did. "
" Of course, " said Angel, cheerfully, looking round for
the mead.
" I found the mead so extremely alcoholic, " continued his
mother, " that it was quite unfit for use as a beverage, but
as valuable as rum or brandy in an emergency j so I have
put it in my medicine-chest. "
" We never drink spirits at this table, on principle, " added
hia father.
" But what shall I tell the dairyman's wife ! " said Angel.
" The truth, of course, " said his father.
" I rather wanted to say we enjoyed the mead and the
black puddings very much. She is a kind, jolly sort of
body, and is sure to ask me directly I return, "
" You cannot if we did not, " Mr. Clare answered, lucidly.
" Ah — no ; though that mead was a drop of pretty tipple. "
" A what 1 "
" O —'tis an expression they use down at Talbothays, "
replied AngeL bloshing. He felt that his parents were right
in their practice if wrong in their want of sentiment, and
said no more.
XXVI
It was not till the evening, after family prayers, that
Angel found opportunity of broaching to his father one
or two subjects near his heart. He had strung himself up
to the purpose while kneeling behind his brothers on the
THE CONSEQUENCE 183
carpet, regarding the soles of their walking-boots and the
little nails in their heels. When the service was over they
went ont of the room with their mother, and Mr. Clare and
himself were left alone.
The young man first discussed with the elder his plan
for the attainment of his position as a farmer on an exten-
sive Bcale — either in England or in the Colonies. His
father then told him that, as he had not been put to the ex-
pense of sending Angel up to Cambridge, he had felt it his
duty to set by a sum of money every year towards the pur.
chase or lease of laud for hini some day, that he might not
feel himself unduly slighted. " As far as worldly wealth
goes, " continued his father, " you will no doubt stand far
superior to your brothers in a few years. "
This considerateness on old Mr. Clare's part led Angel
onward to the other and dearer subject. He observed to
his father that he was then six-and-twenty, and that when
he should start in the farming business he would require
eyes in the back of his head to see to all matters — some
one would be necessary to superintend the domestic labors
of his establishment whilst he was afield. Would it not be
well, therefore, for him to marry I
His father seemed to think this idea not unreasonable ;
and then Angel put the question : " What kind of wife do
you think would be best for me as a thrifty, hard-working
farmer T "
" A truly Christian woman, who will be a help and a
comfort to yon in your goings-out and your comings-in.
Beyond that, it really matters little. Such an one can be
found; indeed, my earnest-minded friend and neighbor,
Dr. Chant "
" But ought she not primarily to be able to milk cows,
churn good butter, make immense cheeses; know how to
set hens and turkeys and rear chickens, to direct a field of
laborers in an emergency, and estimate the value of sheep
sod calves i "
184 TESS OF THE OTJRBEBYILLES
• " Tee ; ft fanner's wife ; yes, certainly. It would be d»
(arable. " Mr. Clare, the elder, had plainly never thought
of these points before. " I was going to add, " he said,
" that, for a pore and saintly woman, you will not find one
more to your true advantage, and certainly not more to
your another's mind and my own, than your friend Mercy,
whom you used to show a certain interest in. It is trne
that my neighbor Chant's daughter has lately caught up
he fashion of the younger clergy round about us for dec-,
orating the Communion-table — altar, as I was shocked to
near her call it one day — with flowers and other stuff on
festival occasions. But her father, who is quite as opposed
to such flummery as I, says that can be cured. It is a
mere girlish outbreak which, I am sure, will not be per-
manent. "
" Yes, yes: Mercy is good and devout, I know. But
father, don't you think that a young woman equally pure
and virtuous as Miss Chant, but one who, in place of that
lady's ecclesiastical accomplishments, understands the duties
of farm life as well as a farmer himself, would suit me in-
finitely better 1 "
His father persisted in his conviction that a knowledge
of a farmer's wife's duties came second to a Pauline view
of humanity ; and the impulsive Angel, wishing to honor
his father's feelings and to advance the cause of his heart
at the same time, grew specious. He said that fate or
Providence had thrown in his way a woman who possessed
every qualification to be the helpmate of an agriculturist
and was decidedly of a serious turn of mind. He would
not say whether or not she had attached herself to the
Bound Low Church School of his father; but she would
probably be open to conviction on that point ; she was i
regular church-goer of simple faith ; honest-hearted, recep-
tive, intelligent, graceful to a degree, chaste as a vestal
and, in personal appearance, exceptionally beautiful.
u Is she of a family such as you would care to marry intc
THE CONSEQUENCE ISO
—a lady, in short 1 " asked bis startled mother, who had
crane softly into the study during the conversation
" She is not what in common parlance is called s lady, "
said Angel, unflinchingly, " for she is a cottager's daughter
as I am proud to say. But she is a lady, nevertheless — in
feeling and nature. "
" Mercy Chant is of a very good family.* "
" Pooh! — what's the advantage of that, mother? " said
Clare, quickly. " How is family to avail the wife of a man
who has to rough it as I have, and shall have to do * "
" Mercy is accomplished. And accomplishments have
their charm, " returned his mother, looking at nun through
tier silver spectacles.
" As to external accomplishments, what will be the use
of them in the life I am going to lead? — while as to her
reading, I can take that in hand She'll be apt pupil
enough, as you would say if you knew her. She's brimful
of poetry — actualized poetry, if I may nee the expression.
She lives what paper-poets only write. . . . And she is an
unimpeachable Christian, I am sure ; perhaps of the very
tribe, genus, and species yon desire to propagate. "
" O Angel, you are mocking ! "
" Mother, I beg pardon. But as she really does attend
church almost every Sunday morning, and is a good
Christian girl, I am sure yon will tolerate any social short-
comings for the sake of that quality, and feel that I may do
worse than choose her. " Angel almost unconsciously waxed
enthusiastic on that rather automatic orthodoxy in his be-
loved Tees, which (never dreaming that it might star. " 1 him
m such good stead) he had been prone to slight w & en ob-
serving it practised by her and the other milkmaids — less
on account of his own scepticism than because of its obvious
unreality in lives essentially naturalistic.
In their sad doubts as to whether their son had himself
any right whatever to the title he claimed for the unknown
young woman. Mr. and Mrs. Clare began to feel it as an
186 TES8 OP THE DTEBERV1LLES
advantage not to be overlooked that she at least was sound
in her views ; especially as the conjunction of the pair must
have arisen by chance or Providence ; for Angel never
would have made orthodoxy a condition of his choice.
They said finally that it was better not to act in a hurry,
but that they would not object to see her.
Angel therefore refrained from declaring more particu-
lars now. He felt that, single-minded and self-sacrificing
as his parents were, there yet existed certain latent prej-
udices of theirs, as middle-class people, which would re-
quire some tact to overcome. For though legally at liberty
to do as he chose, and though their daughter-in-law's quali-
fications could make no practical difference to their lives,
in the probability of her living far away from them, he
wished for affection's sake not to wound their sentiment in
the most important decision of his life.
He observed his own inconsistencies in dwelling upon
accidents in Teas's life as if they were vital features. It was
for herself that he loved Tess ; her soul, her heart, her sub-
stance — not for her skill in the dairy, her aptness as his
scholar, and certainly not for her simple, formal faith-pro-
fession. Her unsophisticated, open-air existence required
no varnish of conventionality to make it palatable to him ,
He held that education had as yet hut little affected the
beats of emotion and impulse on which domestic happiness
depends. It was probable that, in the lapse of ages, im-
proved systems of moral and intellectual training would
appreciably, perhaps considerably, elevate the involuntary,
and even the unconscious, instincts of human nature ; but
np to the present day, culture, as far as he could see, might
be said to have affected only the mental epiderm of those
lives which had been brought under its influence. ThiB
belief was confirmed by his experience of women, which,
having latterly been extended from the cultivated middle-
class into the rural community, had taught him how much
'ess was the intrinsic difference between the good and wis*
THE CONSEQUENCE 181
woman of one social stratum, and the good and wise wo-
man of another social stratum, than between the good and
bad, the wise and the foolish, of the same stratum or class.
It was the morning of his departure. His brothers had
already left the vicarage to proceed on a walking tour in
the north, whence one was to return to his college, and the
other to his curacy. Angel might have accompanied them,
but preferred to rejoin his sweetheart at Talbothays. He
would have been an awkward member of the party ; for,
though the most appreciative humanist, the most ideal re-
ligionist, even the finest theologian and Christologist of the
three, there was alienation in the standing consciousness
that his squareness would not fit the round hole that had
been prepared for him. To neither Felix nor Cuthbert had
he ventured to mention Tess.
His mother made him sandwiches, and his father accom-
panied him, on his own mare, a little way along the road
Having fairly well advanced his own affairs, Angel listened
in a willing silence, as they jogged on together through the
shady lanes, to his father's account of his parish difficulties,
and the coldness of brother clergymen whom he loved, be-
cause of his strict interpretations of the New Testament
by the light of what they deemed a pernicious Calvinistio
doctrine. " Pernicious ! " said Mr. Clare, with genial scorn ;
and he proceeded to recount experiences which would show
the absurdity of that idea. He told of wondrous conver-
sions of evil livers of which he had been the instrument,
sot only amongst the poor, but amongst the rich and well-
to-do- j and he also candidly admitted many failures.
As an instance of the latter, he mentioned the case of a
young upstart squire named lyiTrberville, living some forty
miles off, in the neighborhood of Trantridge.
" Not one of the ancient D'Urbervilles of Kingsbere and
other places T " asked his son. " That curiously historic,
worn-out family, with its ghostly legend of the coach-and-
hwl "
IBS TESS OF THE D'UHBEB VILLUS
« Oh no. The original DTJrbervilles decayed and disap
peared sixty or eighty years ago — at least, I believe so.
This seems to be a new family which has taken the name;
for the credit of the former knightly line, I hope they are
spurious, I'm sure. But it is odd to hear you express in-
terest in old families. I thought yon set less store by them
even than I. "
" You misapprehend me, father; you often do, " said
Angel, with a little impatience. " Politically I am sceptical
as to the virtue of their being old. Some of the wise even
among themselves'exclaim against their own succession,'
as Hamlet puts it ; hut lyrically, dramatically, and even his-
torically, I am tenderly attached to them. "
This distinction, though by no means a subtle one, was
yet too subtle for Mr. Clare the elder, and he went on with
the story he had been about to relate ; which was that after
the death of the senior so-called D'UrberviUe the young
man developed the most reckless passions, though he had
an afflicted mother whose condition should have made him
know better. A knowledge of his career having come to
the ears of Mr. Clare, when he was in that part of the
country preaching missionary sermons, he boldly took oc-
casion to speak to him point-blank on his spiritual state.
Though he was a stranger, occupying another's pulpit, he
had felt this to be his duty, and took for his text the
words from St. Luke, " Thou fool, this night thy soul shall
be required of thee. " The young man much resented this
directness of attack, and in the war of words which followed
when they met he did not scruple to publicly insult Mr.
Clare, without respect for his gray hairs.
Angel flushed with distress. " Dear father, " he said,
sadly, " I wish you would not expose yourself to such
gratuitous pain from scoundrels ! "
" Pain ? " said his father, his rugged face shining in the
ardor of self-abnegation. " The only pain to me was pain
on his account, poor, foolish young man. Do you suppow
THE CONSEQUENCE 189
his incensed words could give me any pain, or even his
blows t'Being reviled we bless ; being persecuted we suf
fer it ; being defamed we entreat ; we are made as the filth
of the world, and as the off scouring of all things unto this
day/ Those ancient and noble words to the Corinthians
are strictly true at this present hour. "
" Not blows, father! He did not proceed to blows! "
" No, he did not. Though I have borne blows from men
fat a mad state of intoxication. "
" No! "
" A dozen times, my boy. What then T I have saved
them from the guilt of murdering their own flesh and blood
thereby ; and they have lived to thank me, and praise God. "
" May this young man do the same ! " said Angel, fer-
vently. " But I fear otherwise, from what you say. "
" Well hope, nevertheless, " said Mr. Clare. " And I con-
tinue to pray for him, though on this side of the grave we
shall probably never meet again. But, after all, one of
those poor words of mine may spring up in his heart as a
good seed some day. "
Now, as always, Clare's father was sanguine as a child ,
and though the younger could not accept his parent's narrow
dogma, he revered his practice, and recognized the hero
under the pietist. Perhaps he revered his fathers practice
even more now than ever, seeing that, in the question of
making Tess his wife, his father had not once thought of
inquiring whether she were well provided or penniless.
The same unworldliness was what had necessitated Angel's
getting a living as a fanner, and would probably keep his
brothers in the position of poor parsons for the term of
their activities ; yet Angel admired it none the less. In-
deed, despite his own heterodoxy, Angel often felt that he
was nearer to his father on the human side than either of
his brethren.
TES8 OP THE LVURBEBVILLES
xxvn
An up-hill and down-dale ride of twenty-odd miles
through a clear, garish midday atmosphere brought him in
the afternoon to a detached knoll a mile or two west of
Taloothays, whence he again looked into that green trough
of sappiness and humidity, the valley of the River Var.
Immediately he began to descend from the upland to the
fat alluvial soil below the atmosphere grew heavier, the
languid perfume of the summer fruits, the mists, the hay,
the flowers, formed therein a vast pool of odor which at
this hour seemed to make the animals, the very bees and
butterflies, drowsy. Clare was now so familiar with the
spot that he knew the individual cows by their names when,
a long distance off, he saw them dotted abont the meads.
It was with a sense of luxury that he was conscious of his
recently acquired power of viewing life here from its inner
Bide, in a way that had been quite foreign to him in his
student-days ; and, much as he loved his parents, he could
not help being aware that to come here, as now, after an
experience of home-life, affected him like throwing off splints
and bandages ; even the one customary curb on the humors
of English rural societies being absent in this place, Tal-
bothays having no resident landlord.
Not a human being was out-of-doors at the dairy. The
denizens were all enjoying the usual afternoon nap of an
hour or so which the exceedingly early hours kept in sum-
mer-ttme rendered a necessity to those engaged in the
butter-making trades. At the door the wood-hooped pails,
sodden and bleached by infinite scrnbbings, hung like hats
on a stand upon the forked and peeled limb of the oak
fixed there for that purpose ; all of them ready and dry for
be evening milking. Angel entered, and went through the
THE CONSEQUENCE 19J
silent passages of the house to the back quarters, where he
listened for a moment. Sustained snores came from the
cart-house, where some of the men were lying down ; the
grant and squeal of sweltering pigs arose from the still
farther distance. The large-leaved rhubarb and cabbage
plants slept too, their broad limp surfaces hanging in the
sun like half -closed umbrellas.
He unbridled and fed his horse, and as he re-entered the
house the clock struck three. Three was the afternoon
skimming-hour ; and, shortly after the stroke, Clare heard
the creaking of the floor-boards above, and then the touch
of a descending foot on the stairs. It was Tess's, who in
another moment came down before his eyes.
She had not heard him enter, and hardly realized his pres
ence there. She was yawning, and he saw the red interior
of her mouth as if it had been a snake's. She had stretched
one arm so high above her coiled-up cable of hair, that he
could see its delicacy above the sunburn; her face was
flushed with sleep, and her eyelids hung heavy over their
pupils. The brim-fulness of her nature breathed from her.
It was a moment when a woman's soul is more incarnate
than at any other time ; when the most spiritual beauty in-
clines to the corporeal ; and sex takes the outside place in
her presentation.
Then those eyes flashed brightly through their filmy
heaviness, before the remainder of her face was well awake.
With an oddly compounded look of gladness, shyness, and
surprise, she exclaimed, " Mr. Clare, how you frightened
me — I *
There had not at first been time for her to think of the
changed relations which his declaration had introduced;
but the full sense of the matter rose up in her face when
she encountered Clare's tender look as he stepped forward
to the bottom stair.
" Dear, darling Tessie ! " he whispered, putting his arm
round her, and his face to hers. " Don't, for Heaven's sake.
192 TESS OF THE DTBBERVtLLES
Mister me any more. I have hastened back ao soon be
cause of you ! "
Tess's excitable heart beat against his by way of reply;
and the~e they stood upon the red-brick floor of the entry,
the sun slanting in by the window of the front room and
through the doorway upon his back, as he held her tightly
to bis breast, upon her declining face, upon the blue veins
of her temple, upon her arm, and her neck, and into the
depths of her hair. Having been lying down in her clothes,
she was warm as a sunned cat.
At first she would not look straight up at him, but her
eyes soon lifted, and his met their violet-black deepness,
while she regarded him as Eve at her second waking might
have regarded Adam.
" I have to go skimming, " she pleaded, " and I have ony
old Deb to help me to-day. Mrs. Crick is gone to market
wi'Mr. Crick, and Eetty is not well, and the others ai«
gone out somewhere, and won't be home till milking. "
As they retreated to the milk-house, Deborah Fyander
appeared on the stairs.
" I have come back, Deborah, " said Mr. Clare, upwards.
" So I can help Tess with the skimming ; and, as you are
tired, I am sure, you needn't come down till milking-time. "
Possibly the Talbothays milk was not very thoroughly
skimmed that afternoon Tess was in a dream, wherein
familiar objects appeared as having light and shade and
position, but no particular outline. Every time she held
the skimmer under the pump to cool it for the work her
hand trembled, the ardor of his affection being so palpable
that she seemed to flinch under it like a plant in too burn-
ing a sun.
Then he pressed her again to his side, and when she had
done running her forefinger round the leads to cut off the
cream-edge, he cleaned it in nature's way, for the uncon-
strained manners of Talbothays Dairy came convenient
THE CONSEQUENCE t»
" I may as. well say it now as later, dearest, " he resumed,
gently. " T wish to ask yon something of a very practical
nature, which I have been thinking of ever since that day
last week in the meads. I shall soon want to many, and,
being a farmer, yon see I shall require for my wife a wo
man who knows all about the management of farms Will
yon be that woman, Tessie I " He put it in that way that
ahe might not think he had yielded to an impulse of whiec
his head would disapprove.
She turned quite careworn. She had bowed to the in
evitable result of proximity, the necessity of loving him ;
but she had not calculated upon this sudden corollary
which, indeed, Clare had pat before her without quite mean
ing himself to do it so soon. With pain that was like the
bitterness of dissolution, she murmured the words of her
indispensable and sworn answer — her indispensable ana
sworn answer as an honorable woman. " Mr Glare — I
cannot be your wife — I cannot be! " The sound of her own
decision seemed to break Tess's very heart, and she bowed
her face in her grief.
" But, Tess ! " he said, amazed at her reply, and holding
her still more greedily close. " Do you say not Surely
yon love met "
" Oh yes, yes ! And I would rather be yours than any-
body's in the world, " returned the sweet, honest voice of
the distressed girl. " Bnt J cannot marry you. "
" Teas, " he said, holding her at arm's length, " yon are
engaged to marry some one else t'"
" No, no ! "
'Then why do you refuse met "
" I don't want to marry, I have not thought o'doing it
I cannot. I only want to love you. "
" Bat why t "
Driven to subterfuge, she stammered : " Your father is a
parson, and your mother wouldn't like yon to many sutib
as me. She will want you to marry a lady. "
194 TESS OF THE D-UBBEBVILLES
" Nonsense — I have spoken to them both. That was
partly why I went home. "
" I feel I cannot — never, never I " she echoed.
" Is it too sudden to be asked thus, my Pretty 1 *
" Tes — I did not expect it. "
" If you will let it pass, please, Tessie, I will give yon
time, " he said. " It was very abrupt to come home and
ipeak to you all at once. I'll not allude to it again for a
n-hile. " She again took np the shining skimmer, held it
beneath the pump, and began anew. But she could not^
as at other times, hit the exact under-surf ace of the cream
with the delicate dexterity required, try as she might;
sometimes she was cutting down into the milk, sometimes
in the air. She could hardly see, her eyes having filled
with two blurring tears drawn forth by a grief which, to
this her best friend and dear advocate, she could never
explain.
" I cant skim — I can't! " she said, tnrning away from
him.
Not to agitate and hinder her any longer, the gentle
Clare began talking in a more general way. " You quite
misapprehend my parents. They are the most simple-
mannered people alive, and quite unambitious. They are
two of the few remaining Evangelical school. Tessie, are
you an Evangelical 1 "
" I don't know. "
" Ton go to church very regularly, and our parson here
is not very High, they tell me. "
Tess's ideas on the views of the parish clergyman, whom
she heard every week, seemed to be rather more vague than
Clare's, who had never heard him at all. " I wish I could!
fix my mind on what I hear more firmly than I do, " she re-
marked. " It is often a great sorrow to me. "
She spoke so unaffectedly that Angel was sure in hu
heart that his father could not object to her on religious
■rounds, even though she did not know whether her prhv
THE CONSEQUENCE IS*
*iples were High, Low, or Broad. He himself knew that,
in reality, the confused beliefs which she held, apparently
imbibed in childhood, were, if anything, Traotarian as to
phraseology, and Pantheistic as to essence. Confused or
otherwise, to disturb them was his last desire.
Leave thon thy sister, -when she prays,
Her early Heaven, her happy views;
Nor thou with ehadow'd hint confuse
A life that leads melodious days.
He had occasionally thought the counsel less honest than
musical ; but be gladly conformed to it now.
He spoke further of the incidents of his visit, of hie
father's mode of life, of his zeal for his principles; she
grew serener, and the undulations disappeared from her
ski mining ; as she finished one lead after another, he f oh
lowed her, and drew the plugs for letting down the milk,
" I fancied you looked a little downcast when you came
in, " she ventured to observe, anxious to keep away from
the subject of herself.
" Yes — well, my father has been talking a good deal to
me of his troubles and difficulties, and the subject always
tends to depress me. He is so zealous that he gets many
snubs and bufletings from people of a different way of
thinking from himself, and I don't like to hear of such
humiliations to a man of his age, the more particularly as
t don't think earnestness does any good when carried so
,-ar. He has been telling me of a very unpleasant scene in
which he took part quite recently. He went as the deputy
of some missionary society to preach in the neighborhood
of Trantridge, a place forty miles from here, and made it
bis business to expostulate with a young rake-hell he met
with somewhere about there — son of some landowner no
that way, who has an afflicted mother. My father ad-
dressed himself to the gentleman point-blank, and there was
quite a disturbance. It was very foolish of my father, 1
196 TBSS OP THE DTJItBERVILLES
must say, to intrude his conversation upon a stranger when
the probabilities were so obvious that it would be useless.
But whatever he thinks to be his duty, that he'll do, in
season or out of season ; and, of course, he makes many
enemies not only among the absolutely vicious, but among
the easy-going, who hate being bothered. He says he
glories in what happened, and that good may be done in-
directly ; but I wish he would not so wear himself out now
that he is getting old, and would leave such pigs to their
wallowing. "
Toss's look had grown hard and worn, and her ripe
mouth tragical; hut she no longer showed any tremulous-
ness. Clare's revived thoughts of his father prevented him
noticing her particularly ; and so they went on down the
white row of liquid rectangles till they had finished and
drained them off, when the other maids returned, and took
the pails, and Deb came to scald out the leads for the new
milk. As Teas withdrew, to go a field to the cows, he said
to her softly, " And my question, Tessie ? *
" Oh no — no ! * replied she, with grave firmness, as one
who h( ftrd anew the moaning and turmoil of her own past
in the allusion to Alec IVUrberville. " It can't be ! "
She went out towards the mead, joining the other milk
maids with a bound, as if trying to make the open air drive
away her sad constraint. All the girls drew onward to the
spot where the cows were grazing in the farther mead, the
bevy advancing with the bold grace of wild animals — the
reckless nnchastened motion of women accustomed to un-
limited space — in which they abandoned themselves to the
air as a swimmer to the wave It Beemed natural enough
to him now that Tess was again in sight to choose a mate
from unoonstrainMi Nature, and not from the abodes oi
Art.

XXV11I
Her refusal, though unexpected, did not permanently
daunt dare. His experience of women was great enongh
for him to be aware that the negative often meant nothing
more than the preface to the affirmative ; and it was little
enough for him not to know that in the manner of the pres-
ent negative there lay a great exception to the dallyings of
coyness. That she had already permitted him to make love
to her he read as an additional assurance, not folly trow-
ing that in the fields and pastures to " sigh gratis " is by no
means disesteemed; love-making being here more often ac-
cepted inconsiderately and for its own sweet sake than in
the carking, anxious homes of the ambitious, where a girl's
craving for an establishment paralyzes her natural thought
of a passion as an end.
" Tess, why did you say'no'in such a positive way t " he
Miked her in the course of a few days.
She started. " Don't ask me. I told you — partly. I am
aot good enough — not worthy enough. "
" How f Not fine lady enough t "
" Yes — something like that, " murmured she. " Your
Mends would scorn me. "
" Indeed, you mistake them — my father and mother. As
for my brothers, I don't care * He clasped his fingers
behind her back to keep her from slipping away. " Now-
yon did not mean it, Sweet T — I am sure you did not ! You
have made me so restless that I cannot read, or play, or do
anything. I am in no hurry, Tess, but I want to know-
to hear from your own warm lips — that you will some day
be mine— any time yon may choose ; but some day t "
She could only shake her head and Took away from him.
Clare regarded her attentively, conned the characters of
198 TESS OF TOE D-UBBERYILLES
Tier face as if they had been hieroglyphics. The denial
seemed real. " Then I ought not to hold you in this way —
ought IT I have no right to yon — no right to seek out
where you are, or walk with yon ! Honestly, Teas, do you
love any other man ! "
" How can yon ask T " she said, with continued self-sup-
" I almost know that yon do not. But then, why do you
rep also me I "
" I don't repulse you. I like yon to — tell me yon love
me : and yon may always tell me as yon go about with me
— oh yes, you may — and never offend me 1 *
" But yon will not accept me as a husband 1 "
" Ah, that's different — it is for your good, indeed, my
dearest ! O, believe me, it is only for your sake ! I don't
like to give myself the great happiness o* promising to be
yours in that way, because — because I am sure I ought not
to do it "
" But you will make me happy ! ■
" Ah — yon think so, but you don't know I *
At such times as this, apprehending the grounds of her
refusal to be her sense of incompetence for the position
proper to the wife of a man like himself, he would then Bay
that she was wonderfully well informed and versatile—
which was certainly true, her natural quickness, and her ad-
miration for him, having led her to pick up his vocabulary,
his accent, and fragments of his knowledge, to a surprising
extent After these tender contests, as they may be called,
and her victory, she would go away by herself under the
remotest cow, if at milking-time, or into the sedge, or into
her room, if at a leisure interval, and mourn silently, not a
minute after an apparently phlegmatic negative.
The straggle was so fearful: her own heart was so
■strongly on the side of his — two ardent hearts against one
poor little conscience — that she tried to fortify her resoin,
ion by every means in her power. She had come to Taj
1 THE CONSEQUENCE 199
bothays with a made-tip mind. On no account could she
agree to a step which, by reason of her history, might cause
bitter rneing to her husband for his blindness in wedding
her. And she held that what her conscience had decided
for tier when her mind was unbiassed ought not to be over-
ruled now.
For two or three days no more was said. She guessed
from the sad countenances of her chamber companions
that they regarded her not only as the favorite, but as the
chosen ; bnt they could see for themselves that she did not
put herself in his way.
Tess had never before known a time in which the thread
of her life was so distinctly twisted of two strands, positive
pleasure and positive pain. At the next cheese-making the
pair were again left alone together. The dairyman him-
self had been lending a hand ; but Mr. Crick, as well as his
wife, seemed latterly to have acquired a suspicion of mutual
interest between these two, though they walked so circum-
spectly that suspicion was but of the faintest. Anyhow,
the dairyman left them to themselves.
They were breaking up the massee of curd before putting
them into the vats. The operation resembled the act of
crumbling bread on a large scale ; and amid the immacu-
late whiteness of the curds Tess Durbeyfleld's hands showed
themselves of the pinkness of the rose. Angel, who was
filling the vats with his handfuls, suddenly ceased, and laid
his hands flat upon hers. Bending lower, he kissed the in-
side vein of her soft, bare arm.
Although the early September weather was sultry, her
arm, from dabbling in the curds, was as cold and damp to
his mouth as a new-gathered mushroom, and tasted of the
whey. But she was such a sheaf of susceptibilities that her
pulse was accelerated by the touch, her blood was driven to
her finger-ends, and the cool arms flushed hot. Then, as
though her heart had said, " Is coyness longer necessary f
- Truth is truth between ma n and woman, as between man
300 rESS OF THE DTJBBERVILLES
and man, " she turned np her eyes, and they beamed dfl
votedly into his as her lip rose in a tender half-smile.
" Do you know why I did that, Tess t " he said.
" Because you love me very much, " she replied.
" Tes, and as a preliminary to a new entreaty. "
" Not again ! " She looked a sudden fear that her resist
ance might break down under her own desire.
" Tess 1 " he went on, " I cannot think why you are so
tantalizing. Why do you disappoint me so T You seem
almost like a coquette, upon my life you do — a coquette of
the first urban water ! They blow hot and blow cold, just
as you do ; and it is the very last sort of thing to expect
to find in a retreat like Talbothays. .■ , . And yet, dearest, "
be quickly added, observing how the remark had cut her,
''I know you to be the most honest, spotless creature that
ever lived. So how can I suppose you a flirt 1 Tees, why
dont you like the idea of being my wife, if you love me as
you seem to do ) ■
" I have never said I dont like the idea, and I never could
say it ; because — it isn't true ! * The stress now getting be-
yond endurance, her lip quivered, and she was obliged'.c
go away.
Glare was so pained and perplexed that he ran after and
caught her in the passage. " lell me, tell me ! " he said,
passionately clasping her, in forgetfulness of his curdy
hands, " do tell me that you wont belong to anybody but
me! "
" I will, I will tell you 1 * she exclaimed. " And I wiD
give you a complete answer, if you will let me go now, Mr.
Clare. I will tell you my experiences — all about myself—
alii "
" Tour experiences, dear ; yes, certainly ; any number. "
He expressed the assen*'in loving satire, looking into her
face. " My Tess has, no doubt, almost as many experiences
as that wild convolvulus out there on the garden hedge,
that opened itself this morning for the first time. TeU BM
THE CONSEQUENCE 801
anything, bat don't use that wretched expression any more
about not being worthy of me. "
" I will not And I'll give you my reasons to-morrow —
nest week *
" Say on Sunday! "
" Yes, on Sunday. "
At last she got away, and did not stop in her retreat till
she was in the thicket of pollard willows at the lower side
of the barton, where she eonld be quite unseen. Here Tess
flung herself down upon the rustling undergrowth of spear-
grass, as upon a bed, and remained crouching in palpitating
misery broken by momentary shoots of joy, which her fears
about the ending could not altogether suppress.
Jn reality, she was drifting into acquiescence. Every
see-saw of her breath, every wave of her blood, every pulse
singing in her ears, was a voice that joined with Nature in
revolt against her scrupulousness. Reckless, inconsiderate
acceptance of him ; to close with him at the altar, revealing
nothing, and chancing discovery at that first act in her
drama; to snatch ripe pleasure before the iron teeth of
pain could have time to shut upon her ; that was what love
counselled ; and in almost a terror of ecstasy Tess confusedly
divined that, despite her many months of lonely self-chas-
tisement, wrestlings, communings, schemes to lead a future
of austere isolation, love's counsel would prevail.
The afternoon advanced, and still she remained among
the willows. She heard the rattle of the pails when taken
down from the forked stands ; the " waow-waow ! " which
accompanied the getting together of the cows. But she did
not go to the milking. They would see her agitation ; and
the dairyman, thinking the cause to be love alone, would
good-naturedly tease her; and that harassment could not
be borne.
Her lover must have guessed her overwrought state, and
invented some excuse for her non-appearance, for no in-
quiries were made or calls given. At half-past six the sun
202 TESS 07 THE D'URBERVILLES
settled down upon the levels, with the aspect of a great
forge in the heavens, and presently a monstrous pumpkin-
like moon arose on the other hand. The pollard willows,
tortured out of their natural shape by incessant (shoppings,
became spiny-haired monsters as they stood up against it.
She went in — and upstairs — without a light.
It was now Wednesday. Thursday came, and Angel
looked thoughtfully at her from a distance, but intruded in
no way upon her. The indoor milkmaids, Marian and the
rest* seemed to guess that something definite was afoot, for
they did not force any remarks upon her in the bed-cham-
ber. Friday passed ; Saturday. To-morrow was the day.
" I shall gie way — I shall say yes — I shall let myself
marry him — I cannot help itt " she suddenly whispered,
with her hot face to the pillow that night, on hearing one
of the other girls sigh his name in her sleep. " I can't
bear to let anybody have him but me ! Yet it is a wrong
to him, and may kill him when he knows 1 my heart—
0—0—01'
* Now, who mid ye think I've heard news o* this morn-
ing I " said Dairyman Crick, as he eat down to breakfast
next day, with a riddling gaze round upon the munching
men and maids. " Now just who mid ye think I "
One guessed, and another guessed. Mrs. Crick did not
guess, because she knew already.
" Well,''said the dairyman, "'tis that slack-twisted'hore'a.
bh-d of a feller, Jack Dollop. He's lately got married to a
widow-woman,''
" Not Jack Dollop t A villain I — to think o'that t * said
i milker.
The name entered quickly into Tess Durbeyfield's con-
THE CONSEQUENCE 308
i, for it was the name of the lover who had wronged
his sweetheart, and had afterwards been so roughly used
by the young woman's mother in the butter-churn.
" And has he married the valiant matron's daughter, as
he promised t " asked Angel Clare, absently, as he turned
over the newspaper he was reading at the little table to
which he was always banished by Mrs. Crick in her sense
of his gentility.
" Not he, sir. Never meant to, " replied the dairyman.
" As I say, tis a widow-woman, and she had money, it seems
— fifty pounds a year or so ; and that was all he was after.
They were married in a great hurry; and then she told
him that by marrying she had lost her fifty pounds a year.
Just fancy the state < > ! my gentleman's mind at that news !
Never such a cat-and-dog life as they've been leading ever
since ! Serves him well beright. But onluckily the poor
woman gets the worst o't. "
" Well, the silly body should liave told him sooner that
the ghost of her first man would trouble him, " said Mrs.
Crick.
" Ay, ay, " responded the dairyman, indecisively. " StilL
yon can see exactly how it was. She wanted a home, and
didn't like to run the risk of losing him, Don't ye think
that was something like it, maidens T " He glanced towards
the row of girls.
" She ought to ha'told him just before they went to
church, when he could hardly have backed oat, " exclaimed
Marian.
" Tes, she ought, " agreed Izz.
" She must have seen what he was after, and should ha'
refused him ! " cried Retty, spasmodically.
" And what do yon say, my dearf " asked the dairyman
of Tess. " Ought women to tell everything at such times I "
" I think she ought — to have told him the true state of
things — or else refused him — I dont know, " replied Tess,
the bread-and-butter choking her.
9M TESS OS 1 T HE- uttrmcr v n .t .wa
* Be cust if I'd have done either oV said Beck Knibbs,
a married helper from one of the cottages. " All's fair in
love and war. I'd ha'married en just as she did, and if
he'd said two words to me about not telling hipi beforehand
anything whatsomdever about my first chap that I hadn't
chose to tell, I'd ha'knocked him down wi'the rolling-pin —
a scram little fellow like he ! Any woman could do it. "
The laughter which followed this sally was supplemented
only by a sorry smile, for form's sake, from Tess. " What
was comedy to them was tragedy to her ; and she could
hardly bear their mirth. She soon rose from table, and, with
an impression that Glare would follow her, she went along
a little wriggling path, now stepping to one Bide of the ir-
rigating channels, and now to the other, till she stood by
the main stream of the Var. Men had been cutting the
water-weeds higher up the river, and masses of them were
floating past her — moving islands of green crowfoot, on
which she might almost have ridden ; long locks of which
weed had lodged against the piles driven to keep the cows
from crossing.
Yes, there was the pain of it. This question of a woman
telling her story — the heaviest of crosses to herself — seemed
bat amusement to others. It was as if people should laugh
at martyrdom.
" Tess ! " came from behind her, and Clare sprang across
the gully, alighting beside her feet. " My wife — soon ! "
" No, no ; I cannot. For your sake, dear Mr. Clare ; for
your sake, I say no. "
" Tess! "
" Still I say no ! " she repeated.
Not expecting this, he had put his arm lightly round her
waist the moment after speaking, beneath her hanging tail
of hair. {The younger dairymaids, including Tess, break-
fasted with their hair loose on Sunday mornings, before
building it up extra high for attending church, a style they
could not adopt when milking, because of butting their
heads against the cows.) . If she had said " Yes " instead
of " No " he would have kissed her ; it had evidently been
his intention; but her determined negative deterred his
scrupulous heart. Their condition of domiciliary comrade-
ship put her, as the woman, to such disadvantage by its
enforced intercourse, that he felt it to be unfair to her
to exercise any pressure of blandishment which he might
have honestly employed had she been better able to avoid
him. He released her momentarily imprisoned waist, and
withheld the kiss.
It all turned on that release of her. What had given her
strength to refuse him this time was solely the tale of the
widow told by the dairyman ; and that would have been
overcome in another moment. But Angel said no more ;
his face was perplexed ; he went away.
Day after day they met — somewhat less constantly than
before, and thus owo or three weeks went by. The end of
September drew near, and she could see in his eye that he
meant to ask her again.
His plan of procedure was different now. It seemed as
though he had made np his mind that her negatives were,
after all, only the result of coyness and youth, startled
by the novelty of the proposal. The fitful evasiveness of
her manner when the subject was under discussion counte-
nanced the idea. So he played a more coaxing game ; and
while never going beyond words, or attempting the renewal
of caresses, he did his utmost orally.
In this way Clare persistently wooed her — with quiet,
never-ceasing pressure — in undertones like that of the purl-
ing milk, gently yet firmly — at the cow's side, at skimmings,
at butter-makings, at cheese-makings, among broody poul-
try, and among farrowing pigs — as no milkmaid was ever
wooed before by such a sort of man.
Teas knew that she must break down. Neither convic-
tions on the moral validity of the previous union, nor a
**use of fairness to Clare, could hold out against it much
306 TESS OP THE DT/RBERVILLES
longer. She loved him so passionately, and he was so god-
like in her eyes ; and being, though untrained, instinctively
refined, her nature cried for his tutelary guidance. And
thus, though Tess kept repeating to herself, " I can never
be his wife, " the words were vain. A proof of her weakness
lay in the very utterance of what calm strength would not
have taken the trouble to formulate. Every sound of his
voice beginning on the old subject stirred her with a terri
fying bliss, and she coveted the recantation she feared.
His manner was — what, man's is not? — so much that of
one who would love her, and cherish her, and defend her,
under any conditions, changes, charges, or revelations, that
her gloom lessened as she basked in it. The season mean-
while was drawing onward to the equinox, and though it
was still fine, the days were much shorter. The dairy had
again worked by morning candle-light for a long time;
and a fresh renewal of Clare's pleading occurred one morn-
ing between three and four.
She had run up in her bedgown to his door to call him
as usual j then had gone back to dress and call the others ;
and, in ten minutes, was walking to the head of the stairs
with the candle in her hand. At the same moment, he
came down his steps from the landing above in his shirt-
sleeves, without any shoes, and put his arm across the
stairway.
" Now, Miss Flirt, before you go down, " he said, peremp-
torily. " It is a fortnight since I spoke, and this won't do
any longer. Ton must tell me what you mean, or I shall
have to leave this house. My door was ajar just now, and
I saw you. For your own safety I must go. You don't
know. Well! Is it to be yes at last? "
" I am only just up, Mr. Clare, and — it is too early to
take me to task, " she pouted. " You need not call me Flirt.
Tis cruel and untrue. Wait till by and by. Please wait
till by and by I I will really think seriously about it be*
veen now and then. Let me go downstairs I *
THE CONSEQUENCE 207
She looked a little like what he said she was, as, holding
the candle sideways, she tried to smile away the seriousness
of her words.
" Call me Angel, then, and not Mr. Clare. "
" Angel. "
" Angel, dearest — why not? "
"'Twould mean that I agree, wouldn't it 1 "
" It would only mean that you love me, even if you can-
not marry me ; and you were so good as to own that long
ago. "
" Very well, then,'Angel, dearest,'if I must, " she mur-
mured, looking at her candle, a roguish curl coming upon
her mouth, notwithstanding her suspense.
Clare had resolved never to kiss her until he had ob-
tained her promise ; but somehow, as Tess stood there in
her prettily tueked-up n^Uring-gown, her hair carelessly
heaped upon her head till there should be leisure to arrange
it when skimming and milking were done, he broke his re-
solve, and brought his lips to her cheek for one moment
She passed downstairs very quickly, never looking back
at him, or saying another word. The other maids were
already down, and the subject was not pursued. Except
Marian, they all looked wistfully and suspiciously at the
pair, in the sad yellow rays which the morning candles
emitted in contrast with the first cold signals of the dawn
without.
" When skimming was done — which, as the milk dimin-
ished with the approach of autumn, was a lessening process
day by day — Betty and the rest went out. The lovers fol-
lowed them.
" Our tremulous lives are so different from theirs, are
they not ? * he musingly observed to her, as he regarded
the three figures tripping before him through the frigid
pallor of opening day.
" Not so very different, I think,''she said-
« Why do you think that? "
208 TESS OP THE lyURBERYLLLES
" There be very few women's lives that are not — tremt
lous, " Teas replied, pausing over the new word as if it im-
pressed her. " There's more in those three than you think.*
" What is in them f "
" Almost — either of'em, " she began huskFy " would •
make — perhaps would make — a properer wife ttmn L And
perhaps they love you as well as I — almost. "
" OTessiel "
There were signs that it was an exquisite relief to her to
hear the impatient exclamation, though she had resolved
so intrepidly to let generosity make one bid against her-
self. That was now done, and she had not the power to
attempt self-immolation a second time then. They were
joined by a milker from one of the cottages, and no more
was said on that which concerned them so deeply. But
Tess knew that this day would decide it
In the afternoon several of the dairyman's household and
assistants went down to the meads as usual, a long way
from the dairy, where many of the cows were milked with-
out being driven home. The supply was getting less, as
the animals were advancing in calf, and the supernumerary
milkers of the lush green season had been dismissed.
The work progressed leisurely. Each pailful was poured
into tall cans that stood in a large spring v & gon which had
been brought upon the scene ; and when tney were milked
t*»e cows trailed away.
Dairyman Crick, who was there with ttee rest, his wrap-
per gleaming miraculously white against the leaden evening
sky, suddenly looked at his heavy watch.
" Why,'tis later than I thought, " he said. " Begad ! We
shan't be soon enough with this milk at the station, if we
dont mind. There's no time to-day to take it home and
mix it with the bulk afore sending off. It must go to sta-
tion straight from here. WhoTI drive it across J "
Mr. Clare volunteered to do so, though it was none of
's business, asking Tess to accompany him . The evening,
THE CONSEQUENCE SOB
though sunless, had heen warm and muggy for the season,
and Tees had come out with her milking-hood only, and
naked-armed and jacketLess; certainly not dressed for a
drive. She therefore replied hy glancing over her scant
Habiliments ; but Clare gently urged her. She assented by
silently relinquishing her pail and stool to the dairyman to
take home ; and mounted the spring wagon beside Clare.
XXX
In the diminishing daylight they went along the level
roadway through the meads, which stretched away into
grayness, and were backed in the extreme mist of distance
by the swarthy and abrupt slopes of Egdon Heath. On its
summit stood slumps and stretches of fir-trees, whose tips
formed in some spots a saw-notched line upon the sky, and
in others appeared like battlemented towers crowning black-
fronted castles of enchantment.
They were so absorbed in the sense of being close to each
other that they did not begin talking for a long while, the
silence being broken only by the clucking of the milk in
the tall cans behind them. The lane they followed was so
solitary that the hazel-nuts had remained on the boughs
till they slipped from their shells, and the blackberries hung
in heavy clusters. Every now and then Angel would fling
the lash of his whip round one of these, pluck it off, and
give it to his companion.
The dull sky soon began to tell its meaning by sending
down herald drops of rain, and the stagnant air of the day
changed into a fitful breeze which played about their faces.
The quicksilvery glaze on the rivers and pools vanished ;
from broad mirrors of light they changed to lustreless
sheets of lead, with a surface like a rasp. But that specta-
910 TESS OP THE D-'UHHEKVILLES
ele did not affect her preoccupation. Her countenance, a
natural carnation 811211117 embrowned by the season, had
deepened Its tinge with the beating of the rain-drops, and
a portion of her hair, which the pressure of the cows'flanks
had, as usual, caused to tumble down from its fastenings,
hung below the curtain of her calico bonnet; and the rain
began to make it clammy, till it hardly was better than sea-
weed.
" I Ought not to have come, I suppose, " she murmured,
looking at the sky.
" I am sorry for the rain, " said he. " But how glad I am
to have you here ! "
Remote Egdon disappeared by degrees behind the liquid i
gauze. The evening grew darker, and the road being crossed
by gates, it was not safe to drive faster than at a walking
pace. The air was rather chill.
" I am so afraid you will get cold, with nothing upon your
arms and shoulders, " he said, surveying her. " Creep close
to me, and perhaps it won't hurt you much. I should be
sorrier still if I did not think that the rain might be helping
me. "
She imperceptibly crept closer, and he wrapped round
them both a large piece of sail-cloth which was sometimes
used to keep the sun off the milk-cans. Tess held it from
slipping off him as well as herself, Clare's hands being oc-
cupied.
" Now we are all right again. Ah — no, we are not ! It
runs down into my neck a little, and it must still more into
yours. That's better. Tour arms are like wet marble, Teas.
Wipe them in the cloth. Now, if you stay quiet, you will
not get another drop. Well, dear — about that question of
mine — that long-standing question! "
The only reply that he could hear for a while was He
smack of the horse's hoofs on the moistening road and the
cluck of the milk in the cans behind them.
" Do you remember what you said t *
" I do, " she replied.
" Before we get home, mind. "
" Ill try. "
He said no more then. As they drove the fragment of
an old manor-house of Caroline date rose against the sky,
and was in due course passed and left behind.
" That, " he observed, to entertain her, " is an interesting
old place — one of the several seats which belonged to an
ancient Norman family, formerly of great influence in this
county — the D'Urbervilles. I never pass one of their resi-
dences without thinking of them. There is something very
sad in the extinction of a family of renown, even if it is
fierce, domineering, feudal renown. "
" Yes, " said Tess.
They crept along towards a point in the expanse of shade
before them at which a feeble light was beginning to assert
its presence, a spot where, by day, a fitful white streak of
steam at intervals upon the dark green background denoted
intermittent moments of contact between their secluded
world and modern life. Modern life stretched out its steam
feeler to this point three or four times a day, touched the
native existences, and quickly withdrew its feeler again, as
if what it touched had been uncongenial.
They reached the feeble light which came from the smoky
lamp of a little railway station ; a poor enough terrestrial
star, yet in one sense of more importance to Talbothays
Dairy and mankind than the celestial ones to which it stood
in. such humiliating contrast. The cans of new milk were
unladen in the rain, Tess getting a little shelter from a
neighboring holly-tree.
Then there was the hissing of a train, which drew up
almost silently upon the wet rails, and the milk was rapidly
lifted into the van. The light of the engine flashed for a
second upon Tess Durbeyfleld's figure, motionless under
the great holly-tree. No object could have looked more
foreign to the gleaming cranks and wheels than this un-
212 TESS OF THE D'URBBRVHiLES
sophisticated girl, with the round bare arms, the rainy face
and hair, the suspended attitude of a friendly leopard at
pause, the cotton gown of no date or fashion, and the wing-
bonnet drooping on her brow.
She mounted again beside her lover, with a mute obe-
dience characteristic of impassioned natures at times, and
when they had wrapped themselves up over head and ears
in Bail-cloth again, they plunged back into the now thick
night. Tess was so receptive that the few minutes of con-
tact with the whirl of material progress lingered in her
thoughts.
" Londoners will drink it at their breakf sets to-morrow,
won't they! " she asked. " Strange people that we have
never seen. "
" Yes — I suppose they will Though not as we send it.
When its strength has been lowered, so that it may not get
up into their heads. "
" Noble men and noble women, ambassadors and centu-
rions, ladies and tradeswomen, and babies who have never
seen a cow. "
" Well, yes; perhaps; particularly centurions. "
" Who don't know anything of us, and where it comes
from ; or think how we two drive miles across the moor
to-night in the rain that it might reach'em in time f "
" We did not drive entirely on account of these precious
Londoners ; we drove a little on our own — on account of
that anxious matter which you will, I am sure, set at rest,
dear Tess. Now, permit me to put it in this way. Yon
belong to me already, you know; your heart, I mean.
Does it not! "
" You know as well as 1 Oh yes — yes ! *
" Then, if your heart does, why not your hand! "
" My only reason was on account of you — on account of
a question. I have something to tell you "
" But suppose it to be entirely for my happiness, and my
■oridly convenience also! "
" Oh yes ; if it is for your happiness and worldly con-
venience. Bat my life afore I came here — I want — — "
" Well, it ) s for my convenience as well as my happiness.
if I have a ^rery large farm, either English or Colonial, yon
will he inv( lnable as a wife to me ; hetter than a woman
oat of the ta-gest mansion in the country. So please —
please, deal Tess — disabuse your mind of the feeling that
yoawillstf id in my way. "
" But mj iistory. I want you to know it — you must let
me tell yoT -you will not like me so well ! "
" Tell it f you wish to, dearest. This precious history,
then. Tea, I was born at so-and-so, Anno Domini "
" I was born at Marlott, " she said, catching at his words
as a help, lightly as they were spoken. " And I grew np
there. And I was in the Sixth Standard when I left school,
and they said I had great aptness, and should make a good
teacher, so it was settled that I should be one. But there
was trouble in my family ; my father was not very indus-
trious, and he drank a little. "
" Yes, yes. Poor child ! Nothingnew. " Hepressed her
more closely to his side.
" And then — there is something very unusual about it —
about me. " Tess's breath quickened.
" Yes, dearest. Never mind. "
" I — I . . . am not a Durbeyneld, but a D'Urberville — ■
a descendant of the old family that owned the house we
passed. And — we be all gone to nothing I "
" A D'Urberville ! . . . Indeed ! And is that all the
trouble, dear Tess T "
" Yes, " she answered, faintly,
■'Well, why should I love you less after knowing this? "
" I waB told by the dairyman that you hated old families. "
He laughed. " WelL it is true, in one sense. I do hate
the aristocratic principle of blood before everything, and do
think that the only pedigrees we ought to respect as reason-
As are those spiritual ones of the wise and virtuous, with-
314 TESS OF THE iyUBBERVniLEBS "
out regard to corporeal paternity. But I am extremely in-
terested in this news — you can have no idea how interested
I am. Are not you interested yourself in being one of
that well-known line) "
" I have thought it interesting— once or twice, especially
smc« coming here, and knowing that many of the hills and
fields I see once belonged to my father's people. But other
hills and fields belonged to Hetty's people, and perhaps
others to Marian's, so that I don't value it particularly. "
" Yes — it is surprising how many of the present tillers of
the soil were once owners of it, and I sometimes wonder
that a certain school of politicians don't make capital of
the circumstance ; but they don't seem to know it ... I
wonder that I did not see the resemblance of your name to
D'Urberville, and trace the manifest corruption. And this
was the carkiug secret ! "
At the last moment her courage had failed her, she feared
his blame for not telling him sooner; and her instinct of
self-preservation was stronger than her candor.
" Of course, " continued the unwitting Clare, " I should
have been glad to know you to be descended exclusively
from the long-suffering, dumb, unrecorded rank and file of
the English nation, and not from the self-seeking few who
made themselves powerful at the expense of the rest. But
I am corrupted away from that by my affection for yon,
Tess jhe laughed as he spoke], and made selfish likewise.
For your own sake I rejoice in your descent. Society is
hopelessly snobbish, and this fact of your extraction may
make an appreciable difference to its acceptance of yon as
my wife, after I have made you the well-read woman that
1 mean to make you. My mother, too, poor soul, will think
so much better of you on account of it. Tess, you must
spell your name correctly — D'TJrberville — from this very
day. "
" I like the other way rather best "
" But you must, dearest I Good heavens I why, dozens of
THE CONSEQUENCE 315
mushroom millionaires would jump at such a possession I
By the by, there's one of that kidney who has taken the
name — where have I heard of him T — up in the neighbor-
hood of The Chase, I think. Why, he is the very man who
had that rumpus with my father I told you of. What an
odd coincidence ! *
" Angel, I think I would rather not take the name ! It
is unlucky, perhaps. " She was agitated.
" Now then, Mistress Tess IVUrberville, I have you.
Take my name, and so you will escape yours ! The secret
is out, so why should you any longer refuse me T "
" If it is sure to make you happy to have me as your
wife, and you feel that you do wish to marry me, very, very
much ™
" I do, dearest, of course ! ■
" I mean, that it is only your wanting me very much, and
being hardly able to keep alive without me, whatever my
offence is, that would make me feel I ought to say I will. "
" You will — you do say it, I know. You will be mine
forever and ever. " He clasped her close and kissed her.
" Yes. " She bad no sooner said it than she burst into a
dry, hard sobbing, so violent that it seemed to rend her.
Tess was not a hysterical girl by any means, and he was
surprised.
" Why do you cry, dearest t "
" I can't tell — quite ! — I am so glad to think— of being
yours, and making you happy. "
" But this doesn't seem very much like gladness, my
Tessie. "
" I mean — I cry because I have broken down in my vow f
I said I would die unmarried. "
" But, if you love me, you would like me to be your hus
band! "
" Yes, yes, yes ! But 0, 1 sometimes wish I had never
been born! "
" Now, my dear Tess, if I did not know that you are
216 TESS OF THE ryURBEBVims
very much excited, and very inexperienced, I should attf
that remark was not very complimentary. How came yon
to wish that if you eare for me ! Do you care for me 1 1
wish you would prove it in some way. "
" How can I prove it more than I have done T " she cried,
in a distraction of tenderness. " Will this prove it moret "
She clasped his neck, and for the first time Clare learnt
what an impassioned woman's kisses were like upon the
lips of one whom she loved with all her heart and soul, as
Tess loved him. " There — now do you believe T " she asked,
wiping her eyes.
" Yes. I never really doubted — never, never ! "
So they drove on through the gloom, forming one bundle
inside the sail-cloth, the horse going as he would, and the
rain driving against them. She had consented. She might
l/ as well have agreed at first. ('The " appetite for joy, " which
stimulates all creation ; that tremendous force which sways
humanity to its purpose, as the tide sways the helpless
weed, was not to be controlled by vague lucubrations over
the social rubric. \
" I must write to my mother, " she said. " You don't
mind my doing that? "
" Of course not, dear, dear child. You are a child to me,
Tess, not to know how very proper it is to write to your
mother at such a time, and how wrong it would be in me to
object Where does she live T "
" At the same place — Marlott. On the farther side of
Blackmoor Vale. "
" Ah, then I have seen you before this Pammer *
" Yes ; at that dance on the green. But you would not
dance with me. 0, 1 hope that is o* no ill-omen for us
now! "
: > , Google
THE CONSEQUENCE
Tess wrote a most touching and urgent letter to hei
mother the very next day, and by the end of the week a re-
sponse to her communication arrived in Joan Durbeyfield's
wandering, last-century hand.
" Deab Tess, —
" J write these few lines hoping they will find you well,
as they leave me at present, thank God for it Dear Tess,
we are all glad to hear that you are really going to be mar-
ried soon. But with respect to your question, Tess, J say
between ourselves, quite private but very strong, that on
no account do yon say a word of your bygone trouble to
him. J did not tell everything to yonr father, he being so
proud on account of his respectability, which, perhaps, yonr
■Intended is the same. Many a woman — some of the High-
est in the Land — have had a Trouble in their time ; and
why should you Trumpet yours when others don't Trumpet
theirs 1 No girl would be such a fool, especially as it is so
long ago, and not your Fault at all. J shall answer the
same if you ask me Fifty Times. Besides, you must bear
in mind that, knowing it to be your childish nature to tell
all that's in your heart — so simple ! — J made you promise
me never to let it out by Word or Deed, having your Wel-
fare in my Mind ; and you solemnly did promise going
from this Door. J have not mentioned either that question
or your coming marriage to your father, as he would blab
it everywhere, poor Simple Man.
" Dear Tess, keep up your Spirits, and we mean to send
yon a Hogshead of Cider for your wedding, knowing there
is not much in your parts, and thin Sour Stuff what then
118 TESS OF THE DtlRBERVILiLES
is. So no mort at present, and with kind lore to yotH
Young Man,
" From your affectionate Mother,
" J. DUBBEYFIELD *
" O mother, mother ! " murmured Teas.
She was recognizing how light was the touch of events
the most oppressive upon Mrs. Durbeyfield's elastic spirit
Her mother did not see life as Teas saw it. That haunt-
ing experience of the past, of which the sear still remained
upon her soul, concealed as it might be by overgrowths,
was to her mother but a passing accident. But perhaps
her mother was right as to the course to be followed, what-
ever she might be in her reasons. Silence seemed, on the
face of it, best for her adored one's happiness : silence it
should be.
Thus steadied by a command from the onlyperson in the
world who had any shadow of right to control her action,
Tess grew calmer. The responsibility was shifted, and her
heart was lighter than it had been for weeks. The days of
declining autumn which followed her assent, beginning with
the month of October, formed a season through which she
lived in spiritual altitudes more nearly approaching ecstasy
than any other period of her life.
There was hardly a touch of earth in her love for Clare.
To her sublime trustfulness he was all that goodness could
be — knew all that a guide, philosopher, and friend should
know. She thought every line in the contour of his person
the perfection of masculine beauty, his soul the soul of a
saint, his intellect that of a seer. The wisdom of her love
for him, as love, sustained her dignity ; she seemed to be
wearing a crown. The compassion of his love for her, as
she saw it, made her lift up her heart to him in devotion.
He would sometimes catch her large, worshipful eyes, that
had no bottom to them, looking at him from their depths,
as if she saw something immortal before her.
THE CONSEQUENCF. 31*
Bhe dismissed the past — trod upon it ttod put it out, as
one treads on a coal that is smouldering and dangerous.
She had not known that men could be so disinterested,
chivalrous, protective, in their love for women as he.
Angel Clare was far from all that she thought him in this
respect; but he was, in truth, more spiritual than animal;
he had himself well in hand, and was singularly free from
grossness. Though not cold-natured, he was rather bright
than hot — less Byronic than Shelleyan ; could love desper-
ately, but his love more especially inclined to the imagina-
tive and ethereal ; it was a fastidious emotion which could
jealously guard the loved one against his very self. This
amazed and enraptured Teas, whose slight experiences had
been so infelicitous till now ; and in her reaction from in*
dignation against the male sex she swerved to excess of
honor for Clare.
They unaffectedly sought each other's company; in her
honest faith she did not disguise her desire to be with him.
The sum of her instincts on this matter, if clearly stated,
would have been that the elusive quality in her sex which
attracts men in general must be distasteful to so perfect a
man after an avowal of love, since it must in its very nature
carry with it a suspicion of art.
The country custom of unreserved comradeship out-of-
doors during betrothal was the only custom she knew, and
to her it had no strangeness ; though it seemed oddly an.
ticipative to Clare till he saw how normal a thing she, in
common with all the other dairy-folk, regarded it. Thus,
during Hub October month of wonderful afternoons they
roved along the meads by creeping paths which followed
the brinks of trickling tributary brooks, hopping across by
ntUe wooden bridges to the other side, and back again.
They were never out of the sound of some purling weir,
whose buzz accompanied their own murmuring, while the
beams of the snn, almost as horizontal as the mead itself,
formed a pollen of radiance over the landscape. They saw
A20 TESS OP THE DTJBBEBvTLLES
tiny blue fogs in the shadows of trees and hedges all the
tune that there was bright sunshine elsewhere. The sun
was so near the ground, and the sward so flat, that the
shadows of Glare and Tess would stretch a quarter of a
mile ahead of them, like two long fingers pointing afar to
where the green alluvial reaches abutted against the sloping
sides of the vale.
Men were at work here and there — for it was the season
for " taking up " the meadows, or digging the little water-
ways clear for the winter irrigation, and mending their
banks where trodden down by the cows. The shovelfuls
of loam, black as jet, brought there by the river when it
was as wide as the whole valley, were an essence of soils,
pounded champaigns of the past, steeped, refined, and sub-
tilized to extraordinary richness, out of which came all the
fertility of the mead, and of the cattle grazing there.
Clare hardily kept his arm round her waist in sight of
these watermen, with the air of a man who was accustomed
to public dalliance, though actually as shy as she who, with
lips parted and eyes askance on the laborers, wore the look
of a wary animal the while.
" You are not ashamed of owning me as yours before
them t * she said, gladly.
" Oh no— no ! "
" But if it should reach the ears of your friends at Em-
minster that you be walking about like this with me, a
milkmaid "
" The most bewitching milkmaid ever seen. "
" They might feel it a hurt to their dignity. "
" My dear girl — a IVITrberviUe hurt the dignity of a
Clare 1 It is a grand card to play — that of your belonging
to such a family, and I am reserving it for a grand effect
when we are married, and have the proofs of your descent
from Parson Tringham. Apart from that, my future is to
'^e totally foreign to my f amUy's — it will not affect even the
rf ace of their lives. We shall leave this part of England
— perhaps England itself — and what does it matter how
people regard as here 1 You will like going, will yon not 1 *
She could answer no more than a bare affirmative, so
great was the emotion aroused in her at the thought of go-
ing through the world with him as his own familiar friend.
Her feelings almost filled her ears like a babble of waves,
and surged up to her eyes. She pot her hand in his, and
thus they went on, to a place where the reflected sum glared
up from the river, under a bridge, with a molten-metallic
glow that dazzled their eyes, though the sun itself was
hidden by the bridge. They stood still, whereupon little
furred and feathered heads popped up from the smooth
surface of the water ; but, finding that the disturbing pres-
ences had paused and not passed by, they disappeared
again. Upon this river-brink they lingered till the fog
began to close round them — which was very early in the
evening at this time of the year — settling on the lashes of
her eyes, where it rested like crystals, and on his brows
and hair.
V They walked later on Sundays, when it was quite dark.
Some of the dairy-people, who were also out-of-doors on
the first Sunday evening after their engagement was sus-
pected, heard her impulsive speeches, ecstasized to frag-
ments, though they were too far off to hear the words dis-
coursed ; heard the spasmodic catch in her remarks, broken
Into syllables by the leapings of her heart between joy and
fear, as she walked leaning on his arm : noted her con-
tented pauses, the occasional iittle laugh, upon which her
soul seemed to ride — the laugh of a worn* n in company
with the man she loves and has won from i„'7 other women
— nnlike anything else in civilization. They saw the buoy-
ancy of her tread, like the skim of a bird which has not
quite alighted.
Her affection for him was now the breath and life ol
Toss's being; it enveloped her as a photosphere, irradiated
h«r into forgetfnlness of her past sorrows, keeping back
S22 TESS OP THE DTJBBERVILLES
the gloomy spectres that would persist in their attempts to
touch her— doubt, fear, moodiness, care, shame. She knew
that they were waiting like wolves just outside the circum-
scribing light, but she had long spells of power to keep
them in hungry subjection there. .
A spiritual forgetfulness coexisted with an intellectual
remembrance. She walked in brightness, but she knew that
in the background those shapes of darkness were always
spread. They might be receding, or they might be ap-
proaching, one or the other, a little every day.
One evening Tess and Clare were obliged to sit indoors
keeping house, all the other occupants of the domicile being
away. As they talked she looked admiringly up at him,
and met his two appreciative eyes.
" lam not worthy of you — no, I am not ! " she burst out,
jumping up from her low stool with wild suddenness, as
though appalled at his homage, and the fulness of her own
Joy thereat.
v Clare, deeming the whole basis of her excitement to be
that which was only the smaller part of it, said, " I won't
have you speak like it, dear Tess ! Distinction does not
consist in the facile use of a contemptible set of conven-
tions, but in being numbered among those who are true,
and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely, and of good re-
port — as you are, my Tess. "
She struggled with the sob in her throat. How often
had that string of excellences made her young heart ache
in church of late years, and how strange that he should
have cited them now.
" Why didn't yon stay and love me when I — was sixteen ;
living with mv little sisters and brothers, and you danced
on the green M O, why didn't you, why didn't you ! " she
cried, impetuously clasping her hands.
Angel began to soothe and reassure her, thinking to
himself, truly enough, what a creature of moods and im-
THE CONSEQUENCE 223
;.cusea she was, and how careful he would have to be of
her when she depended for her happiness entirely on
him.
" Ah — why didn't I come ! " he said, sentimentally. " That
is just what I feel. If I had only known ! But you must
not be so bitter in your regret — why should you be? "
With the woman's instinct to hide compromising events,
she answered hastily :
" I should have had three years more of your heart thai
I can ever have now. Then I should not have wasted my
time as I have done — I should have had so much longer
l It was no mature woman with a long dark vista of in-
trigue behind her who was tormented thus by her past ; but
a girl of simple life, not yet one-and-twenty, who had been <
caught during her days of immaturity like a bird in a
springe, To calm herself the more completely, she arose
from her little stool and left the room, overturning the
stool with her skirts as she went.
He sat on by the cheerful firelight thrown from a bundle
of green ash-sticks laid across the dogs ; the sticks snapped
pleasantly, and hissed out bubbles of sap from their ends.
When she came back she was herself again.
" Do you not think you are just a wee bit capricious, fit-
ful, Tess t " he said, good-humoredly, as he spread a cushion
for her on the stool, and seated himself in the settle beside
her. " I wanted to ask you something, and just then you
ran away. "
" Yes, perhaps I am capricious, " she murmured. Sh*
suddenly approached him, and put a hand upon each of his
arms. " No, Angel, I hain't really so — by nature, I mean ! *
The more particularly to assure him that she was not,
she placed herself close to him in the settle, and allowed
her head to find a resting-place against Clare's shoulder.
" What did yon want to ask me — I am sure I will answer
it, " she continued, humbly.
324 TESS OF THE & TTRBERVILLES
" Well, you love me, and have agreed to marry me, and
hence there follows a thirdly,'When shall the day be!'"
" I like living like this. "
" But I must think of starting in business on my own
hook with the new year, or a little later. And before I get
involved in the multifarious details of my new position, I
should like to have secured my partner. "
" But, " she timidly answered, " to speak quite practically,
wouldn't it be best not to marry till after all that T — though
I can't bear the thought c/ your going away and leaving
me here ! "
" Of course you cannot — and it is not best in this case.
I want you to help me in many ways in making my start.
When shall it be J Why not a fortnight from now T "
" No, " she said, becoming grave ; " I have so many things
to think of first. "
" But " He drew her gently nearer to him.
The reality of marriage was startling now that it loomed
so near. Before discussion of the question had proceeded
further, there walked round the corner of the settle into the
full firelight of the apartment Mr. Dairyman Crick, Mrs.
Crick, and two of the milkmaids.
Tess sprang like an elastic hall from his side to her feet,
while her face flushed, and her eyes shone in the firelight.
" I knew how it would be if I sat so close to him ! " she
cried, with vexation. " I said to myself, they are sure to
come and catch us ! But I wasn't really sitting on his knee,
mough it might have seemed as if I was almost ! "
" Well — if so be you hadn't told us, I am sure we
shouldn'ha'noticed that you had been sitting anywhere at
all, in this light, " replied the dairyman. He continued to
his wife, with the mien of a man who understood nothing
of the emotions relating to matrimony: " Now, Christian-
aer, that shows that folk should never fancy other folks
^ supposing things when they bain'fc. Oh no, I should
THE CONSEQUENCE 236
never ha'thought, cf her sitting on his knee if she hadn't
told me — not I. "
" We are going to be married soon, " said Clare, with im-
provised phlegm.
" Ah — and be ye ! Well, I am truly glad to hear it, sir.
Pve thought yon mid do such a thing for some time. She's
too good for a dairymaid — I said so the very first day I saw
her — and a prize for any man; and what's more, a wonder-
ful woman for a gentleman-farmer's wife ; he wont be at
the mercy of bis baily wi'her at his side. "
Somehow Tess disappeared. She had been even more
Btrack with the look of the girls who followed Crick than
abashed by Crick's blunt praise.
After snpper, when she reached her bedroom, they were
all present A light was burning, and each girl was sit-
ting np in her bed, awaiting Tess, the whole like a row of
avenging ghosts.
But she saw in a few moments that there was no malice
in their mood. They could scarcely feel as a loss what they
had never expected to have. Their condition was objective,
contemplative.
" He's going to marry her ! " murmured Retty, never tak-
ing her eyes off Tess " How her face do show it I ■
" You be going to marry him t " asked Marian.
" Yes, " said Tess.
" When! "
" Some day, perhaps. "
They thought that this was evasiveness only. " Yes — go-
ing to marry him — a gentleman ! " repeated Izz Huett. And
by a sort of fascination the three girls, one after another,
crept out of their beds, and came and stood barefooted
round Tess. Retty put her hands upon Tess's shoulders, as
if to realize her friend's corporeality after such a miracle,
and the other two laid their arms round her waist, all look
injrjnto her face.
236 TESS OP THE D'UBBEBVIIJjES
" How it do seem 1 Almost more than I can think of I *
said Izz H uett .
Marian kissed Teas. " Yes, " she murmured.
" Was that because of love for her, or because other Iip»
touched there by now! " continued Izz, dryly, to Marian.
" I wasn't thinking tf that, " said Marian, simply. " I was
on'y feeling all the strangeness o't — that she is to be his
wife, and nobody else. I don't say nay to it, nor either of
us, because we did not think of it— only loved him. Still,
. nobody else is to marry him in the world — no fine lady,
nobody in jewels and gold, in silks and satins ; but she
who do live like we.*
" Are you sure you don't dislike me for it I * said Tess. in
a low voice.
They hung about her in their flowing white nightgowns
before replying, as if they considered their answer might
lie in her look. " I don't know — I don't know, " murmured
Retty Priddle. " I want to hate'ee ; but I cannot 1 "
" That's how I feel, " echoed Izz and Marian. " I can\
hate her. Somehow she do hinder me I n
" He ought to marry one of you, " murmured Tess.
" Why! "
" Ton are all better than I. "
" We better than you! " said the girls, in a low, slow
whisper. " No, no, dear Tess 1 *
" Ton are! " she contradicted, impetuously. And sod-
lenly tearing away from their clinging arms, she bin.it
into a hysterical fit of tears, bowing herself on the chest- of
Irawers, and repeating incessantly, " Oh yes, yes, yes 1 "
Having once given way, she could not stop her weepiiig.
" He ought to have had one of yon I I think I ought to
make hin\ even now I Ton would be better for him than
— I don't know what I am saying. O I O ! *
They went up to her and clasped her round, but still her
sobs tore her. " Get some water, " said Marian. " SheV
ipset by us, poor thing, poor thing 1 ■ They gently led hew
THE CONSEQUENCE 821
beck to the side of her bed, where they kissed her warmly.
" You are best for'n, " said Marian. " More ladylike, and a
better scholar than we, especially since he has taught'ee
to much. But even you ought to be proud. Ton be proud,
Fm sure 1 "
" Yes, I am, " she said ; " and I am ashamed at bo break-
ing down ! "
When they were all in bed, and the light was out, Marian
whispered across to her, " You will think of us when yon
6e his wife, Teas, and of how we told'ee that we loved him,
and how we tried not to hate you, and did not hate you,
and could not hate you, because you were bis choice, and
we never hoped to be chose by him. "
They were not aware that, at these words, salt, stinging
tears trickled down upon Toss's pillow anew, and how slit
resolved, with a bursting heart, to tell all her history to
Angel Clare, despite her mother's command — to let him for
whom she lived and breathed despise her if he would, and
her mother regard her as a fool, rather than preserve a
silence which might be deemed a treachery ■ to him, and
which somehow seemed a wrong to these.
This penitential mood kept her from naming the wedding'
day. The beginning of November found its date still in
abeyance, though he asked her at the most tempting timea
But Toss's desire seemed to be for a perpetual betrothal, in
which everything should remain as it was then.
The meads were changing now ; but it was still warm
enough in early afternoons before milkin g to idle there
awhile, and the state of dairy-work at this time of year al-
lowed a Bpare hour for idling. Looking over the damp sod
J28 TESS OP T HM TVint.R bh.vt t ,t jcg
in the direction of the sun, a glistening ripple of g
webs was visible to their eyes under the luminary, like the
track of moonlight on the sea. Gnats, knowing nothing of
their brief glorification, wandered across the air above this
pathway, irradiated as if they bore fire within them, then
passed out of its line, and were quite extinct. In the pres-
ence of these things he would remind her that the date
was still the question.
Or he would ask her at night, when he accompanied her
on some mission invented by Mrs. Crick to give him the
opportunity. This was mostly a journey to the farmhouse
on the slopes above the vale, to inquire how the advanced
cows were getting on in the straw-barton to which they
were relegated. For it was a time of the year that brought
great changes to the world of kine. Batches of the animals
were sent away daily to this lying-in hospital, where they
lived on straw till their calves were born, after which events
and as soon as the calf could walk, mother and offspring
were driven back to the dairy. In the interval which elapsed
befoie the calves were sold there was, of course, little milk-
hig to be done, but as soon as the calf had been taken away
die milkmaids would have to set to work as usual.
Returning from one of these dark walks, they reached a
great gravel-cliff immediately over the levels, where they
stood still and listened The water was now high in the
streams, squirting through the weirs, and tinkling under
culverts; the smallest gulleys were all full; there was no
taking short cuts anywhere, and foot-passengers were com-
pelled to follow the permanent ways. From the whole ex-
lent of the invisible vale came a multitudinous intonation ;
It forced upon the fancy that a great city lay below them,
and that the murmur was the vociferation of its populace.
" It seems like tens of thousands of them, " said Tess;
" holding public meetings in their marketplaces, arguing,
preaching, quarrelling, sobbing, groaning, praying, and
urging.*
THE CONSEQUENCE 229
Clare was not particularly heeding. " Did Crick speak
Co you to-day, dear, about his not wanting much assistance
during the winter months ? "
" No. "
" The cows are going dry rapidly. "
" Yes, " she answered. " Six or seven went to the straw-
barton yesterday, and three the day before, making near
twenty in the straw already. Ah — is it that the farmer
don't want my help for the calving T O, I am not wanted
here any more ! And I have tried so hard to "
" Crick didnt exactly say that he would no longer re.
quire you. But, knowing what our relations were, he said,
in the most good-natured and respectful manner possible,
that he supposed, on my leaving at Christmas, I should take
you with me, and on my asking what he would do without
you, he merely observed that, as a matter of fact, it was a
time of year when he could do with a very little female
help. I am afraid I was sinner enough to feel rather glad
that he was in this way forcing your hand. "
" I dont think you ought to have felt glad, Angel. Be-
cause'tis always mournful not to be wanted, even if at the
same time'tis convenient. "'
" WelL it is convenient — you have admitted that. " He
put his finger upon her cheek. " Ah ! " he said.
" WhaU "
" I feel the red rising np at her having been caught I
But why should I trifle so ! We will not trifle — life is too
" It is — I saw that before you did. "
She was seeing it then. To decline to marry him after
all — in obedience to her emotion of last night — and leave
the dairy, meant to go to some strange place, not a dairy ;
for milkmaids were not in request now calving-time was
coming on ; to go to some arable farm, where no divine being
like Angel Clare was. She hated the thought, and she
hated more the thought of going home.
£34 TESS OF THE IPUBBEBVILLES
" So that, seriously, dearest Teas, " he continued, " since
you will probahly have to leave at Christmas, it is in every
way desirable and convenient that I should carry you off
then as my property. Besides, if you were not the most-
mi calculating girl in the world you would know that we
could not go on like this forever. "
" I wish we could. That it would always be summer and
autumn, and you always courting me, and always thinking
as much of me as you have done through the past summer-
time!''
" I always shalL "
" O, I know you will ! " she cried, with a sudden fervor of
faith in him. " Angel, I will fix the day when I will be-
come yours for always. " Thus at last it was arranged be-
tween them, during that dark walk home, amid the myriads
of liquid voices on the right and left.
" When they reached the dairy Mr. " and Mrs. Crick were
promptly told — with injunctions to secrecy ; for each of the
lovers was desirous that the marriage should be kept as
private as possible. The dairyman, though he had thought
of dismissing her soon, now made a great concern about
losing her. What should he do about his skimming I Who
would make the ornamental butter-pats for the Melchester
and Sandbourne ladies! Mrs. Crick congratulated TeBB
on the shilly-shallying having at last come to an end, and
said that directly she set eyes on Tess she divined that she
was to be the chosen one of somebody who was no common
outdoor man ; Tess had looked so genteel and superior as
she walked across the barton on that afternoon of her ar-
rival ; that she was of a good family she could have sworn.
In point of fact, Mrs. Crick did distinctly remember think-
ing that Tess was unusually graceful and pretty as she ap-
proached ; as for the gentility and superiority, they might
have been a growth of the imagination aided by subsequent
knowledge.
Tess was now carried along upon the wings of the hour^
■rHE CONSEQUENCE 231
without the senae of a will. " ) The word had been given ;
the number of the day written down. Her naturally bright
intelligence had begun to admit the fatalistic convictions
common to field-folk and those who associate more exten-
sively with natural phenomena than with their fellow-
ereatures; and she accordingly drifted into that passive
responsiveness to all things her lover suggested, character-
istic of the frame of mind.
But Bhe wrote anew to her mother, ostensibly to notify
the wedding-day ; really to again implore her advice. It
was a gentleman who had chosen her, which perhaps her
mother had not sufficiently considered. A post-nuptial ex-
planation, which might be accepted with a light heart by a
rougher man, might not be received with the same feeling
by him. But this communication brought no reply from
Mrs. Durbeyfield.
Despite Angel Clare's plausible representations to himself
and to Tess of the practical need for their immediate mar-
riage, there was, in truth, an element of precipitancy in the
Btep, as became apparent at a later date. He loved her
■dearly, though perhaps rather ideally and fancifully than
with the impassioned thoroughness of her feeling for him.
He had entertained no notion, when doomed, as he had
thought, to an unintellectual bucolic life, that such charms
as he beheld in this idyllic creature would be found behind
the scenes. Unsophistication was a thing to talk of ; but
he had not known how it really struck one until he came
here. But he was very far from seeing his future track
clearly, and it might be a year or two before he would be
able to consider himself fairly started in life. The secret
lay in the tinge of recklessness imparted to his career and
character by the sense that he had been made to miss his
true destiny through the prejudices of his family.
" Don't you think'twould ha'been better for us to wait
till you were quite settled in your midland farm 1 " she once
asked timidly. (A midland farm was the idea just then.)
232 TTESS OF T HH! TV I TnRBHt.V TT .T ,KH
'To tell the truth, my Tess, I don't like yon to be left
anywhere away from my influence and sympathy. "
The reason was a good one, so far as it went. His in-
fluence over her had been so marked that she had caught
his manner and habits, his speech and phrases, his likings
and his aversions. And to leave her in farm-land would
be to let her slip back again out of accord with him. He
wished to have her under his charge for another reason.
His parents had naturally desired to see her once at least
before he carried her off to a distant settlement, English or
Colonial ; and as no opinion of theirs was to be allowed to
change his intention, he judged that a couple of months'
life with him in lodgings whilst seeking for an advantageous
opening would be of some social assistance to her at what
she might feel to be a trying ordeal — her presentation to
his mother at the vicarage.
Next, he wished to see a little of the working of a flour-
null, having an idea that he might combine the use of one
with corn-growing. The proprietor of a large old water-
mill at Wellbridge — once the milT of an abbey— had offered
him the inspection of his time-honored mode of procedure,
and a hand in the operations for a few days, whenever he
should choose to come. Clare paid a visit to the place,
some few miles distant, one day at this time, to inquire pan
ticulars, and returned to Talbothays in the evening. She
found him determined to spend a short time at the Well-
bridge flour-mills ; and what had determined him ! Less
the opportunity of an insight into grinding and bolting
than the casual fact that lodgings were to be obtained in
that very farmhouse which, before its mutilation, had been
the mansion of a branch of the DTJrberville family. Thif
was always how Clare settled practical questions; by a
sentiment which had nothing to do with them. They de-
cided to go immediately after the wedding, and remain
for a fortnight, instead of journeying to towns and inn*
" Then v° will start off to examine some farms on the
THE CONSEQUENCE 233
other side of London that I have heard of, " he said, " and
by March or April we will pay a visit to my father and
mother. "
Questions of procedure such as these arose and passed,
and the day, the incredible day, on which, she was to become
'his, loomed large in the near future. The thirty-first of
December, Mew Year's Eve, was the date. His wife, she
.•aid to herself. Could it ever bet Their two selves to-
gether, nothing to divide them, every incident shared by
(hem : why not 1 And yet why I
One Snnday morning Izz Hnett returned from church,
Bud spoke privately to Tess.
" You was not called home • this morning. "
" What! "
" It should ha'been the first time of asking to-day, " she
answered, looking quietly at Tess. " You meant to be
married New Year's Eve, deary 1 "
The other returned a quick affirmative.
" And there must be three times of asking. And now
there be only two Sundays left between. "
Tess felt her cheek paling. Izz was right; of course
there must be three. Perhaps he had forgotten. If so,
there must be a week's postponement, and that was un-
How could she remind her lover 1 She who had been bo
backward was suddenly fired with impatience and alarm
lest she should lose her dear prize.
A natural incident relieved her anxiety. Izz mentioned
the omission of the banns to Mrs. Crick, and Mrs. Crick
took a matron's privilege of speaking to Angel on the point.
u Have ye forgot'em, Mr. Clare. The banns, I mean. "
" No, I have not forgot'em, " said Clare.
As soon as he caught Tess alone he assured her.''Don't
let them tease you about the banns. A license will be
quieter for us, and I have decided on a license without con-
* " Caned home !!--]o oal ptrrasd far irablication of banns
234 TES8 01 " THE TVT TftBITB V 1 1 .raw
suiting you. So if you go to church on Sunday morning
yon will not hear your own name, if you wished to. "
" I didn't wish to hear it, dearest, " she said, proudly.
But to know that things were in train was an immense
relief to Tess notwithstanding, who had well-nigh feared
that somebody would stand up and forbid the banns on the'
ground of her history. How events were favoring her !
" I don't feel quite easy, " she said to herself. " All this
good fortune may be scourged out o'me afterwards by a
lot of ill. That's how God mostly does. I wish I could
have had common banns 1 "
But everything went smoothly. She wondered whether
he would like her to be married in her present best whit*
frock, or if she onght to buy a new one. The question waa
set at rest by his forethought, disclosed by the arrival oi
some large packages addressed to her. Inside them she
found a whole stock of clothing, from bonnet to shoes, in-
cluding a perfect morning costume, such as would well suit
the simple wedding they planned. He entered the house
shortly after the arrival of the packages, and heard her up
stairs undoing them.
A minute later she came down with a flush on her face
and tears in her eyes.
" How thoughtful you've been! " she murmured, her cheek
upon his shoulder. " Even to the gloves and handkerchief 1
My own love — how good, how kind ! "
" No, no, Tessie; just an order to a tradeswoman in
London — nothing more, " said he ; and to divert her from
thinking too highly of him he told her to go upstairs, and
take her time, and see if it all fitted ; and, if not. to get th»
village seamstress to make a few alterations.
She did return upstairs, and put on the gown. Alone,
she stood for a moment before the glass looking at the effect
of her silk attire ; and then there came into her head hei
mother's ballad of the mystic robe,
THE CONSEQUENCE 233
which Mrs. Dm-toeyfield had used to sing to her as a child,
so blithely and so archly, her foot on the cradle, which she
rocked to the tone. Suppose this robe should betray her
condition by its changing color, as her robe had betrayed
Queen Guenever. Since she had been at the dairy she had
V»t once thought of the lines till now.
Angel felt that he would like to spend a day with her
before the wedding somewhere away from the dairy, as a
last jaunt in her company while they were yet mere lover
and mistress ; a romantic day, in circumstances that would
never be repeated ; with that other and greater day beam-
ing close ahead of them. During the preceding week,
therefore, he suggested making a few purchases in the
nearest town, and they started together.
Glare's life at the dairy had been that of a recluse in re-
spect to the world of his own class. For months he had
never gone near a town, and, requiring no vehicle, had
never kept one, hiring the dairyman's cob or gig if he rode
or drove. They went in the gig that day.
And then for the first time in their lives they shopped
as partners in one concern, that of their future domicile.
It was Christmas Eve, with its loads of holly and mistletoe,
and the town was very full of strangers who had come in
from all parts of the country on account of the day. Teas
paid the penalty of walking about with happiness super-
added to beauty on her countenance by being much stared
at as she moved amid them on his arm.
In the evening they returned to the inn at which they
had put up, and Tess waited in the entry while Angel went
to see the horse and gig brought to the door. The general
236 TESS OF THE D'UEBEKVIIiES
sitting-room was full of guests, who were continually going
in and out. As the door opened and shut each time for
the passage of these, the light within the parlor fell full
upon Tess's face. Two men came out and passed by her
among the rest. One of them had stared her up and down
in surprise, and she fancied he was a Trantridge man,
though that village lay so many miles off that Trantridge
folk were rarities here.
" A comely maid that, " said the other.
" True, comely enough. But unless I make a great mis-
take " And he negatived the remainder of the remark
forthwith.
Clare had just returned from the stable-yard, and, eon-
fronting the man on the threshold, heard the words, and
saw the shrinking of Tess. The insult to her stung him to
the quick, and, before he had considered anything at all, he
struck the man on the chin with the full force of his Qst,
sending him staggering backwards into the passage.
The man recovered himself, and seemed inclined to come
on, and Clare, stepping outside the door, put himself in a
posture of defence. But his opponent began to think bet-
ter of the matter. He looked anew at Tess as he passed
her, and said to Clare, " I beg pardon, sir ; twas a complete
mistake. I thought she was another woman, forty miles
from here. "
Clare, feeling then that he had been too hasty, and that
he was, moreover, to blame for leaving her standing in an
inn passage, did what he usually did in such eases, gave
the man five shillings to plaster the blow ; and thus they
parted, bidding each other a pacific good-night. As soon
as Clare had taken the reins from the ostler, and the young
couple had driven off, the two men went in the other
" And was it a mistake t * said the second one.
" Not a bit of it. But I didn't want to hurt the gentle-
an's feelingB — not L "
THE CONSEQUENCE 25)
In the meantime the lovers were driving onward. " Gould
we put off our wedding till a little later I* Tess asked, in a
dry, dull voice. " I mean, if we wished ! *
" No, my love. Calm yourself. Bo you mean that the
fellow may have time to summon me for assault I " he
asked, good-humoredly.
" No — I only meant — if it should have to be put off. "
" What she meant was not very clear, and he directed her
to dismiss such fancies from her mind, which she obedi-
ently did as well as she could. But she was grave, very
grave, all the way home; till she thought, " We shall go
away, a very long distance, hundreds of miles from these
parts, and such as this can never happen again, and no
ghost of the past reach there. " Even now, this Trantridge
man was the first she had seen in this part of the country
during her residence here.
They parted tenderly that night on the landing, and
Clare ascended to his attic. Tess sat np finishing some
attle requisites, lest the few remaining days should not
afford sufficient time, and, while she sat, she heard a noise
in Angel's room overhead, a sound of thumping and strug-
gling. Everybody else in the house was asleep, and, in her
anxiety lest Clare should be ill, she ran up and knocked at
his door, and asked him what was the matter.
" Oh, nothing, dear, " he said from within. " I am so sorry
I disturbed you! But the reason is rather an amusing
one; I fell asleep and dreamed that I was fighting that
fellow again who insulted you, and the noise yon heard
was my pummelling away with my fists at my portmanteau,
which I pulled out to-day for packing. I am occasionally
liable to these freaks in my sleep. Go to bed, and think
of it no more. "
This was the last drachm required to turn the scale of
her indecision. Declare the past to him by word of mouth
she could not ; but there was another way. She sat down
*nd wrote on the four pages of a note-sheet a succinct nar.
238 TESS OP'I'Hit CURBERVILLES
rative of those events of three or four years ago ; put ft
into an envelope and directed it to Clare. Then, lest the
flesh should again be weak, she crept upstairs without any
shoes and slipped the note under his door.
Her night was a broken one, as it well might be, and she
listened for the first faint noise overhead. It came, as
usual ; he descended, as usual. She descended. He met
her at the bottom of the stairs and kissed her. Surely it
was as warmly as ever.
He looked a little disturbed and worn, she thought
But he said not a word to her about her revelation, even
when they were alone. Could he have had it 1 Unless he
began the subject, she felt that she could say nothing. So
the day passed, and it was evident that whatever he thought
he meant to keep to himself. Yet he was frank and affec-
tionate as before. Could it be that her doubts were child-
ish! that he forgave her T that he loved her for what she
was, just as she was, and smiled at her disquiet as at a
foolish nightmare T Had he received her note T She glanced
into his room, and could see nothing of it. It might be
that he forgave her. But even if he had not received it she
had a sudden enthusiastic trust that he surely Would forgive
her.
Every morning and night he was the same, and thus New
Year's Eve broke — the wedding-day.
The lovers did not rise at milking-time, having through
the whole of this last week of their sojourn at the dairy
been accorded something of the position of guests, Tess
being honored with a room of her own. When they ar-
rived downstairs at breakfast-time they were surprised to
see what effects had been produced in the large kitchen to
their glory since they had last beheld it. At some unnatural
hour of the morning the dairyman had caused the yawning
chimney-corner to be whitened, and the brick hearth red
dened, and a blazing yellow damask blower to be hung
toss the arch in the place of the old grimy blue cotton
THE CONSEQUENCE 239
one with a black sprig pattern which had formerly done
duty here. This renovated aspect of what was the focus
indeed of the room on a dull winter morning threw a smil-
ing demeanor over the whole apartment:
" I was determined to do suininat in honor o't, " said the
dairyman. " And as you wouldn't hear of my gieing a
rattling good randy i'fiddles and bass-viols complete, as we
should ha'done in old times, this was all I could think o'
as a noiseless thing. "
Toss's friends lived so far off that none could conven-
iently have been present at the ceremony, even had any
been asked ; but as a fact nobody was invited from M arlott.
As for Angel's family, he had written and duly informed
them of the time, and assured them that he would be glad
to see one at least of them there for the day if he would like
to come. His brothers had not replied at all, seeming to
be indignant with him ; while his father and mother had
written a rather sad letter, deploring his precipitancy in
rushing into marriage, but making the best of the matter
by saying that, though a dairywoman was the last daugh-
ter-in-law they could have expected, their son had arrived at
an ege at which he might be supposed to be the best judge.
This coolness in his relations distressed Clare less than it
would have done had he been without the grand card with
•vhich he meant to surprise them ere long. To produce
Tees, fresh from the dairy, as a iyUrberville and a lady,
he had felt to be temerarious and risky; hence he had
concealed her lineage till such time as, familiarized with
worldly ways by a few months'travel and reading with
him, be could take her on a visit to his parents, and im-
part the knowledge while triumphantly producing her as
worthy of such an ancient line. It was a pretty lover's
dream, if no more. Perhaps Tess's lineage had more value
for himself than for anybody in the world besides.
Her perception that Angel's bearing towards her still re-
mained in no whit altered by her own communication ren-
840 TESS OP THE lyURBEliVILUSS
dered Teas guiltily doubtful if he could have received it
She rose from breakfast before he had finished, and hastened
upstairs. It occurred to her to look once more into the
queer, gaunt room which had been Clare's den, or rather
eyrie, for so long, and climbing the ladder, she stood at the
open door of the apartment, regarding and pondering. She
stooped to the threshold of the doorway, where she had
poshed in the note two or three days earlier in such excite-
ment. The carpet reached close to the sill, and under tho
edge of the carpet she discerned the faint white margin of
the envelope containing her letter to him, which he obviously
had never seen, owing to her having in her haste thrust it
beneath the carpet as well as beneath the door.
With a feeling of faintness she withdrew the letter.
There it was — sealed up, just as it had left her hands.
The mountain had not yet been removed. She could not
let him read it now, the house being in full bustle of prep-
aration; and descending to her own ipom, she destroyed
the letter there.
She was so pale when be saw her again that he felt quite
anxious. The incident of the misplaced letter, though she
had guessed that it might be so, overwhelmed her ; what
could she do at this late moment T Everything was in a
stir; there was coming and going; all had to dress, the
dairyman and Mrs. Crick having been asked to accompany
them as witnesses; and reflection or deliberate talk was
well-nigh impossible. The only moment Teas could get to
be alone with Clare was when they met upon the landing.
" I am so anxious to talk to you — I want to confess all
my faults and blunders, " she said, with attempted lightness.
" No, no — we can't have faults talked of — you must be
deemed perfect to-day at least, Sweet, " he cried. " We
shall have plenty of time hereafter, I hope, to talk over our
failings. I will confess mine at the same time. "
" But it would be better for me to do it now, I think, se
that you could not say *
THE CONSEQUENCE 241
■'Well, yon shall tell me any thing — say, as soon as we
are settled in onr lodging ; not now. I, too, will tell you
my faults then. Bnt do not let us spoil the day with them ;
they will be excellent matter for a dull time. "
" Then you don't wish me to, dearest I "
" I do not, Tess, really. "
The hurry of dressing and starting left no time for more
than this. Those words of his seemed to reassure her on
further reflection, especially that the subject was one on
which he would not have liked to speak to her. She was
whirled onward through the nest couple of critical hours
by the mastering tide of her devotion to him, which closed
up further meditation. Her one desire, so long resisted, to
make herself his, to call him her lord, her own — then, if
necessary, to die — had at last lifted her np from her plod-
ding reflective pathway. In dressing, she moved about in
a mental cloud of many-colored idealities, which eclipsed
all sinister contingencies by its brightness.
The church was a long way off, and they were obliged to
drive, particularly as it was winter. A close carriage was
ordered from a roadside inn, a vehicle which had been kept
there ever since the old days of post-chaise travelling. It
had stout wheel -spokes and heavy felloes, a great curved
bed, immense straps and springs, and a pole like a batter-
ing-ram. The postilion was a venerable " boy " of sixty —
a martyr to rheumatic gout, the result of excessive exposure
in youth, counteracted by strong liquors — who had stood
at inn-doors, doing nothing, for the whole five-and-twenty
years that had elapsed since he had no longer been required
to ride professionally, as if expecting the old times to come
back again. He had a permanent ru nnin g wound on the
outside of his right leg, originated by the constant bruis-
jngs of aristocratic carriage-poles during the many years
that he had been in regular employ at the Golden Crown,
Inside this cumbrous and creaking structure, and behind
243 TESS OF THE &'URBERVILLGd
this decayed condnotor, the partie carrte took their 8
the bride and bridegroom and Mr. and Mrs. Crick. Angei
■would have liked one at least of his brothers to be present
as groomsman, bat their silence after his gentle hint to that
effect by letter had signified that they did not ear© to come.
They disapproved of the marriage, and conld not be ex-
pected to countenance it. Perhaps it was well that they
could not be present ; they were not worldly young fellows,
but fraternizing with dairy-folk would have struck unpleas-
antly upon their biassed niceness, apart from their views of
the match.
Upheld by the momentum of the time, Tess knew noth,
ing of this ; did not see it ; did not know the road they were
taking to the church. She knew*that Angel was close to
her ; all the rest was a luminous mist She was a sort of
celestial person, who owed her being to poetry — one of
those classical divinities Clare was accustomed to talk to
her about when they took their walks together.
The marriage being by license, there were only a dozen
or so of people in the church ; had there been a thousand
they would have produced no more effect upon her. They
were at stellar distances from her present world. In the
ecstatic solemnity with which she swore her faith to him,
the ordinary sensibilities of sex seemed a flippancy. At a
pause in the service, while they were kneeling together, she
unconsciously inclined herself towards him, so that her
shoulder touched his arm ; she had been frightened by a
passing thought, and the movement had been automatic, to
assure herself that he was really there, and to fortify her
belief that his fidelity would be proof against all things.
Clare knew that she loved him — every curve of her form
showed that — but he did not know at that time the full
depth of her devotion, its single-mindedness, its meekness ;
what long-suffering it guaranteed — what honesty, what en
irance, what good faith.
is they came out of church the ringers swung the hells
THE CONSEQUENCE 3U
off their rests, and a modest peal of three notes broke forth
— that limited amount of expression having been deemed
sufficient for the joys of such a small parish. Passing by
the tower with her husband on the path to the gate, she
could feel the vibrant air humming round them from
the louvred belfry in a circle of sound, and it matched
the highly charged mental atmosphere in which she was
living.
This condition of mind wherein she felt glorified by an
irradiation not her own, like the Angel whom St. John saw
in the sun, lasted till the sound of the church-bells had died
away, and the emotions of the wedding service had calmed
Her eyes could dwell upon details more clearly now, and
Mr. and Mrs. Crick having directed their own gig to be
Bent for them, to leave the carriage to the young couple,
she observed the build and character of that conveyance
for the first time. Sitting in silence, she regarded it long.
" I fancy you seem oppressed, Tessie ! " said Clare.
" Yes, " she answered, putting her hand to her brow. " I
tremble at many things. It is all so serious, Angel. Among
other things I seem to have seen this carriage before, to be
very well acquainted with it. It is very odd — I must have
seen it in a dream. "
" O — you have heard the legend of the D'TJrberville
Coach — that well-known superstition of this county about
your family when they were very popular here ; and this
lumbering old thing reminds you of it. "
" I have never heard of it to my knowledge,''said she.
" What is the legend — may I know itl "
" Well — I would rather not tell it in detail just now. A
certain DTJrberville of the sixteenth or seventeenth century
committed a dreadful crime in his family coach ; and since
that time members of the family see or hear this old coach
whenever But I'll tell you another day — it is rather
gloomy. Evidently some dim knowledge of it has been
2M TESS OF THE B > UBBERYIU,BS
brought back to your mind by the sight of this venerably
caravan. "
" I don't remember hearing it before, " she murmured.
" Is it when we are going to die, Angel, that members of
my family see it, or is it when we have committed a crime I *
" Now, Tess ! * He silenced her by a kiss.
By the time they reached home she was contrite and
spiritless. She was Mrs. Angel Clare, indeed, but had she
any moral right to the name ! Was she not more truly
Mrs. Alexander DTJr berville T Could intensity of love jus-
tify what might be considered in upright souls as culpable
reticence t She knew not what was expected of women in
such eases ; and she had no counsellor.
However, when she found herself alone in her room for
a few minutes — the last day this on which she was ever to
enter it — she knelt down and prayed. She tried to pray to
God, but it was her husband who really had her supplica-
tion. Her idolatry of this man was such that she herself
almost feared it to be ill-omened. She was conscious of
the notion expressed by Friar Laurence : " These violent
delights have violent ends. " It might be too desperate for
human conditions — too rank, too wild, too deadly. " O my
love, my love, why do I love you so ! * she whispered there
alone ; " for she yon love is not my real self, but one in my
image ; the one I might have been. "
Afternoon came, and with it the hour for departure.
They had decided to fulfil the plan of going for a few days
to the lodgings in the old farmhouse near Wellbridge Mill,
at which he meant to reside during his investigation of
flour-processes. At two o'clock there was nothing left to
do but start. All the servantry of the dairy were standing
in the red-brick entry to see them go out, the dairyman and
his wife following to the door. Tess saw her three cham-
ber-mates in a row against the wall, pensively inclining
their heads. She had much questioned if they would ap-
pear at the parting moment ; but there they were, stoicd
THE CONSEQUENCE 245
and staunch to the last. She knew why the delicate Ketty
looked so fragile, and Izz so tragically sorrowful, and Mar-
ian so blank ; and she forgot her own dogging shadow for
a moment in contemplating theirs.
She impulsively whispered to him : " Will you kiss'em
all, once, poor things, for the first and last time 1 "
Clare had not the least objection to such a farewell for-
mality — which was all that it was to him — and as he passed
them he kissed them in succession where they stood, saying
" Good-by " to each as he did so. When they reached the
door Tess femininely glanced back to discern the effect of
that kiss of charity ; there was no triumph in her glance,
as there might have been. If there had it would have dis-
appeared when she saw how moved the girls all were. The
kiss had obviously done harm by awakening feelings they
were trying to subdue.
Of all this Clare was unconscious. Passing on to the
wicket-gate he shook hands with the dairyman and his
wife, and expressed his last thanks to them for their atten-
tions ; after which there was a moment of silence before
they had moved off. It was interrupted by the crowing of
a cock. The white one with the rose comb had come and
settled on the palings in front of the house, within a few
yards of them, and his notes thrilled their ears through,
dwindling away like echoes down a valley of rocks.
" O!* said Mrs. Crick. " An afternoon crow 1 "
Two men were standing by the yard-gate, holding it
open.
" That's bad, " one murmured to the other, not thinking
that the words could be heard by the group at the door-
wicket.
The cock crew again — straight towards Clare.
" Well ! " said the dairyman.
" I dont like to hear him ! " said Tess to her husband
■ Tell the man to drive on. Good-by, good-by I "
The cock crew again.
246 TESS O? THE ECURBERVILLES
" Hoosh ! Just yon be off, sir, or I'll twist your neck !'■
said the dairyman with some irritation, turning to the bird
mid driving him away. And to his wife as they went in-
doors : " Now, to think o* that jnst to-day ! I've not heard
his crow of an afternoon all the year afore. "
" It only means a change in the weather, " said she j " not
what yo a think ;'tis impossible ! "
They drove by the level road along the valley to a dis-
tance of " a few nines, and, reaching Wellbridge, turned away
from the village to the left, and over the great Elizabethan
bridge which gave the place half its name. Immediately
behind it stood the house in which they had engaged lodg-
ings, whose exterior is so well known to all travellers
through the Froom Valley ; once portion of a fine manorial
residence, the property and home of a D'Urberville, but
since its partial demolition a farmhouse ; an adaptation by
no means singular in this district, where there are few old
farm homesteads which have not, at some time or other,
before ten estates were merged in one, been the seat of a
landowner.
" Welcome to one of your ancestral mansions ! " said
Clare as he handed her down. But he repented the pleas-
antry ; it was too near a satire.
On entering they found that, though they had only en-
gaged a couple of rooms, the farmer had taken advantage
of their proposed presence during the few coming days to
pay a New Year's visit to some friends, leaving a woman
from a neighboring cottage to minister to their few wants.
The absoluteness of possession pleased them, and they real-
ized it as tl e first moment of their experience under their
wn exclusive roof-tree.
THE CONSEQUENCE BIT
Bat he found that the mouldy old habitation somewhat
depressed his bride. When the carriage was gone they
ascended the stairs to wash their hands, the charwoman
showing the way. On the landing Tess stopped and started.
" What's the matter T " said he.
" Those horrid women ! " she answered, with a smile.
" How they frightened me ! *
He looked up and perceived two life-size portraits on
panels built into the masonry. As all visitors to the man-
sion are aware, these paintings represent women of middle
age, of a date some two hundred years ago, whose linea-
ments once seen can never be forgotten. The long, pointed
features, narrow eye, and smirk of the one, so suggestive
of merciless treachery, the hill-hook nose, large teeth and
bold eye of the other, suggesting arrogance to the point of
ferocity, haunt the beholder afterwards in his dreams.
" Whose portraits are those f asked Clare of the char-
" IVe been told by the old folk that they were ladies of
the DTJrberville family, the ancient lords of this manor, "
she said. " Owing to their being bnilded into the wall they
can't be removed. "
The unpleasantness of the matter was that, in addition
to their effect upon Tess, her fine features were unquestion-
ably traceable in their exaggerated forms. He said nothing
of this, however ; and regretting that his romantic plan of
choosing this house for their bridal time was proving to
be a mistake, went on into the adjoining room. The place
having been rather hastily prepared for them, they washed
their hands in one basin. Clare touched hers under the
water.
" Which are my fingers and which are yours T " he said,
looking np. " They are very mnch mixed. "
" They are all yours, " said she, very prettily, and endeav.
ored to be gayer than she was. He had not been displeased
with her thoughtfulness on such an occasion ; it was what
248 MSSS OF TUB DTJKBEB-VILLES
every sensible woman would show ; but Tess knew that she
had been thoughtful to excess, and straggled against it.
The sun was so low on that short last afternoon of the
year tiiat it shone in through a small opening and formed
a golden staff which stretched across to her skirt, where it
made a spot like a paint-mark set upon her. They went
down to the ancient parlor to tea, and here they shared
their first common meal alone. Such was their childish-
ness, or rather his, that he found it interesting to use the
same bread-and-butter plate as herself, and to brush crumbs
from her lips with his own. He wondered a little that she
did not enter into these frivolities with his own zest.
Looking at her silently for a long time, " She is a dear,
dear Tess/ he thought to himself, as one deciding on the
true construction of a difficult passage. " Do I realize
solemnly enough how utterly and irretrievably this little
womanly thing is the creature of my good or bad faith and
fortune t I think not. I think I could not, unless I were a
woman myself. What I am, she is. What I become she
must become. Wnat I cannot be she cannot be. And shall
I ever neglect her, or hurt her, or even forget to consider
hert God forbid such a crime ! "
They sat on over the tea-table, waiting for their luggage,
which the dairyman had promised to send before it grew
dark. But evening began to close in, and the luggage did
not arrive, and they had brought nothing more than they
stood in. With the departure of the sun the calm mood of
the winter day changed. Out-of-doors there began noises
as of silk smartly rubbed ; the restful dead leaves of the
preceding autumn were stirred to irksome resurrection, and
whirled about unwillingly, and tapped against the shutters.
It soon began to rain.
" That cock knew the weather was going to change, " said
Clare.
The woman who had attended upon them had gone homa
r the night, but she had placed candles upon the table.
and now they lit them. Each candle-name drew towards
the fireplace.
" These old houses are so draughty, " continued Angel,
looking at the flames, and at the grease guttering down the
sides. " I wonder where that luggage is T We haven't even
a brush and comb. "
" I don't know, " she answered, absent-minded.
" Tess, you are not a bit cheerful this evenings — not at all
as you used to be. Those harridans upstairs have unsettled
you. I am sorry I brought you here. I wonder if you really
love me, after all T "
He knew that she did, and the words had no serious in-
tent; but she was surcharged with emotion, and winced
like a wounded animal. Though she tried not to shed tears,
she could not help showing one or two.
" I did not mean it, " said he, sorry. " You are worried
at not having your things, I know. I cannot think why
old Jonathan has not come with them. Why, it is seven
o'clock ! Ah, there he is 1 "
A knock had come to the door, and, there being nobody
else to answer it, Clare went out. He returned to the room
with a small package in his hand.
" It is not Jonathan, after all, " he said.
" How vexing ! " said Tess.
The packet had been brought by a special messenger, who
had arrived at Talbothays from Emininster Vicarage im-
mediately after tie departure of the married couple, and
had followed them hither, being under injunction to deliver
it into nobody's hands but theirs. Clare brought it to the
light. It was less than a foot long, sewed up in canvas,
sealed in red wax with his father's seal, and directed in his
father's hand to " Mrs. Angel Clare. "
" It is a little wedding-present for you, Tess, " said he,
handing it to her. " How thoughtful they are ! "
Tess looked a little flustered as she took it
T think I would rather have you open it. dearest. " said
260 TESB OF THE D-URBERVILLES
she, after examining the parcel. " I don't like to break
those great seals ; they look so serious. Please open it for
me ! *
He undid the parcel. Inside was a case of morocco
leather, on the top of which lay a note and a key.
The note was for Clare, in the following words j
" My dear Son, —
" Possibly yon have forgotten that on the death of your
godmother, Mrs. Pitney, when you were a lad, she— vain,
kind woman that she was — left to me a portion of the con*
tents of her jewel-case in trust for your wife, if you she;: Id
ever have one, as a mark of her affection for you and whom-
soever you should choose. This trust I have fulfilled, and
the diamonds have been locked up at my banker's ever since
Though I feel it to be a somewhat incongruous act in the
circumstances, I am, as you will see, bound to hand over the
articles to the woman to whom they will now rightly belong,
and they are therefore promptly sent. They become, I be-
lieve, heirlooms, strictly speaking, according to the terms of
your godmother's will, the precise words of which that refer
to this matter are enclosed. "
*'I do remember, " said Clare; " but I had quite forgot
ten. "
Unlocking the case, they found it to contain a necklace,
with pendant, bracelets, and ear-rings ; and also some other
smalt ornaments.
Tess seemed afraid to touch them at first, but her eyes
sparkled for a moment as much as the stones when Chin
spread out the set.
" Are they minef she asked, incredulously.
" They are, certainly, " said he.
He turned to the fire. He remembered how, when he
was a lad of fifteen, Ms godmother, the Squire's wife — the
only rich person with whom he had ever come in contact-
THE CONSEQUENCE 25]
tad pinned her faith to his success ; had prophesied a -won-
drous career for him. There had seemed nothing at all out
of keeping with such a conjectured career in the storing
up of these showy ornaments for his wife, and the wives of
her descendants. They gleamed somewhat ironically now.
" Yet whyt " he asked himself. It was but a question of
vanity throughout ; and if that were admitted into one side
of the equation it should be admitted into the other. HiB
wife was a D'TJrberville : whom could they become better
than her 1
Suddenly he said with enthusiasm, " Teas, put them on —
put them on 1 " And he turned from the fire to help her.
As if by magic she had already donned them — necklace,
ear-rings, bracelets, and all.
" But the gown isn't right, Teas, " said Clare. " It ought
to be a low one for a set of brilliants like that.''
" Ought it! " said Tess.
" Yes, " said he. He suggested to her how to tuck in the
upper edge of her bodice, so as to make it roughly approx-
imate to the cut for evening wear ; and when she had done
this, and the pendant to the necklace hung isolated amid
the whiteness of her throat, as it was designed to do, he
stepped back to survey her.
" My heavens, " said Clare, " how beautiful you are ! "
She astonished him. As everybody knows, fine feathers
make fine birds : a peasant girl but very moderately pre-
possessing to the casual observer in her simple condition
and attire will bloom as an amazing beauty if clothed as a
woman of fashion with the aids that Art can render ; while
the beauty of the midnight crush would often cut but a
sorry figure if placed inside the field-woman's wrapper
upon a monotonous acreage of turnips on a dull day. He
had never till now realized the artistic excellence of Tess'e
limbs and features.
" If you were only to appear in a ballroom ! " he said.
* But no — no, dearest ; I think I love you best in the wing.
352 TESS OP THE DTJRBERVILLES
bonnet and cotton frock — yes, better than in this, well as
you support these dignities. "
Tess's sense of her striking appearance had given her a
flush of excitement, which was yet not happiness.
" Ill take them off, " she said, " in case Jonathan should
see me. They are not fit for me, are they T They must be
gold, I suppose 1 "
" Let them stay a few minutes longer. Sell them?
Never. It would be a breach of faith. "
Influenced by a second thought, she readily obeyed : she
had something to tell, and there might be help in these.
She sat down with the jewels upon her; and they again
indulged, in conjectures as to where Jonathan could possi-
bly be with their baggage. The ale they had poured out
for his consumption when he came had gone flat with long
standing.
Shortly after this they began supper, which was already
laid on a side-table. Before they had finished there was a
jerk in the fire-smoke, the rising skein of which bulged out
into the room, as if some giant had laid his hand on the
chimney-top for a moment. It had been caused by the
opening of the outer door. A heavy step was now heard
in the passage, and Angel went out
" I couldn'make nobody hear at all by knocking, " apolo-
gized Jonathan Kail, for it was he at last ; " and as'twas
raining out I opened the door. I've brought the things,
sir. "
" I am very glad to see them. But you are very late. "
•'Well, yes, sir. " There was something snbdued in Jona-
than Kail's tone which had not been there in the day, and
lines of concern were ploughed upon his forehead in addi-
tion to the lines of years. He continued: " We've all been
gallied at the dairy at what might ha'been a most terrible
affliction since you and your mis'ess — so to name her now
—left us this a'ternoon. Perhaps you ha'nt forgot the
ock's afternoon crowt "
THE CONSEQUENCE 298
" Dear me ; — what *
" Well, some says it do mane one thing, and some an-
other ; bnt what's happened is that poor little Betty Priddle
hev tried to drown herself. "
" No! Really t Why, she bade ns good-by with the
" Yes. Well, sir, when you and your mis'ess — so to name
what she lawful is — when you two drove away, as I say,
Betty and Marian put on their bonnets and went out ; and
as there is not much doing now, being New Year's Eve,
and folks mops and brooms from what's inside'em, nobody
took much notice. They went on to Lew-Everard, where
they had some'at to drink, and then on they vamped to
Dree-armed Gross, and there they seem to have parted,
Betty striking across the water-meads as if for home, and
Marian going on to the next village, where there's another
public-house. Nothing more was seed or heard o* Betty
till the waterman, on his way home, noticed some'at by the
Great Pool, and twas her bonnet and shawl packed up. In
the water he found her. He and another man brought her
home, thinking'a was dead ; but she came round by de-
grees. "
Angel, suddenly recollecting that Tess was overhearing
this gloomy tale, went to shut the door between the passage
and the ante-room to the inner parlor where she was ; but
his wife, flinging a shawl round her, had approached and
was listening to the man's narrative, her eyes resting ab-
sently on the luggage and the drops of rain glistening
upon it
" And, more than this, there's Marian ; she's been found
dead drunk by the withy-bed — a girl who hev never been
known to touch anything before except shilling ale ; though
to be sure,'a was always a good trencher-woman, as her
face showed. It seems as if the maids had all gone out tf
their minds ! 9
" And Izzf asked Tess,
SIM TESS OF THE D'UBBERVILLES
" Izz is about house as usual ; but'a do say'a can guess
how it happened ; and she seems to be very low in mind
about it, poor maid, as well she mid be. And so yon see,
sir, as all this happened just when we was packing your few
traps and your mis'ess's night-rail and dressing things into
the cart, why, it belated me. "
" Yes. Well, Jonathan, will you get the trunks upstairs,
and drink a cup of ale, and hasten back as soon as yon
can, in case you should be wanted T "
Tess had gone back to the inner parlor, and sat down
by the fire, looking wistfully into it. She heard Jonathan
Kail's heavy footsteps up and down the stairs till he had
done placing the luggage, and heard him express his thanks
for the ale her husband took out to him, and for the gratu-
ity he received. Jonathan's footsteps then died from the
door, and his cart creaked away.
Angel slid forward the massive oak bar which fastened
the door, and coming in to where she sat over the hearth,
pressed her cheeks between his hands from behind. He
expected her to jump up gaily and unpack the toilet gear
that she had been so anxious about, but as she did not rise,
he sat down with her in the firelight, the candles on the
supper- table being too thin and glimmering to interfere
with its glow.
" I am so sorry you should have heard this sad story, " he
said. " Still, don't let it depress you. Retty was naturally
morbid, you know. "
" Without the least cause, " said Tess. " While they who
have cause to be, hide it, and pretend they are not. "
This incident had turned the scale for her. They were
simple and innocent girls on whom the unhappiness of un-
requited love had fallen ; they had deserved better at the
hands of Fate. She had deserved worse, yet she was the
chosen one. It was wicked of her to take all without pay-
ing. She would pay to the uttermost farthing ; she would
tell, there and then. This final determination she came to
when she looked into the fire, he holding her hand.
A steady crimson glare from the now nameless embers
painted the sides and back of the fireplace with its color,
and the well-polished andirons, and the old brass tongs that
would not meet. The 1 underside of the mantel-shelf was
flushed with the unwavering blood-colored light, and the
legs of the table nearest the fire. Tess's face and neck re-
flected the same warmth ; which each diamond turned into
an Aldebaran or a Sirius — a constellation of white, red, and
green flashes, that interchanged their hues with her every
pulsation.
" Do you remember what we said to each other this
morning about telling our faults ? " he asked, abruptly, find-
ing that she still remained immovable. " We spoke lightly,
perhaps, and you may well have done so. But for me it
was no light promise. I want to make a confession to you,
love. "
This, from him, so unexpectedly apposite, had the effect
upon her of a Providential interposition.
" Tou have to confess something 1 " she said, quickly, and
even with gladness and relief.
" Tou did not expect it! Ah — you thought too highly
of me. Now, listen. Put your head there, because I want
you to forgive me, and not to be indignant with me for not
telling you before, as perhaps I ought to have done. "
How strange it was 1 He seemed to be her double, Sha
did not speak, and Clare went on :
" But, darling, I did not mention it because I was afraid
of endangering my chance of you, the great prize of my
life — my fellowship I call you. My brother's fellowship
was won at his college, mine at Talbothays Dairy. Well, I
would not risk it I was going to tell you a month ago — ■
at the time you agreed to be mine, but I could not ; I
thought it might frighten you away from me. I put it off i
256'TESS OF THE IVURBERYILKES
then I thought I would tell yon yesterday, to give yon ft
ebance at least of escaping me. But I did not. And I did
not this morning, when yon proposed onr confessing our
faults on the landing — the sinner that I was ! But I must,
now I see you sitting there so solemnly. I wonder; if yon
will forgive me T " , " *.
" Oh yes ! I am sure that *
" Well, I hope so. But wait a minute. You don't know.
To begin at the beginning. Though I believe my poor
father fears that I am one of the eternally lost for my doc-
trines, I am of course a believer in good morals, Tess, as
much as you. I used to wish to be a teacher of men, and
it was a great disappointment to me when I found I could
not enter the Church. * I loved spotlessness, even though I
could lay no claim to it, and hated impurity, as I hope I do
nowA Whatever one may think of plenary inspiration, one
must heartily subscribe to these words of Paul :'Be thou
an example — in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit,
in faith, in purity.'It is the only safeguard for us poor
Miman beings.'Integer vita),'says a Roman poet, who is
-.trange company for St. Paul ;
The man of upright life, from frailties free,
Fdscqb, needs no Moorish spear and bow.
Well, a certain place is paved with good intentions, and ;
having felt all that so strongly, you will see what a terrible
remorse it bred in me when, in the midst of my high aims
for other people, I myself felL " I
He then told her of that time of his life to which allusion
has been made when, tossed about by doubts and difficulties I
Eke a cork on the wares, he went to London and plunged
into eight-ana 1 forty hours'dissipation with a stranger.
" Happily I awoke almost immediately to a sense of my
folly, " he continued. " I would have no more to say to her >
wid I came home. I have never repeated the offence. Bnt
THE CONSEQUENCE 257
i felt I should like to treat you with perfect frankness and
honor, and I could not do so without telling this. Do yon
forgive me! "
She pressed his hand tightly for an answer.
" Then we will dismiss it at once and forever — too pain-
ful as it is for the occasion — and talk of something lighter*
" Angel — I am almost glad — because now you can for.
give me! I have not made my confession. I have a con*
Cession, too — remember, I said so. "
" Ah, to be sure ! Now then for it, wicked little one. "
" Perhaps, although you smile, it is as serious as yours,
or more so. "
" It can hardly be more serious, dearest "
" It cannot — oh no, it cannot ! " She jumped up at the
nope. " No, it cannot be more serious, certainly, " she cried,
" because tis just the same ! I will tell you now. "
Their hands were still joined. The ashes under the grate
were lit by the fire vertically, like a torrid waste. Imagina-
tion might have beheld a Last-Day Kindness in this red-
coaled glow, which still fell on his face and hand, and on
hers, peering into the loose hair about her brow, and firing
the delicate skin underneath. A large shadow of her shape
rose upon the wall and ceiling. She bent forward, at which
each diamond on her neck gave a sinister wink like a toad's,
and pressing her forehead against his temple she entered
on the story of her acquaintance with Alec DITrberville
and its results, murmuring the words without flinching,
and with her eyelids drooping down.
: > , Google
THE WOMAN PAYS.
Her narrative ended ; even its re-assertions and second-
ary explanations were done. Tess-'s voice throughout had
hardly risen higher than its opening tone ; there had been
no exculpatory phrase of any kind, and she had not wept
Bat the complexion even of external things seemed to
suffer transmutation as her announcement progressed. The
fire in the grate looked impish — demoniacally funny, as if
it did not care in the least about her strait. The fender
grinned idly, as if it^ too, did not care. The light from
the water-bottle was merely engaged in a chromatic prob-
lem. All material objects around announced their irre-
sponsibility with terrible iteration. And yet nothing had
changed since the moments when he had been kissing her ;
or rather, nothing in the substance of things. But the
essence of things had changed. When she ceased, the
auricular impressions from their previous endearments
seemed to hustle away into the corners of their brains, re-
peating themselves as echoes from a time of supremely
purblind foolishness.
Clare performed the irrelevant act of stirring the fire ;
the intelligence had not even yet got to the bottom of him.
After stirring the embers he rose to his feet ; all the force
f her disclosure had imparted itself now. His face had
THE WOMAN PAYS 2G8
withered. In the strenuousness of his concentration he ,
treadled fitfully on the floor. He could not, by any con-
trivance, think closely enough ; that was the meaning of
his vague movement. When he spoke it was in the most
inadequate, commonplace voice of the many varied tones
she had heard from him.
" Tess ! »
" Tes, dearest. "
" Am I to believe this 1 Prom your manner I am to take
it as true. 0, you cannot be out of your mind ! Ton ought
to be ! Tet you are not. . . My wife, my own Tess ! —
nothing in you warrants such a supposition as that! "
" I am not out of my mind, " she said.
" And yet " He .looked vacantly at her, to resume
with dazed senses : " Why didn't you tell me before I Ah
yes, you would have told me, in a way — but I hindered you,
1 remember ! "
These and other of his words were nothing but the per-
functory babble of the surface while the depths remained
paralyzed. He turned away, and bent over a chair. Tesa
followed him to the middle of the room where he was, and
stood there staring at him with eyes that did not weep.
Presently she slid down upon her knees beside his foot,
and from this position she crouched in a heap.
" In the name of our love, forgive me I * she whispered
with a dry mouth. " I have forgiven you for the same. "
And, as he did not answer, she said again, " Forgive me
as you are forgiven. "
" I have no such hope, " said he.
" I forgive y & u, Angel. "
" Ton— yes, you do. "
" But you do not forgive me T *
" O Tess, forgiveness does not apply to the case ( Ton
were one person ; now you are another. My God — how
can forgiveness meet such a grotesque — prestidigitation as
that! "
360 TESS OF THE iyURBERVILLES
I He paused, contemplating this idea ; then suddenly broke
Into horrible laughter — as unnatural and ghastly as a laugh
in hell. Sickly white, she jumped up.
" Don't — don't ! It kills me quite, that ! " she shrieked,
" 0,have mercy upon me — have mercy! . . . Angel! An-
gel! what do you mean by that laugh! " she cried out,
" Do you know what this is to met "
He shook his head.
" I have been hoping, longing, praying, to make you
happy. I have thought what joy it will be to do it, what
an unworthy wife I shall be if I do not! Thatfs what I
have felt, Angel! "
" I know that. "
" I thought, Angel, that you loved me — me, my very self I
If it is I you do love, 0, how can it be that you look and v
speak so f It frightens me 1 Having begun to love'ee,
I love'ee forever — in all changes, in all disgraces, because
you are yourself. I ask no more. Then how can you, O
my own husband, stop loving me t " *
" I repeat, the woman I have been loving is not you. "
" But who T "
" Another woman in your shape. "
She perceived in his words the realization of her own
apprehensive foreboding in former times. He looked upon
her as a species of impostor ; a guilty woman in the guise
of an innocent one. Terror was upon her white face aa
she saw it ; her cheek was flaccid, and her mouth had almost
the aspect of a round little hole. The horrible sense of his
view of her so deadened her appearance that he stepped
forward, thinking she was going to fall.
" Sit down, sit down, " he said, gently. " Ton are ill ; and
it is natural that you should be. "
She did sit down, without knowing where she was, that
strained look still upon her face, and her eyes such as to
make his flesh creep.
" I dont belong to you any more, then; do J, Angdf*
THE WOMAN PATS 361
Bhe asked, helplessly. " It is not me, but another ■woman
lite me that he loved, ho says. "
By a momentary power of introspection, she seemed to
take pity npon herself as one who was ill-used. Her eyes
filled as she regarded her position further; she turned
round and burst into a flood of self -sympathetic tears.
Angel Clare was relieved at this change, for the effect on
her of what had happened was beginning to be a trouble
to him only less than the woe of the disclosure itself. He
waited patiently, apathetically, tall the violence of her grief
had worn itself out, and her rush of weeping had lessened
to a catching gasp at intervals.
" Angel, " she said, suddenly, in her natural tones, the in-
sane, dry voiee of terror having left her now ; " Angel, am
I too wicked for you and me to live together 1 "
" I have not been able to think what we can do. "
" I shan't ask you to let me live with you, Angel, because
I have no right to. I shall not write to mother and sisters
to say we be married, as I said I would do ;'and I shan't
finish the good-hussir* I cut out and meant to make while
we were in lodgings. "
" Shant youT "
" No, I shan't do anything, unless you order me to ; and
if you go away from me I shall not follow'ee ; and if you
never speak to me any more I shall not ask why, unless
you tell me I may. "
" And if I do order you to do anything t "
" I will obey you like your perfect slave, even if it is to
lie down and die. "
" You are very good. But it strikes me that there is a
want of harmony between your present mood of self-sacri-
fice and your past mood of self-preservation. "
These were the first words of antagonism. To fling elab-
orate sarcasms at Tess, however, was much like flinging
'them at a dog or cat. The charms of their subtlety passed
\pf her unappreciated, and she only received them as inimical
262 TESS OF THE lyURBERVILLES
sounds which meant that anger ruled. She remained muh,
not knowing that he was desperately smothering his affec-
tion for her. She hardly observed that " a tear descended
slowly upon his cheek, so large that it magnified the pores
of the skin over which it rolled, like the object-lens of a mi-
croscope. Meanwhile re-illumination as to the terrible and
total change that her confession had wrought in his life, in
his universe, returned to him , and he tried desperately to ad-
vance among the new conditions in which he stood. Some
consequent action was necessary : yet what 1
" Teas, " he said, as gently as he could speak, " I cannot
stay — in this room — just now. " I will walk out a little
way. " He quietly left the room, and the two glasses of
wine that he had poured out for their supper — one for her,
one for him — remained on the table untasted. This was
what their supper — their Agape — had come to. At tea, two
or three hours earlier, they had, in the freakishness of affec-
tion, drunk from one cup.
The closing of the door behind him, gently as it had been
pulled to, roused Tess from her stupor. He was gone ; she
could not stay. Hastily flinging her cloak round her, she
opened the door and followed, putting out the candles as if
she were never coming back. The rain was over, and the
night was now clear.
She was soon close at his heels, for Clare walked slowly,
and without purpose. His form beside her light gray fig- i
ure looked black, sinister, and forbidding, and she felt as
sarcasm the touch of the jewels of which she had been mo-
mentarily so proud. Clare turned at hearing her footsteps,
but his recognition of her presence seemed to make no
difference in him, and he went on over the five yawning
arches of the great bridge in front of the house. .
The eow and horse tracks in the road were full of watefJ
. having been enough to charge them, but
enough to wash them away. Across these minute pools
the reflected stars flitted in a quick transit as she passed;
THE WOMAN PATS 283
she would not have known they were shining overhead if
she had not seen them there — the vastest things of the uni-
verse imaged in objects bo mean.
The place to which they had travelled to-day was in the
same valley as Talbothays, but some miles lower down the
river; and the surroundings being open she kept easily
in sight of him. Away from the house the road wound
through the meads, and along these she followed Clare
without any attempt to come up with him or to attract him,
but with dumb and vacant fidelity.
At last, however, her listless walk bought her up along-
side him, and still he said nothing. The cruelty of fooled
honesty is often great after enlightenment, and it was great
in Clare now. The outdoor air had apparently taken away
from hum all tendency to act on impulse : he saw her with-
out irradiation — in all her bareness. She knew that Time
was chanting his satiric psalm at her then :
Behold, when thy face is made bare, he that loved thee shall hate ;
Thy face shall be no more fair at the fall of thy fate.
For tliy life shall fall as a leaf and be shed as the rain ;
And the veil of thine head shall be grief, and the erown shall he pain.
He was still intently thinking, and her companionship
had now insufficient power to break or divert the strain of
thought. What a weak thing her presence must have be-
come to him ! She could not help addressing Clare.
" What have I do no — what have I done T I have not told
of anything that interferes with or belies my love for you.
You don't think I planned it, do you! It is in your own
mind what you are angry at, Angel ; it is not in me. O,
it is not in me, and I am not that deceitful woman you
r.hinV me! "
" H'm — well. Not deceitful, my wife ; but not the same.
No, not the same. But do not make me reproach you!
I have sworn that I will not; and I do everything to
avoid it. "
264 TESS OF THE nrntTiF.RV TTJ.Tr w
But she went on pleading in her distraction; and peN
haps said things that would hare been better left to silence.
" 0 Angel — Angel: I was a child — a child when it hap.
pened 1 I knew nothing of men. "
" You were more sinned against than sinning, that I ad-
mit. "
" Then will you not forgive me 1 "
" I do forgive you. But forgiveness is not alL "
" And love met "
To this question he did not answer.
" Angel — my mother says that it sometimes happen*
so— she knows several cases where they were worse than I,
and the husband has not minded it much — has forgiven her
at least. And yet the woman has not loved him as I do
you. "
" Dont, Tess, don't argue. Different societies, different
manners. You seem like an unappreciative peasant woman,
who has never been initiated into the proportions of things.
You don't know what you say. "
" lam only a peasant by position, not by nature. " She
spoke with an impulse to anger, but it went as it came. -
" So much the worse for you. I think that parson who
unearthed your pedigree would have done better if he had
held his tongue. I cannot help associating your decline as
a family with this other fact — of your want of firmness.
Decrepit families imply decrepit wills, decrepit conduct.
God, why did you give me a handle for despising you more
by infor min g me of your descent ! Here was I thinking
you a new-sprung child of Nature ; there were you, the ex-
hausted seed of an effete aristocracy ! "
" Lots o " families are as bad as mine in that. Betty's
family were once large landowners, and so were Dairyman
Billetfs. And the Debbyhouses, who now be carters, were
once the De Bayeux family. You find such as I every*
where ;'tis a feature of our eounty, and I can't help it "
" So much the worse for the county. "
TEE WOMAN PAYS 26b
She took these reproaches in their bulk simply, sot in
their particulars ; he did not love her as he had loved her
hitherto, and to all else she was indifferent.
They wandered on again in silence. It was said after-
wards that a cottager of Wellbridge, who went out late
that night for a doctor, met two lovers in the pastures,
walking very slowly, without converse, one behind the other,
as in a funeral procession, and the glimpse that he ob-
tained of their faces seemed to denote that they were
anxious and sad. Returning later, he passed them again
in the same field, progressing just as slowly, and as regard-
less of the hour and of the cheerless night as before. It
was only on account of his preoccupation with his own
affairs, and the illness in his house, that he did not bear in
mind the curious incident, which, however, he recalled a
long while after.
During the interval of the cottager's going and coming,
she had said to her husband, " I don't see how I can help
being the cause of much misery to you all your life. The
river is down there. I can put an end to myself in it. I
am not afraid. "
" I don't wish to add murder to my other follies, " he
said.
" I will leave something to show that I did it myself— on
account of my shame. They will not blame you then. "
" Don't speak so — I don't want to hear it ! It is absurd
to have such thoughts in this kind of case, which is rather
one for satirical laughter than for tragedy. You don't in
the least understand the quality of the mishap. It would
be viewed in the light of a joke by nine-tenths of the world,
if it were known. Please oblige me by returning to the
house, and going to bed. "
" I will, " said shej dutifully.
They had rambled round by a road which led to the well-
known ruins of the Cistercian Abbey behind the mill, the
latter having, in centuries past, been attached to the monas-
266 TESS OF THE DtTBBEBVTLLES
tie establishment. The mill stall worked on, food being a
t -perennial necessity ; the abbey had perished, creeds being-
transient. One continually sees the ministration of the
temporary outlasting the ministration of the eternal.
Their walk having been circuitous, they were still not far
from the house, and in obeying his direction she only had
to reach the large stone bridge across the main river,
and follow the road for a few yards. When %he got back
everything remained as she had left it, the fire being still
burning. She did not stay downstairs for more than a
few moments, but proceeded to her chamber, whither the
luggage had been taken. Here she sat down on the edge
of the bed, looking vacantly around, and presently began to
undress. In removing the light towards the bedstead its
rays fell npon the tester of white dimity ; something was
hanging beneath it, and she lifted the candle to see what it
was. A bough of mistletoe. Angel had pnt it there; she
knew that in an instant. This was the explanation of that
mysterious parcel which it had been so difficult to pack and
bring ; whose contents he would not explain to her, saying
that time would soon show her the purpose thereof. In
his zest and his gaiety he had hung it there. How foolish
and inopportune that mistletoe looked now!
Having nothing more to fear, having scarce anything to
hope, for that he would relent there seemed no promise
whatever, she lay down dully. When sorrow ceases to be
speculative sleep sees her opportunity. Among so many
happier moods which forbid repose this was a mood that
welcomed it, and in a few minutes the lonely Tess forgot
existence, surrounded by the aromatic stillness of the cham-
ber that had once, possibly, been the bride-chamber of her
own ancestry.
Later on that night Clare also retraced his steps to the
house. Entering softly to the sitting-room he obtained a
" ight, and with the manner of one who had considered his
urse, he spread his rugs upon the old horsehair sofa
THE WOMAN PATS 261
which stood there, and roughly shaped it to asleeping-couch.
Before lying down he crept shoeless npstairs, and listened
at the door of her apartment. Her measured breathing
told. that she was sleeping profoundly.
" Thank God ! ■ murmured Clare ; and yet he was con-
scious of a pang of bitterness at the thought — approxi-
mately true, though not wholly so — that having shifted the
burden of her Bfe to his shoulders, she was now reposing
without care-
He turned away to descend j then, irresolute, faced round
to her door again. In the act he caught sight of one of the
DTTrberville dames, whose portrait was immediately over
the entrance to Tess's bed-chamber. In the candle-light
the painting was more than unpleasant. Sinister design
lurked in its features, a concentrated purpose of ravenge
on the other sex — so it seemed to him then. The Caroline
bodice of the portrait was low, precisely as Tess's had been
when he tucked it in to show the necklace ; and again he
experienced the distressing sensation of a resemblance be-
tween them.
The check was sufficient He resumed his retreat, and
descended.
His air remained calm and cold, his small, compressed
mouth indexing his powers of self-control ; his face wear-
ing still that terribly sterile expression which had spread
thereon since her disclosure. It was the face of a man who
was no longer passion's slave, yet who found no advantage
in his enfranchisement He was simply regarding the har-
rowing contingencies of human experience, the unexpected-
ness of things. Nothing so pure, so sweet, so truthful as
Teas had seemed possible all the long while that he had
adored her, up to an hour ago ; but
The tittle less, and what worlds away 1
He argued erroneously when he said to himself that her
heart was not indexed in the honest freshness of her face ;
208 TESS OF THE lyUEBEEVTLKFS
bat Teas had no advocate to set him right Could it be
possible, he continued, that eyes which as they gazed never
expressed any divergence from what the tongue was telling,
were yet ever seeing another world behind her apparent
one, discordant and contrasting?
He reclined on his couch in the sitting-room, and extin-
guished the light. The night came in, and took up its place
there, unconcerned and indifferent; the flight which had
already swallowed up his happiness, and was now digesting
it listlessly ; and was ready to swallow up the happiness of
a thousand other people with as little disturbance or change
of mien.
XXXVI
Clare arose in the light of a dawn that was ashy and
furtive, as though associated with crime. The fireplace
confronted him with its extinct embers ; the spread supper-
table, whereon stood the two full glasses of nntasted wine,
now fiat and filmy; her vacated seat and his own; the
other articles of furniture, with their eternal look of not
being able to help it, their intolerable inquiry what was
to be done T From above there was no sound ; but in a
few minutes there came a knock at the door. He remem-
bered that it would be the neighboring cottager's wife, who
was to minister to their wants while they remained here,
The presence of a third person in the house would be ex-
tremely awkward just now, and, being already dressed, he
opened the window, and informed her that they could man-
age to shift for themselves that morning. She had a milk-
can in her hand, which he told her to leave at the door.
When the dame had gone away he searched in the back
quarters of the house for fuel, and speedily lit a fire.
There was plenty of eggs, butter, bread, and so on in At
THE WOMAN PAYS 269
larder, and Glare soon bad breakfast laid, bis experiences at
the dairy having rendered him facile in domestic prepara-
tions. The smoke of the kindled wood rose from the
chimney without like a lotus-beaded column ; local people
who were passing by saw it, and thought of the newly
married couple, and envied their happiness.
Angel cast a final glance round, and then, going to the
foot of the stairs, said, " Breakfast is ready. "
He opened the front door, and took a few steps in the
morning air. When, after a short space, he came back, she
was already in the sitting-room, mechanically readjusting
the breakfast things. As she was fully attired, and the
interval since his calling her had been but two or three
minutes, she must have been dressed, or nearly so, before be
went to summon her. Her hair was twisted up in a large
round mass at the back of her head, and she bad put on one
of the new frocks — a pale blue woollen garment with neck,
frillings of white. Her hands and face appeared to be
cold, and she had possibly been sitting dressed in the bed-
room a long time without any fire. The extreme civility
of Clare's tone in calling her seemed to have inspired her,
for the moment, with anew g limm er of hope. But it soon
died when she looked at him.
The pair were, in truth, but the ashes of their former fires.
To the hot sorrow of the previous night had succeeded
heaviness ; it seemed as if nothing eould kindle either of
them to fervor of sensation any more.
He spoke gently to her, and she replied with a like on.
demonstrativeness. At last she came up to him, looking
in his sharply defined face as one who had no conscious-
ness that her own formed a visible object also.
'■'Angel ! " she said, and paused, touching him with her
fingers lightly as a breeze, as though she could hardly be-
lieve to be there in the flesh the man who was onee her lover.
Her eyes were bright, her cheek, though pale, still showed
its wonted roundness, though dried tears had left a vitrified
170 TESS OT THB lyUBBEBVILLES
glistening thereon ; and the usually ripe red mouth was
almost as pale as her cheek. But she was still throbbingly
alive, notwithstanding that under the stress of her mental
grief the life beat so brokenly that a little further pull upon
it might cause real illness, render her eyes dull, uncharac-
teristic, and her mouth thin.
But she looked absolutely pure. Nature, in her fantas-
tic trickery, had set such a seal of girlishness upon Toss's
countenance that he gazed at her with a stupefied air.
" Tess ! Say it is not true I No, it is not true 1 *
" It is true. "
" Every word T "
" Every word. "
He looked at her imploringly, as if be would willingly
have taken a lie from her lips, knowing it to be one, and
have made of it, by some sort of sophistry, a valid denial
However, she only repeated, " It is true. "
" Is he living ? " Angel then asked.
" The baby died. "
" But the man I "
" He is alive. "
A last despair passed over Glare's face. " Is he in Eng.
landT "
" Yes. "
He took a few steps vaguely. " My position — is this,''he
said, abruptly. " I thought — any man would have thought
— that by giving up all ambition to win a wife with social
standing, with fortune, with knowledge of the world, I
should secure rustic innocence as surely as I should secure
pink cheeks ; but However, I am no man to reproach
you, and I will not. "
Tess felt his position so entirely that the remainder had
not been needed. Therein lay just the distress of it ; she
saw that he had lost all round.
" Angel — I should not have let it go on to marriage
nth'ee if I had not known that, after all, there was a last
THE WOMAN PATS 271
Way out of it for you ; though I hoped you would never "
Her voice grew husky.
" A last way! "
" I mean, to get rid of me. You can get rid of me. "
" How! "
" By divorcing me. "
" Good heavens — how can you be so simple ! How can 1
divorce you! "
" Can't you — now I have told you this ! I thought my
tafession would give you grounds for that. "
" O Tess — you are too, too — childish — unformed — crude,
I suppose ! I don't know what you are. You don'fc under-
stand the law — you don't understand ! "
" What — you cannot t "
" For what happened before our marriage! Indeed 1
cannot. "
A quick shame mixed with the misery upon his listener's
face. " I thought — I thought, " she whispered. " 0, now I
see how wicked I seem to you. Believe me — believe me,
on my soul, I never thought but that you could ! I hoped
you would not ; yet I believed, without a doubt, that you
could cast me off if you were determined, and didn't love
me at — at — all ! "
" You were mistaken, " he said.
" 0, then I ought to have done it, to have done it last
night ! But I hadn't the courage. That's just like me ! "
" The courage to do what ! "
As she did not answer he took her by the hand. " What
were you thinking of doing ! " he inquired.
" Of putting an end to myself. "
" When! "
She writhed under this inquisitorial manner. " Last
night, " she answered.
" Where! "
" Under your mistletoe. "
" My good Ood! — how! " he asked, eternlv
372 TESS OP THE D > UKBERVH < LES
" PH tell you, sir, if you won't be angry with me ! ■ she
said, shrinking. " It was with the cord of my box. But I
could not — do the last thing ! I was afraid that it might
cause a scandal to your name. "
The unexpected quality of this confession, wrung from
her, and not volunteered, shook him indescribably. But
he still held her, and, letting his glance fall from her face
downwards, he said tremulously, " Now, listen to this. You
must not dare to think of such a horrible thing! How
could you ! You will promise me as your husband to
attempt that no more. "
" lam ready to promise. I saw how wicked it was. "
" Wicked! The idea was unworthy of you beyond de-
scription.''
" But, Angel, " she pleaded, enlarging her eyes in calm
■ unconcern upon him, " it was thought of entirely on your
account — to set you free without the scandal of the divorce
that I thought you would have to get I should never
have dreamed of doing it on rcin e. However, to do it with
my own hand is too good for me, after all. It is you, my
ruined husband, who ought to strike the blow. I think I
should love you more, if that were possible, if you could
bring yourself to do it, since there's no other way of escape
for'ee. I feel I am so utterly worthless. So very greatly
in the way 1 "
" Ssh! "
" Well, since you say so, I won't. I have no wish opposed
to yours. "
He knew this to be true enough. Since the desperation
of the night her activities had dropped to zero, and there
was no further rashness to be feared.
Tess tried to busy herself again over the breakfast-table
with more or less success, and they sat down both on the
same side, so that their glances did not meet. There was
at first something awkward in hearing each other eat and
rink, but this could not be escaped ; moreover, the amount
THB WOMAN PATS W8
of eating done was small on both sides. Breakfast over,
he rose, and, telling her the hour at which he might be ex-
pected to dinner, went off to the miller's in a mechanical
pursuance of the plan of studying that business, which had
been his only practical reason for coming here.
When he was gone Teas stood at the window, and pres-
ently saw his form crossing the great stone bridge which
conducted to the mill premises. He sank behind it, crossed
the railway beyond, and disappeared. Then, without a sigh,
she turned her attention to the room, and began clearing
the table and setting it in order.
The charwoman soon came. Her presence was at first a
strain upon Tess, but afterwards an alleviation. At half-
past twelve she left her assistant alone in the kitchen, and,
returning to the sitting-room, waited for the reappearance
of Angel's form behind the bridge.
About one he showed himself. Her face flushed, although
he was a quarter of a mile off. She ran to the kitchen to
get the dinner served by the time he should enter. He
went first to the room where they had washed their hands
together the day before, and as he entered the sitting-room
the dish-covers rose from the dishes as if by his own motion.
" How punctual ! " he said.
" Yes. I saw you coming over the bridge, " said she.
The meal was passed in commonplace talk of what he had
been doing during the morning at the Abbey Mill, of the
methods of bolting and the old-fashioned machinery, which
he feared would not enlighten him greatly on modern im-
proved methods, some of it seeming to have been in use
ever since the days it ground for the monks in the adjoin-
ing* conventual buildings — now a heap of ruins. He left
the house again in the course of an hour, coming home at
dusk, and occupying himself through the evening with his
papers. She feared she was in the way, and, when the old
woman was gone, retired to the kitehen, where she made
herself busy as well as Bhe could for more than an hour.
274 TE9S OF THBi PTTTFKK V 1 1 < T iTW
Clarets shape appeared at the door. " You must not
wort like this, " he said. " You are not my servant, yon
know j you are my wifa "
Her face brightened. " I may think myself that — in-
deed ! * she murmured in piteous raillery. " You mean in
name I Well, I don't want to be anything more. "
" You may think so, Tees! You are. What do yon
mean? "
" I don't know, " she said, hastily, with tears in her eyes.
" I thought I — because I am not respectable, I mean. I
told you I thought I was not respectable enough long
ago — and I didn't want to marry you, on that account —
only you urged me ! "
She broke into sobs, and turned her back to him. It
would almost have won round any man but Angel Clare.
Within the remote depths of his constitution, so gentle and
affectionate as he was in general, there lay hidden a hard
logical deposit, like a vein of metal in a soft loam, which
turned the edge of everything that attempted to traverse it
It had blocked his way with the Church; it blocked his
way with Tess. Moreover, his affection itself was less fire
than radiance, and, with regard to the .other sex, when he
ceased to believe he ceased to follow; contrasting in this
with many impressionable natures, who remain sensuously
infatuated with what they intellectually despise. When
pnt upon his mettle his power of self-mastery was appalling
— almost inhuman. He waited till her sobbing ceased
" I wish half the women in England were as respectable
as you, " he said, in an ebullition of bitterness against wom-
ankind in general. " It isn't a question of respectability,
but one of principle. " *
He spoke such things as these and more of a kindred
sort to her, being still swayed by the antipathetic wave
which warps direct souls with such persistence when once
their vision finds itself mocked by appearances. There
vas, it is true, underneath, a back current of sympathy
THE WOMAN PAYS 27S
through which a woman of the world might have conquered
Mm. But Tess did not think of this ; she took everything
as her deserts, and hardly opened her mouth. The firmness
of her devotion to him was indeed almost pitiful ; quick-
tempered as she naturally was, nothing that he could say
made her unseemly; she sought not her own; was not
provoked ; thought no evil of bis treatment of her. She
might just now have been Apostolic Charity herself returned
to a self-seeking modern world.
This evening, night, and morning were passed precisely
as the preceding ones had been passed. On one, and only
one, occasion did she — the formerly free and independent
Tess — venture to make any advances. It was on the third
occasion of his starting after a meal to go out to the flour-
mill. As he was leaving the table he said " Good-by, " and
she replied in the same words, at the same time inc lining
her mouth in the way of his. He did not avail himself of
the invitation, saying, as he turned hastily aside, " I shall
be home punctually. "
Tess shrank into herself as if she had been struck. Often
enough had he tried to reach those lips against her consent
— often had he said gaily that her mouth and breath tasted
of butter and eggs and milk and honey, on which she mainly
Eved, that he drew sustenance from them, and other follies
of that sort. But he did not care for them now. He ob-
served her sudden shrinking, and said gently, " You know,
I have to think of a course. It was imperative that we
should stay together a little while, to avoid the scandal to
you that would have resulted from our immediate parting.
But you must see it is only for form's sake. "
" Yes, " said Tess, absently.
He went out, and on his way to the mill stood still, and,
faint as his love for her had waned, wished for a moment
that he had responded yet more kindly, and kissed her once
at least.
Thus they lived through this despairing day or two ; in
376 TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES
the same house, truly ; but more widely apart than bef or«
they were lovers. It was evident to her that he was, as he
bad said, living with paralyzed activities, in his endeavor
to think of a plan of procedure. She was awe-stricken to
discover such determination under such apparent flexibility.
She no longer expected forgiveness now. More than once
she thought of going away from him during his absence at
the mill j but she feared that this, instead of benefiting him ,
might be the means of hampering and humiliating him yet
more, if it should become known.
Meanwhile Clare was meditating verily. Hi a thought
had been unsuspended ; he was becoming ill with thinking;
eaten out with thinking, withered by thinking; scourged
out of all his former pulsating, flexuous domesticity. Ho
walked about saying to himself, " What's to be done — what'u
to be done I " and by chance she overheard him. It caused!
her to break the reserve about their future which had hith
erto prevailed.
" I suppose — you are not going to live wi'me — long, are
you, Angel 1 " she asked, the sunk corners of her mouth be-
traying how purely mechanical were the means by which
Bhe retained that expression of chastened calm upon her
face.
" I cannot, " he said, " without despising myself, and what
is worse, perhaps, despising you. I mean, of course, can-
not live with you in the ordinary sense. At present, what-
ever I feel, I do not despise you, And, since we have begun
to speak, Tess, let me speak plainly, otherwise you may
not perceive all my difficulties. How can we live together
while that man lives, he being your husband in the sight of
Nature, if not really f Now I put it to you. Don't think
of me or of yourself, my feelings or your feelings. That's
not all the difficulty ; it lies in another consideration— one
bearing upon the future of other people than ourselves.
Think of years to come, and children born to us, and this
wt matter getting known — for it must get known. Black-
THE WOMAN PATS BJT
■foor Vale and The Chase, even the yonder side of i% are
ttot such uttermost parts of the earth that nobody ever
eomes from or goes to them from elsewhere. Well, think
of these wretches of our flesh and blood growing up under
doubts which they will gradually get to feel the full force
of with their expanding years. What an awakening for
them ! What a prospect ! Can you honestly say Remain,
after contemplating this contingency! Don't you think
-ye had better endure the ills we have than fly to others! "
She did not lift her eyelids, weighted with trouble.
" I cannot say Remain, " she answered. " I cannot ; I had
aot thought bo far. "
Tess's feminine hope — shall we confess it — had been so
obstinately recuperative as to revive in her surreptitious
visions of a domiciliary intimacy continued long enough
zo break down his coldness even against his judgment.
Though unsophisticated in the usual sense, she was not in-
complete ; and it would have denoted deficiency of woman-
aood if she had not instinctively known what an argument
aes in propinquity. Nothing else would serve her, she
knew, if this failed. It was wrong to hope in what was of
the nature of strategy, she said to herself : yet that sort of
hope she could not extinguish. His last representation had
now been made, and it was, as sne said, a new view. She
bad truly never thought so far as that, and his lucid picture
of possible offspring who would scorn her was one that
brought deadly conviction to an honest heart which was
humanitarian to its centre. Sheer experience had already
taught her, that, in some circumstances, there was one
i5^gl)etter_than to lead a good life, and that was to be
3aved from leading any life whatever, Like all who had
Deen previsioned by Buffering, she couid, in the words of
M. Sully-Prudhomme, hear a penal sentence in the fiaj,
* You shall be born. "
Yet such is the vulpine slyness of Dame Nature, that, till
*ow, Tess had been hoodwinked by her love for Clare into
f78 TE88 OP THE CUItBBRVILLES
forgetting it might result in vitalizations that would inflict
upon others what she had bewailed as a misfortune to her.
self.
She therefore could not withstand his argument. But
with the self-combating proclivity of the supersensitive, an
answer thereto arose in Clare's own mind, and he almost
feared it It was based on her exceptional physical nature ;
and she might have used it promisingly. Moreover, she
might have added: " On an Australian upland or Texan
plain, who is to know or care about my misfortunes, or to
reproach me or yon 1 " Yet, like the majority of women.
she accepted the momentary presentment as if it were the
inevitable. And she may have been right. The heart of
woman knowetb not only its own bitterness, but its hus-
band's, and who should say that, even if these assumed re-
proaches were not likely to be addressed to him or to his
by strangers, they might not have reached his ears from
his own fastidious brain.
It was the third day of the estrangement. Some might
risk the odd paradox that with more animalism he would
have been the nobler man. We do not say it. Yet Clare's
love was ethereal to a fault, imaginative to impracticability.
With these natures, corporeal presence is sometimes less
appealing than corporeal absence ; the latter creating an
ideal presence that conveniently drops the defects of the
real. She found that her personality did not plead her
cause so forcibly as she had anticipated. The figurative
phrase was true: she was another woman than the one
who had excited his desire.
" I have thought over what you say, " she remarked to
him, moving her forefinger over the table-eloth, her other
hand, which bore the ring that mocked them both, support*
ing her forehead. " It is quite true, all of it ; it must be.
You must go away from me. "
" But what can you dot "
" I can go home. "
THE WOMAN PATS 279
dart ^iad not thought of that. " Are yon sore 1 " he saicL
" Quite sure. We ought to part, and we may as well get
it past and done. You once said that I was apt to win
men against their better judgment j and if I am constantly
before your eyes I may cause you to change your plans in
opposition to your reason and wish ; and afterwards your
repentance and my sorrow will be terrible. "
He was silent. " And you would like to go hornet " he
ashed.
" I want to leave you, and go home. "
" Then it shall be so. "
Though she did not look up at him, she started. There
was a difference between the proposition and the covenant.
which she had felt only too quickly.
" I feared it would come to this, " she murmured, her coun-
tenance meekly fixed. " I don't complain, Angel. I — I
think it best. What you said has quite convinced me.
Yes — though nobody else should reproach me, if we should
stay together, yet somewhen, years hence, you might get
angry with me for any ordinary matter, and knowing what
you do of my bygones, you yourself might be tempted to
say words, and they might be overheard, perhaps by my
own children. 0, what only hurts me now would torture
and kill me then ! I will go — to-morrow. "
" And I shall not stay here. Though I did not like to
intimate it, I have seen that it was advisable we should
part — at least for a while, till I can better see the shape that
things have taken, and can write to you. "
Tess stole a glance at her husband. He was pale, even
tremulous ; but, as before, 8he was appalled by the deter-
mination revealed in the depths of this gentle being she had
married — the will to subdue the grosser emotion to the sub-
tler emotion, the substance to the conception, the flesh to
the spirit. Propensities, tendencies, habits, were as dead
leaves upon the tyrannous wind of his imaginative ascend-
ency.
280 TESS OP THE D-'UBDEKVILLEs
He may have observed her look, for he explained: " 1
think of people more kindly when I am away from them ; *
adding cynically, " God knows; perhaps we shall sbske
down together some day, for weariness; thousands 1 *ve
done it ! "
That day he began to pack up, and she went upstairs
and began to pack also. Both knew that it was in their
two minds that they might part the next morning forever,
despite the gloss of assuaging conjectures thrown over their
proceeding by reason of their being of the sort to whom
any parting which has an air of finality about it is a tor-
ture. He knew, and she knew, that, though the fascination
which each had exercised over the other — on her part in.
dependently of accomplishments — would probably in the
first days of their separation be even more potent than
ever, time must attenuate that effect; the practical argn-
ments against accepting her as a housemate would pro-
nounce themselves more strongly in the boreal light of a
remoter time. Moreover, when two people are once parted
— have abandoned a common domicile and a common en-
vironment — new growths insensibly bud upward to fill
each vacated place ; unforeseen accidents hinder intentions,
and old plans are forgotten.
xxsvn.
Midnight came and passed silently, for there was noth-
ing to announce it in the Valley of the Var.
Not long after one o'clock there was a slight creak in the
darkened old farmhouse once the mansion of the D'Urber.
villes. Tess, who used the upper chamber, heard it and
awoke. It had come from the three-cornered step of the
staircase,, which, as usual, was loosely nailed. She saw tha
THE WOMAN PAYS 281
door of her bedroom open, and the figure of her husband
crossed the stream of moonlight with a curiously careful
tread. He was in his shirt and trousers only, and her first
flush of joy died when she perceived that his eyes were fixed
in an unnatural stare on vacancy. When he reached the
middle of the room he stood still and murmured, in tones
of indescribable sadness, " Dead ! dead ! dead ! "
Under the influence of any strongly disturbing force
Clare would occasionally walk in his sleep, and even per-
form strange feats, such as he had done on the night of
their return from market just before their marriage, when
he re-enacted in his bedroom his combat with the man who
had insulted her. Teas saw that continued mental distress
had wrought that somnambulistic state in him now.
Rer loyal confidence in him lay so deep down in her
heart that, awake or asleep, he inspired her with no sort of
personal fear. If he had entered with a pistol in his hand
he would scarcely have disturbed her trust in his protec-
tiveness.
Clare came close, and bent over her. " Dead, dead, dead ! "
he murmured.
After fixedly regarding her for some moments with the
same gaze of unmeasurable woe he bent lower, enclosed
her in his arms, and rolled her in the sheet as in a shroud.
Then lifting her from the bed with as much respect as one
would show to a dead body in such circumstances, he car-
lied her across the room, murmuring, " My poor, poor Tess
—my dearest, darling Tess ! So sweet, so good, so true ! "
The words of endearment, withheld so severely in his
waking hours, were inexpressibly sweet to her forlorn and
hungry heart. If it had been to save her weary life she
would not, by moving or struggling, have put an end to
the position she found herself in. Thus she lay in absolute
stillness, scarcely venturing to breathe, and, wondering what
he was going to do with her, suffered herself to he borne
out upon the landing
282 TES9 OF THE DTTBBEBVUiBS
" My -wife — dead, dead ! " he said.
He paused in his labors for a moment to lean with her
against the banister. Was he going to throw her downt
Self-solicitude was near extinction in her, and in the knowl-
edge that he had planned to depart from her on the mor-
row, possibly for always, she lay in his arms in this pre.
carious position with rather a sense of luxury than a sense
of terror. If they could only fall together, and both be
dashed to pieces, how fit, how desirable !
However, he did not let her fall, but took advantage of
the support of the handrail to imprint a kiss upon her lips
— lips in the daytime scorned. Then he clasped her with
a renewed firmness of hold, and descended the staircase.
The creak of the corner stair did not awaken him, and they
reached the ground-floor safely. Freeing one of his hands
from its grasp of her for a moment, he slid back the door-
bar and passed out, slightly striking his stockinged toe
against the edge of the door. But this he seemed not to
mind, and, having room for extension in the open air, he
got her upon his shoulder, so that be could carry her with
more ease, the absence of clothes taking much from his
burden. Thus he bore her off the premises, in the direction
of the river, a few yards distant;.
His ultimate intention, if he had any, she had not yet
divined ; and she found herself conjecturing on the matter
as a third person might have done. So easefuUy had she
delivered her whole being up to him that it pleased her to
think he was regarding her as his absolute possession, to
dispose of as he should choose. It was consoling, under
the hovering terror of to-morrow's separation, to feel that
he really recognized her now as his wife Tess, and did not
cast her off, even if in that recognition he went so far as to
arrogate to himself the right of harming her.
Ah ! now she knew he was dreaming of — that Sunday
morning when he had borne her along through the water
with the other dairymaids, who had loved him nearly «
THE WOMAN PATS SSI
much as she, if that were possible, which Tess could hardly
admit dare did not cross the bridge with her, but pro-
ceeding several paces on the same side towards the adjoin-
ing mill, at length stood still on the brink of the Froom.
Its waters, in creeping down these miles of meadow-land,
frequently divided, serpentining in purposeless curves, loop-
ing themselves around little islands that had no name, re-
turning, and re-embodying themselves as a broad main
stream farther on. Opposite the spot to which he had
brought her was such a general confluence, and the river
was proportionately voluminous and deep. Across it was
a narrow foot-bridge; but now the autumn rains had
washed the handrail away, leaving the bare plank only,
which, lying a few inches above the speeding current,
formed a giddy pathway for even steady heads ; and Tess
had noticed from the window of the house in the daytime
young men trying to cross, upon it as a feat in balancing.
Her husband had possibly observed the same performance ;
anyhow, he now mounted the bridge, and, sliding one foot
forward, advanced along it
Was he going- to drown her J Probably he was. The
spot was lonely, the river deep and wide enough to make
such a purpose easy of accomplishment He might drown
her if he would ; it would be better than parting to-morrow
to lead severed lives.
The swift stream raced and gyrated under them, tossing,
distorting, and splitting the moon's reflected face. Spots of
froth travelled past, and intercepted weeds waved behind
the piles. If they could both fall together into the current
now, their arms would be so tightly clasped together that
they could not be saved ; they would go out of the world
almost painlessly, and there would be no more reproach to
her, or to him for marrying her. His last half-hour with
her would have been a loving one, while if they lived till
he awoke his daytime aversion would return, and this hour
would remain to be contemplated only as a transient dream.
281 TESS OF THE D'URBEBYILI.ES
The impulse stirred in her, yet she dared not indulge it ,
to make a movement that would have precipitated them
both into the gulf. How she valued her own life had been
proved ; but his — she had no right to tamper with it. He
reached the other side with her in safety.
Here they were within a plantation which formed the
Abbey grounds, and taking a new hold of her, he went on-
ward a few steps till they reached the ruined choir of the
Abbey church. Against the north wall was the emply
stone coffin of an abbot, without a lid, in which every tour-
ist with a turn for grim humor was accustomed to stretch
himself. In this Clare carefully laid Tess. Having kissed
her lips a second time, be breathed deeply, as if a greatly
desired end were attained. Clare then laid down beside
her, when he immediately fell into the deep dead slumber
of exhaustion, and remained motionless as a log. The
spurt of mental excitement which had produced the effort
was now over.
Tess sat up in the coffin. The night, though dry and
mild for the season, was more than sufficiently cold to
make it dangerous for him to remain here long, in his half-
clothed state. If he were left to himself, he would in all
probability stay there till the morning, and be chilled to
certain death. She had heard of such deaths after sleep-
walking. But how could she dare to awaken him, and let
him know what he had been doing, when it would mortify
him to discover his folly in respect of her J Tess, however,
stepping out of her stone confine, shook him slightly, but
was unable to arouse him without being violent. It was
indispensable to do something, for she was beginning to
shiver, the sheet being but a poor protection. Her excite-
ment had in a measure kept her warm during the advent-
ure i but that beatific interval was over.
It suddenly occurred to her to try persuasion ; and ac-
cordingly she whispered in his ear, with as much firmness
ud decision as she could summon, " Let us walk on, dar-
THE WOMAN PATS 288
Bri g , " at the same time taking him suggestively by the arm.
To her relief, he unresistingly acquiesced ; her words had
apparently thrown him back into his dream, which thence*
forward seemed to enter on a new phase, wherein he fancied
she had risen as a spirit, and was leading him to Heaven.
Thus she conducted him by the arm to the stone bridge in
front of their residence, crossing which they stood at the
manor-house door. Tess's feet were quite bare, and the
stones hurt her, and chill ed her to the bone ; but Clare was
in his woollen stockings, and appeared to feel no discomfort.
There was no further difficulty. She induced him " to lie
down on his own sofa-bed, and covered him up warmly,
lighting a temporary fire of wood, to dry any dampness
out of him. The noise of these attentions she thought
might awaken him, and secretly wished that they might
But the exhaustion of his mind and body was such that he
remained undisturbed.
As soon as they met the next morning, Tess divined that
Angel knew little or nothing of how far she had been con-
cerned in the night's excursion, though as regarded himself
he may have had an inkling that he had not lain still. In
truth, he had awakened that morning from a sleep deep at
annihilat ion ; and during those first few moments in which
the brain, like a Samson shaking himself, is trying its
strength, he had some dim notion of an unusual nocturnal
proceeding. But the realities of his situation soon dis-
placed conjecture on the other subject.
He waited in expectancy to discern some mental point
ing ; he knew that if any intention of his, concluded over.
night, did not vanish in the light of morning, it stood on q
basis approximating to one of pure reason, even if initiated
by impulse of feeling ; that it was so far, therefore, to be
trusted.
He thus beheld in the pale morning light the resolve to
separate from her ; not as a hot and indignant instinct, but
denuded of the passionateness which had made it scorch
266 TESS OF THE DTJBBERVILLES
and born ; standing in its bones ; nothing bnt a skeleton,
but none the less there. Clare no longer hesitated.
At breakfast, and while they were packing the few re.
malning articles, he showed his weariness from the nights
effort so unmistakably that Tess was on the point of speak-
ing and revealing all that had happened ; but the reflection
that it would anger him, grieve him, stultify him, by letting
him know that he had instinctively manifested a fondness
for her of which his common-sense did not approve ; that
his inclination had compromised his dignity when reason
slept, again deterred her. It was too much like laughing at
a man when sober for his erratic deeds during intoxication.
It just crossed her mind, too, that he might have a faint
recollection of his tender vagary, and was disinclined to
allude to it from a conviction that she would take advan-
tage of the undoubted opportunity it gave her of appealing
to him anew not to go.
He had ordered by letter a vehicle from the nearest
town, and soon after breakfast it arrived She saw in it
the beginning of the end — the temporary end, at least, for
the revelation of his tenderness by the incident of the
night led her to think of a possible future with him. The
luggage was put on the top, and the man drove them off,
the miller and the old waiting-woman expressing some sur-
prise at their precipitate departure, which Clare attributed
to his discovery that the mill-work was not of the modem
kind which he wished to investigate, a statement that was
true so far as it went. Beyond this there was nothing in
the manner of their leaving to suggest a, fiasco, or that they
were not going together to visit friends.
Their route lay near the dairy from which they had
started with such solemn joy in each other a few days back;
and as Clare wished to wind up his business with Mr. Crick,
Tess could hardly avoid paying Mrs. Crick a call at the
same time, unless she would excite suspicion of their un-
happy state.
THE WOMAN FATS 287
To make the call as unobtrusive as possible they left the
carriage at the end of the short lane leading down from
the high road to the dairy-house, and descended the track
on foot, side by side. The withy-bed had been cut, and
they conld see over the stamps the spot on whieh Clare had
followed her when he pressed her to be bis wife ; to the
left the enclosure in whieh she had been fascinated by bis
harp ; and far away over the roofs of the cowstalls, the
mead which had been the scene of their first embrace. The
gold of the summer picture was now gray, the colors mean,
the rich soil mud, and the river cold.
Over the barton-gate the dairyman saw them, and came
forward, throwing into his face the kind of joviality deemed
appropriate in Talbothays and its vicinity on the reappear-
ance of the newly married. Then Mrs. Crick emerged from
the house, and several others of their old acquaintance,
though Marian and Eetty did not appear to be there.
Tess valiantly bore their sly attacks and friendly humors,
which affected her far otherwise than they supposed. In
the tacit agreement of husband and wife to keep their
estrangement a secret they behaved as would have been
ordinary. And then, although she would rather there had
been no word spoken on the subject, Tess had to hear in
detail the story of Marian and Eetty. The latter had gone
home to her father's, and Marian had left to look for em-
ployment elsewhere. They feared Bhe would come to no
good.
To dissipate the sadness of this recital Tess went and
bade all her favorite cows good-by, touching each of them
with her hand, and as she and Clare stood side by side at
leaving as if united body and soul, there would have been
something peculiarly sorry in their aspect to one whc
should have seen it truly: two limbs of one life, as they
outwardly were, his arm touching hers, her skirts touching
him, facing one way, as against all the dairy facing the
other, speaking in their adieus as " we, " and yet sundered
288 TESS OF THE DTJBBERVILLES
like the poles. Perhaps something unusually stiff and em-
barrassed in their attitude, some awkwardness in acting up
to their profession of unity, different from the natural shy-
ness of young couples, may have heen apparent, for when
they were gone Mrs. Crick said to her husband, " How on-
natural the brightness of her eyes did seem, and how the
pair stood like waxen images and talked as if they were
in a dream ! Didn't it strike'ee that'twas sot Tess had
always sommat strange in her, and she's not now quite like
the proud young bride of a well-be-doing man. "
They re-entered the vehicle, and were driven along the
roads through " Weatherbury and Stagfoot Lane, till they
reached Nuzzlebury, where Clare dismissed the fly and man.
They rested here awhile, and entering the Vale were next
driven onward towards her home by a stranger who did
not know their new relationship. At a midway point,
when many miles had heen passed over, and where there
were cross-roads, Clare stopped the man, and said to Tess
that if she meant to return to her mother's house it was
here that he would leave her. As they could not talk with
freedom in the driver's presence, he asked her to accompany
him for a few steps on foot along one of the branch roads ;
she assented, and directing the man to wait a few minutes,
they strolled away.
" Now, let us understand each other, " he said, gently.
" There is no anger between us, though there is that which
I cannot endure at present. I will try to bring myself to
endure it. I will let yon know where I go to as soon as I
know myself. And if I can bring myself to bear it — if it
is desirable, possible —I will come to you. But until I come
to you it wUl be better that you should not try to come to
me. "
The severity of the decree seemed deadly to Tess ; she
saw his view of her clearly enough ; he could regard her in
> n other light than that of one who had practised gross de-
rt upon him. Yet could a woman who had done even
THE WOMAN PATS 290
what she had done deserve all this ? But she could contest
the point with him no further. She simply repeated after
him his own words.
" Until you come to me I must not try to come to youf "
" Just so. "
" May I write to yout "
" Oh yes — if yon are ill, or want anything at all. I hope
that will not be the case ; so that it may happen that I
write first to you. " ■
" I agree to the conditions, Angel; because you know
best what my punishment ought to be ; only — only — don't
'ee make it more than I can bear I "
That was all she said on the matter. If Tess had been
artful, had she made a scene, fainted, wept hysterically, in
that lonely lane, notwithstanding the fury of fastidiousness
with which he was possessed, he would probably not have
withstood her. But her mood of long-suffering made his
•way easy for him, and she herself was his best advocate.
In her submission — which perhaps was a symptom of that
reckless acquiescence in chance too apparent in the whole
D'TJrberville family — the many effective chords which she
could have stirred by an appeal were left untouched.
The remainder of their discourse was on practical matters
only. He now handed her a packet containing a fairly
good sum of money, which he had obtained from his bank-
ers for the purpose. The brilliants, the interest in which
seemed to be Tess's for her life only (if he understood the
wording of the will), he advised her to let him send to a
bank for safety ; and to this she readily agreed.
These things arranged, he walked with Tess back to the
carriage, and handed her in. He paid the coachman, and
told him where to drive her. Taking then his own bag
and umbrella — the sole articles he had brought with him
hitherwards — he bade her good-by; and they parted there
and then.
The fly moved creepingly np the hill, and Clare watehed
890 TESS OF THE DTJBBEKVILLES
it go with an unpremeditated hope that Teas would look-
out of the window for one moment. But that she never
thought of doing, would not have ventured to do, lying in
a half-dead faint inside. Thus he watched her out of sight,
and in the anguish of his heart quoted a line of a poet
with a few improvements of his own :
Glad's not in His heaven : all's wrong with the world !
When Tess had passed over the crest of the hill he turned
to go his own way, and did not know that he loved her still
xxxvtn
As she drove on through Blackmoor Vale, and the land-
scape of her youth began to open around her, Tess aroused
herself from her stupor. Her first thought was how would
she be able to face her parents *
She reached the turnpike gate which stood near the en-
trance to the village. It was thrown open by a stranger,
not by the old man who had kept it for many years, and
to whom she had been known ; he had probably left on
New Tear's Day, the date when such changes were made.
Having received no intelligence lately from her home, she
asked the turnpike-keeper the news.
" — nothing, miss, " he answered. " Marlott is Marlott
still. Folks have died, and that. John Durbeyfleld, too,
hev had a daughter married this week to a gentleman-
farmer ; not from John's own house, you know ; they was
married elsewhere; the gentleman being of that high
standing that John's own folk was not considered well-be-
doing enough to have any part in it, the bridegroom seem-
ingly not knowing how't have been discovered that John
'a old and ancient nobleman himself by blood, with family
THE WOMAN PAT3 2tu
skellingtons in their own vaults to this day, but done out
of Mb property in the time o'the Romans. However, Sir
John, as we call'n now, kept up the wedding-day as well
as he could, and stood treat to everybody in the parish ; and
John's wife sung songs at The Pure Drop till past eleven
o'clock. "
Hearing this, Tess felt so sick at heart that she could not
decide to go home publicly in this fly with her luggage and
belongings. She asked the turnpike-keeper if she might
deposit her things at Ms house for a while, and, on Ms
offering no objection, she dismissed her carriage, and went
on to die village alone by a back lane.
At sight of her father's cMmney she asked herself how
she could possibly enter the house f Inside that cottage
her relations were calmly supposing her far away on a
wedding tour with a comparatively rich man, who was to
conduct her to bouncing prosperity; while here she was,
friendless, creeping up to the old door quite by herself,
with no better place to go to in the world.
She did not reach the house unobserved. Just by the
garden-hedge she was met by a girl who knew her — one
of the two or three with whom she had been intimate at
school. After making a few inquiries as to how Tess came
there, her friend, unheeding her tragic look, interrupted
with, " But where's thy gentleman, Tess! "
Tess hastily explained that he had been called away on
business, and, leaving her interlocutor, clambered over the
garden-hedge, and thus made her way to the house.
As she went up the garden-path she heard her mother
singing by the back door, coming in sight of which she
perceived Mrs. Dnrbeyfield on the doorstep in the act of
wringing a sheet. Having performed tMs without observ-
ing Tess, she went indoors, and her daughter followed her.
The washing-tub stood in the same old place on the same,
old quarter-hogshead, and her mother, having thrown the
sheet aside, was about to plunge her arms in anew.
292 TESS OP THE D'UBBEBVILLES
" Why — Teas ! — my chil'— I thought yon was going to bt
married — some days ago — really and truly ttiis time — ws
sent the cider "
" Yes, mother ; so I am. "
" Going to be ! *
" I mean — I am married. "
" Married ! Then whore's thy husband T*
" 0, he's gone away for a time. "
" Gone away ! When was yon married, then f The day
you said ! "
" Yes, Tuesday, mother. "
" And now'tis on'y Saturday, and he gone away I "
" Yes } he's gone. "
" What's the meaning o* that T " Nation seize such hus.
bands as you seem to get, say I ! "
" Mother ! " — Tess went across to Joan Durbeynold, laid
her face upon the matron's bosom, and burst into sobs—
" I don't know how to tell'ee, mother ! Yon said to me,
and wrote to me, that I was not to tell him. But I did tell
him — I couldn't help it — and he went away ! "
" O you little fool — you little fool 1 " burst out Mrs. Dor-
beyfleld. " My good God I that ever I should ha* lived to
say it, but I say it again, you little fool ! "
Tess was convulsed with weeping, the tension of so many
days having relaxed at last. " I know it — I know— I
know 1 " she gasped through her sobs. " But, O my mother,
I could not help it ; he was so good — and I felt the wicked-
ness of trying to blind him as to what had happened I If
— if — it were to be done again — I should do the same. I
could not — I dared not — so sin— against him ! "
" But you sinned enough to marry him first ! "
" Yes, yes ; that's where my misery do lie. But I thought
he could get rid of me by law if he were determined not to
overlook it And 0, if yon knew— if yon could only haH
know how I loved him — how anxious I was to have him—
~nd how wrung I was between caring so tenon for him and
XHE WOMAN PAYS - 291
my wish to be fair to him t - Teas was so shaken that she
could get do further, and sunk a helpless thing into a chair.
" Well, well ; what's done can't he undone ! Pm sure I
dont know why children o'my bringing forth should all be
bigger simpletons than other people's — not to know better
than to blab such a thing as that, when he couldn't ha'found
it out till too late 1 " Here Mrs. Durbeyfleld began shed-
ding tears on her own account as a mother to be pitied.
" What your father will say I dont know, " she continued;
" for he's been talking about the wedding up at Rolliver*B
and The Pure Drop every day since, and about his family
getting back to their rightful position through you — poor
silly man ! — and now you've made this mess of it. The
Lord-a-Lord ! *
As if to bring matters to a focus, Tess's father was heard
approaching at that moment. He did not, however, enter
immediately, and Mrs. Durbeyfleld said that she would
break the bad news to him herself, Tess keeping out of
sight for the present. Joan began to take the mishap as
she took all such mishaps after her first burst of disap-
pointment, as she had taken Tess's original trouble, as she *
would have taken a wet holiday or a failure in the potato
crop — as a thing which had come upon them irrespective
of w ill, or law , or desert, or folly ; a chance external im- ,
pingement to be borne with; not a lesson.
Tess retreated upstairs, and beheld casually that the beds
had been shifted, and new arrangements made. Her old
bed had been adapted for two younger children. There
was no place here for her now.
The room below being unceiled, she could hear most of
what went on there. Presently her father entered, appar-
ently carrying a live hen. He was a foot-higgler now, hav-
ing been obliged to sell his second horse, and he travelled
with his basket on his arm. The hen had been carried with
hini this morning as it was often carried, to show people
that he was in his work, though the bird had really lain,
j©4 TESS OF THE D*3RBEBVILIjES
with its legs tied, under the table at RolKver's for more
than an hour.
" We've just had up a story about * Dnrbeyfleld be-
gan, and thereupon related in detail to his wife a discussion
which had arisen at the inn about the clergy, originated
by the fact of his daughter having married into a clerical
family. " They was formerly styled'sir,'like my own an-
cestry, " he Baid, " though nowadays their true style, strictly
speaking, is'clerk'only. " As Tess had wished that no
great publicity should be given to the event, he had men.
tioned no particulars. He hoped she would remove that
prohibition soon. He proposed that the couple should take
Tess's own name, D'Urberville, as uncorrupted. It was bet-
ter than her husband's. He asked if any letter had come
from her that day.
Then Mrs. Durbeyfleld informed him that no letter had
come, but Tess unfortunately had come herself.
When at length the collapse was explained to him a sul-
len mortification, not usual with Durbeyfleld, overpowered
the effect of the cheering glass. Yet the intrinsic quality
of the event affected his touchy sensitiveness less than its
conjectured effect upon the minds of others.
" To think, now, that this was to be the end o't, " said
Sir John. " And I with a family vault under that there
church of Kingsbere as big as Squire Jollard's ale-cellar,
and my folk lying there in sixes and sevens, as genuine
county bones and marrow as any recorded in history. And
now to be sure what they fellers at Rolliver's and The Pore
Drop will say to me ; how they'll squint and glance, and
say,'This is yer mighty grand match is it; this is yer
getting back to the true family level of yer forefathers in
King Norman's time 1'I feel this is too much, Joan ; I
shall put an end to myself, title and all — I can bear it no
longer ! . . . But she can make him keep her if he's mar
ried her 1 "
" Why, yes. But she won't t hink o'doing that. "
THE WOMAN PAYS 200
" D'ye think he really have married her. Or is it with
him as with t'other? "
Poor Tess, who had heard as far as this, could not bear
to hear more. The perception that her word could be
doubted even here, in her own parental house, set her mind
against the spot as nothing else could have done. How
mta^gfited woT-o tha attacks of destiny ! And if her father
doubted her a little, would not neighbors and acquaintance
doubt her much * O, she could not live long at home !
A few days, accordingly, were all that she allowed her-
self here, at the end of which time she received a short note
from Clare, informing her that he had gone to the North
of England to look at a farm. In her craving for the dig-
nity of her true position as his wife, and to hide from her
parents the vast extent of the division between them, she
made use of this letter as her reason for again departing,
leaving them under the impression that she was setting out
to join bim . Still further to screen her husband from any
imputation of unkindness to her, she took twenty-five of
the fifty pounds Clare had given her, and handed the sum
over to her mother, as if the wife of a man like Angel Clare
could well afford it, saying that it was a slight return for
the trouble and humiliation she had brought upon them in
years past. With this assertion of her dignity she bade
them farewell ; and after that there were lively doings in
the Durbeyneld household for some time on the strength
of Tess's bounty, her mother saying, and indeed believing,
that the quarrel which had arisen between the young hus-
band and wife had adjusted itself under their strong feeling
that they could not live apart from each other.
„:„»Goo g lc
TES8 OF THE iyURBERVILLES
It was three weeks after the marriage that Glare found
himself descending on foot the hill which led to the well-
known parsonage of his father. With his downward coarse
the square tower of the church rose into the still evening
sky in a manner of inquiry as to why he had come ; and no
living person in the twilighted town seemed to notice him,
still less to expect him. He was arriving like a ghost, and
the sound of his own footsteps was almost an encumbrance
to he got rid of.
The pieture of life had changed for Clare. Before this
time he had known it speculatively only ; now he thought
he knew it as a practical man ; though perhaps he did not,
even yet. Nevertheless, humanity stood before him no
longer in the pensive sweetness of Italian art, hut in the
staring and ghastly attitudes of a Wiertz Museum, and
with the hideous leer of a Van Beers.
His conduct during these first weeks had heen desultory
beyond description. After mechanically attempting to
pursue his agricultural plans as though nothing unusual
had happened, in the manner recommended by the great
and wise men of all ages, he concluded that very few of
those great and wise men had ever gone so far outside
themselves as to test the feasibility of their counsel " This
is the chief thing : be not perturbed,''said the Pagan mor-
alist. That was just Clare's own opinion. But he was
perturbed. " Let not your heart be troubled, neither let ifc
be afraid, " said the Nazarene. Clare chimed in cordially ;
but his heart was troubled all the same. How he would
have liked to confront those two great thinkers, and ear.
nestly appeal to them as fellow-man to fellow-men, and ask
hem to tell him their method 1
THE WOMAN PATS 297
His mood transmuted itself into a dogged indifference
till at length he fancied he was looking on his own existence
with the passive interest of an outsider.
He was embittered by the conviction that all this desola-
tion had been brought about by the accident of her being
a D'Urberville. When he found that Tess came of that
exhausted ancient line, and was not of the new tribes from
below, as he had fondly dreamed, why had he not stoically
abandoned her, in fidelity to his principles f This was
what he had got by apostasy, and his punishment was de-
served.
Then he became weary and anxious, and his anxiety in-
creased. He wondered if he had treated her unfairly. He
ate without knowing that he ate, and drank without tasting.
As the hours dropped past, as the motive of each act in the
long series of bygone days presented itself to his view, he
perceived how intimately the notion of having Tess as a
dear possession was mixed up with all schemes, and words,
and ways.
In going hither and thither he observed in the outskirts
of a small town a red-and-blue placard setting forth the
great advantages of the Empire of Brazil as a field for the
emigrating agriculturist. Land was offered there on ex-
ceptionally advantageous terms. Brazil somewhat attracted
him as a new idea. Tess could eventually join him there,
and perhaps in that country of contrasting scenes, and
notions, and habits, the conventions would not be so opera-
tive which made life with her seem impracticable to him
here. In brief, he was strongly inclined to try Brazil, espe-
cially as the season for going thither was just at hand.
With this view he was returning to Emminster to disclose
his plan to his parents, and to make the best explanation
he could make of arriving without Tess short of revealing
what had actually separated them. As he reached the door
the new moon shone upon his face, just as the old one had
done in the small hours of that morning when he had car
t»8 TESS OP THE DTJBBEKVILLES
ried Ms wife in Mb anna across the river to the graveyard
of the monks ; but his face was thinner now.
Clare had given his parents no warning of Ms visit, and
his arrival stirred the atmosphere of the vicarage as the
dive of the kingfisher stirs a quiet pool. His father and
mother were both in the drawing-room, but neither of his
brothers was now at home. Angel entered, and closed the
door quietly behind Mm.
" But — Where's your wife, dear Angel ! * cried his mother.
" How you surprise us ! *
" She is at her mother's — temporarily. I have come home
rather in a hurry because I've decided to go to Brazil. "
" Brazil 1 " Why, they are all Catholics there, surely I *
" Are they T I hadn't thought of that, "
But even the novelty and painfulness of his going, pat-
ticularly to a Papistical laud, could not displace for long
Mr. and Mrs. Clare's natural interest in their son's marriage.
" We had your brief note three weeks ago announcing
that it had taken place, " said Mrs. Clare, " and your father
sent your godmother's gift to her, as you know. Of course
it was best that none of us should be present, especially as
you preferred to marry her from the dairy, and not at he*
home, wherever that may be. It would have embarrassed
you, and given us no pleasure. Tour brothers felt that
very strongly. Of course, now it is done we do not eom.
plain, particularly if she suits you for the business you
have chosen to follow instead of the ministry of the < Jos-
pel. . . . Tet I wish I could have seen her first, Angel, or
have known a little more about her. We sent her no pres-
ent of our own, not knowing what would best give hei
pleasure, but you must suppose it only delayed. AngeL
there is no irritation in my mind or your father's against
you for tMs marriage ; but we have thought it much better
to reserve our liking for your wife till we could see her.
'nd now yon have not brought her. It seems strange.
" hat has happened ! "
3e renHed that it had been thought best by them that
THE WOMAN PAYS 299
she should go to her parents'home for the present, whilst
he came there.
" I dont mind telling you, dear mother, " he said, " that
I always meant to keep her away from this house till I
should feel she could come with credit to you. But this
idea of Brazil is quite a recent one. If I do go it will be
onadvisable for me to take her on this my first journey
She will remain at her mother's till I come back. "
" And I shall not see her before you start f "
He was afraid they would not. His original plan had
been, as he had said, to refrain from bringing her there for
some little while — not to wound their prejudices — feelings
— in any way ; and for other reasons he had adhered to it.
He would have to visit home in the course of a year, if he
went out at once; and it would be possible for them to see
her before he started a second time — with her.
A hastily prepared supper was brought in, and dare
gave further explanation of his plans. His mother's dis-
appointment at not seeing the bride still remained with
her. Glare's late enthusiasm for Tess had infected her
through her maternal sympathies, till she had almost fan-
cied that a good thing could come out of Nazareth — a
charming woman out of Talbothays Dairy. She watched
her son as he ate.
" Cannot yon describe her T I am sure she is very pretty,
Angel. "
" Of that there can be no question I " said he, with a zest
■which covered its bitterness.
" And that she is pure and virtuous goes without ques-
tion! "
" Pnre and virtuous, of course, she is. "
" I can see her quite distinctly. You said the other day
that she was fine in figure ; roundly built ; had deep red
lips like Cupid's bow ; dark eyelashes and brows, an im.
mense rope of hair like a ship's cable ; and large eyes vk >
lety-bluey-blackish. "
" I did. mother. "
BOO TES8 OF THE iyOBBEBVILLES
" I quite see her. And living in such seclusion she nato-
rally had scarce ever seen any young man from the world
without till she saw you. "
" You were her first love 1 *
" Yes. "
M There are worse wives than these simple, rosy-mouthed,
robust girls of the farm. Certainly I could have wished-—
well, since my son is to be an agriculturist, it is perhaps
but proper that his wife should have been accustomed to,
an outdoor life. "
His father was less inquisitive ; but when the time cam*
for the chapter from the Bible which was always read be-
fore evening prayers, the vicar observed to Mrs. Glare, " I
think, since Angel has come, that it will be more appropri-
ate to read the thirty-first of Proverbs than the chapter
which we should have had in the usual course of our read-
ingT "
" Yes, certainly, " said Mrs Clare. " The words of Ki ng
Lemuel " (she could cite chapter and verse as well as her
husband). " My dear son, your father has decided to read
us the chapter in Proverbs in praise of a virtuous wife*
We shall not need to be reminded to apply the words to
the absent one. May Heaven shield her in all her ways ! *
A lump rose in Clare's throat. The domestic lectern wu
taken out from the corner and set in the middle of the fire-
place, the Bible opened upon it ; the two old servants cam*
in, and Angel's father began to read at the tenth verse oi
the aforesaid chapter :
"'Who ean find a virtuous woman ! for her price is fat
above rubies. She riseth while it is yet night, and givett
meat to her household. She girdeth her loins with strength,
and strengthened! her arms. She perceiveth that her mei-
chandise is good ; her candle goeth not out by night. She
looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth no*
'he bread of idleness. Her children arise up and call ha
THE WOMAN PATS SOI
blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her. Many
daughters have done virtuously, but thou exeellest them
alL'"
When prayers were over, his mother said : " I coold not
help thinking how very aptly that chapter your dear father
read applied, in some of its particulars, to the woman yon
have chosen. The perfect woman, you see, was a working
woman ; not an idler, not a fine lady, but one who used
her hands and her head and her heart for the good of
others.'Her children arise up and call her blessed ; her
husband also, and he praiseth her. Many daughters have
done virtuously, but she exeelleth them all.'Well, I wish
I could have seen her, AngeL Since she is pure and chaste
she would have been refined enough for me. "
Clare coold bear this no longer. His eyes were full of
tears, which seemed like drops of molten lead. He bade a
quick good-night to these sincere and simple souls whom
he loved so well ; who knew neither the world, the flesh,
nor the devil in their own hearts ; only as something vague
and external to themselves. He went to his own chamber.
His mother followed him, and tapped at his door. Clare
opened it to discover her standing without, with anxious eyes.
" Angel, " she asked, " is there something wrong that yon
go away so soon f I am quite sure you are not yourself. "
" I am not quite, mother, " said he.
" About her ! Now, my son, I know it is that — I know
it is about her. Have you quarrelled in these three weeks T *
" We have not exactly quarrelled, " he said. " But we
have had a difference "
" Angel — is she a young woman whose history will bear
investigation t ■ With a mother's instinct Mrs. Clare had
pot her finger on the kind of trouble that would cause such
a disquiet as seemed to agitate her son.
" She is spotless I * he replied, and felt that if it had sent
him to eternal hell there and then he would have told that
Kb,
303 TESS OF THE DTJRBEEVILLE8
" Then never mind the rest. After all, there are few
sweeter things in nature than an unsullied country mai < t
Any erudeness of manner which may offend your more
educated sense at first will, I am sure, disappear under the
influence of your companionship and tuition.''
«- Such terrible sarcasm of blind magnanimity brought
nome to Clare the gloomy perception that he had utterly
wrecked his career by this marriage, which had not been
among his early thoughts after the disclosure. True, on
his own account he cared very little about his career ; but
he had wished to make it at least a respectable one on ac-
count of his parents and brothers. And now, as he looked
into the candle, its name dumbly expressed to him that it
was made to shine on sensible people, and that it abhorred
lighting the face of a dupe and a failure.
When his agitation had cooled, he would be at momenta
incensed with his poor wife for causing a situation in which
he was obliged to practise deception on his parents. He
almost talked to her in his anger, as if she had been in the
room. And then her cooing voice, plaintive in expostula-
tion, disturbed the darkness, the velvet touch of her line
passed over his brow, and he could distinguish in the air
the warmth of her breath.
" •^This night the woman of his belittling deprecations was
thinking how great and good her husband was. " While
over them both there hung a deeper shade than the shade
which Angel Clare perceived, namely, the shade of his
„ Own limitations. With all his attempted independence of
judgment, this advanced and well-meaning young man — a
sample product of the last flve-and-twenty years — was yet
the slave to custom and conventionality when surprised
back into his early teachings^ No prophet had told him,
and he was not prophet enough to tell himself, that essen-
tially this young wife of his was as deserving of the praise
of King Lemuel as any other woman endowed with the
Bame dislike of evil, her moral value having to be reckoned
THE WOMAN PAYS 303
not by achievement but by tendency. Moreover, the figure
near at hand suffers on such occasions, because it shows up
its sorriness without shade ; while vague figures afar off
are honored, in that their distance makes artistic virtues
of their stains. In considering what Tees was not, he over-
looked what she was, and forgot that the deficient can be
more than the entire.
XL
At breakfast Brazil was the topic, and all endeavored to
take a hopeful view of Clare's proposed experiment with that
country's soil, notwithstanding the discouraging reports of
some farm-laborers who had emigrated thither and returned
home within the twelve months. After breakfast Clare
went into the little town to wind up such trifling matters
as he was concerned with there, and to get from the local
bank all the money he possessed. On his way back he
encountered Miss Mercy Chant by the church, from whose
walls she seemed to be a sort of emanation She was carry-
ing an armful of Bibles for her class, and such was in°r
view of life that events which produced heartache in others
wrought beatific smiles upon her — an enviable result, al-
though, in the opinion of Angel Clare, it was obtained by
a curiously unnatural sacrifice of humanity to mysticism.
She had learnt that he was about to leave England, and
observed what an excellent and promising scheme it seemed
to be.
" Yes; it is a likely scheme enough in a commercial
sense, no doubt, " he replied. " But, my dear Mercy, it
snaps the continuity of existence. Perhaps a cloister would
be preferable. "
" A cloister I Angel Clare 1 "
304 TESS OF THE DT,'RBERVILLB9
" Went "
" Why, you wicked man, a cloister implies a monk, and
a monk Catholicism ! *
" And Catholicism sin, and sin damnation. Thou art in
a parlous state, Angel Clare ! "
" I glory in my Protestantism, " said she, severely.
Then Clare, thrown by sheer misery into one of the de-
moniacal moods in which a man does despite to his true
principles, called her close to him, and fiendishly whispered
in her ear the most heterodox ideas he could think of. His
momentary laughter at the horror which appeared on her
fair face ceased when it merged in pain and anxiety for his
welfare. " Dear Mercy, " he said, " you must forgive me.
I think I am going crazy ! "
She thought that he was ; and thus the interview ended,
and Clare re-entered the vicarage. With the local banker
he deposited the jewels till happier days should arise. He
also paid into the bank thirty pounds — to be sent to Teas
in a few months, as she might require ; and wrote to her at
her parents'home in Blackmoor Vale to inform her of
what he had done. This amount, with the sum he had al-
ready placed in her hands — about fifty pounds — he hoped
would be amply sufficient for her wants just at present,
particularly as in an emergency she had been directed to
apply to his father.
He deemed it best not to put his parents into communi-
cation with her by informing them of her address ; and,
being unaware of what had really happened to estrange
the two, neither his father nor his mother suggested that
he should do so. During the day he left the parsonage,
for what he had to complete he wished to get done quickly.
As the last duty before leaving this part of England it
was necessary for him to call at the WeUbridge farmhouse,
in which he had spent with Tess the first three days of
their marriage, the trifle of rent having to be paid, the key
dven np of the rooms they had occupied, and two or three
THE WOMAN PATS 300
small articles fetched away that they had left behind. It
was under this roof that the deepest shadow ever thrown
upon his Hf e had stretched its gloom over him Yet when he
had unlocked the door of the sitting-room and looked into
it, the memory which returned first upon him was that of
their happy arrival on a similar afternoon, the first fresh
sense of sharing a habitation conjointly, the first meal to-
gether, the chatting by the fire with joined hands.
The farmer and his wife were in the fields at the moment
of his visit, and Clare was in the rooms alone for some time.
Inwardly swollen with a renewal of sentiments that he had
not quit* reckoned with, he went upstairs to her chamber,
which had never been his. The bed was smooth as she
had made it with her own hands on the morning of leaving.
The mistletoe hung under the tester just as he had placed
it. Having been there three or four weeks, it was turning
color, and the leaves and berries were wrinkled. Angel
took it down and crushed it into the grate. Standing
there, he for the first time doubted whether his eourse in this
conjuncture had been a wise, much less a generous, one. But
had he not been cruelly blinded I In the incoherent multi-
tude of his emotions he knelt down at the bedside wet-eyed.
" O Tess! If you had only told me sooner, I would have
forgiven you ! " he mourned.
Hearing a footstep below, he rose and went to the top of
the stairs. At the bottom of the flight he saw a woman
standing, and on her turning up her face recognized the
pale, dark-eyed Izz Huett.
" Mr. Clare, " said she, " I've called to see you and Mrs.
Clare, and to inquire if ye be well. I thought you would
be back. "
This was a girl whose secret he had guessed, but who
had not yet guessed his ; an honest girl who loved him —
one who would have made as good, or nearly as good, a
practical farmer's wife as Teas.
* I am here alone. " he said j " we are not living here
806 TESS OF THE D'URBERVTLLES
now.* Explaining why he had come, he asked, " Which
way are you going home, Izz t *
" I have no home at Talbothays Dairy now, sir,* she raid
" Why is that F "
Izz looked down. " It was so dismal there that I left.
I am staying out this way. " She pointed in a contrary
direction — the direction in which he was journeying,
" Well — are you going there now? I can take you if you
wish for a lift. "
Her olive complexion grew richer in hue. " Thank'ee,
Mr. Clare, " she said.
He soon found the farmer, and settled the account for
his rent and the few other items which had to be considered
by reason of the sudden abandonment of the lodgings. On
Clare's return to his horse and gig Izz jumped up beside
" I am going to leave England, Izz, " he said, as they drove
on. " Going to Braztt. "
" And do Mrs. Clare like the notion of sueh a journey f *
she asked.
" She is not going at present — say for a year or so. I am
going out to reconnoitre — to see what life there is like. "
They sped along eastward for some considerable distance.
Izz making no observation. " How are the others t " he in-
quired. " How is Rettyt "
" She is in a sort of nervous state ; and so thin and hol-
low-cheeked that'a do seem in a decline. Nobody will ever
fall in love wi'her any more, " said Izz, absently.
" And Marian T "
Izz lowered her voice. " Marian drinks.*
" Indeed ! "
" Yes. The dairyman has got rid of her. "
" And you t "
" I don't drink, and I baint in a decline. But — I am DO
great things at singing afore breakfast now I *
" How is that ! Do you remember how neatly you used
THE WOMAN PAYS SOT
to turn " Twas down in Copid's Gardens'and'The Tailort
Breeches'at morning milking? "
" Ah yes! When yon first came, sir, that was Not
when you had been there a bit. "
" Why was that falling-off t »
Her black eyes flashed up to his face for one moment by
way of answer.
" Izz — how weak of you — for snch as I ! " he said, and fell
into reverie " Then — suppose I had asked you to marry
mel "
* If yon had I should have said'Yes,'and you would
have married a woman who loved'ee. "
" Really! "
" Down to the ground! B she whispered. " O my (JodI
did you never guess it till now ! "
By and by they reached a branch road to the village.
* I must get down. I live out there, " said Izz, abruptly,
never having spoken since her avowaL \
Clare slowed the horse. He was incensed against his
fate, bitterly disposed towards social ordinances; for they / ,
had cooped him up in a corner, out of which there was no'
legitimate pathway. Why not be revenged on society by
r atin g his future domesticities himself, instead of kissing
the pedagogic rod of convention in this lonely manner T
" I am going to Brazil alone, Izz, " said he. " I have
separated from my wife for personal, not voyaging, reasons.
I may never live with her again. I may not be able to love
you ; but — will you go with me instead of her I *
" Do yon truly wish me to go T "
" I do. I have been badly used enough to wish for re
net And you at least love me disinterestedly. "
" Yes — I will go, " said Izz, after a pause.
* You will 1 You know what it means, Izz ! "
•* It means that I shall live with you for the time yon are
over there — thatfs good enough for me. "
" Remember, you are not to trust me in morals now
808 TES8 OP THE iyURBERVILiaiS
But I ought to remind yon that it Trill be wrong-doing m
the eyes o_ civilization — " Western civilization, that is to
say. "
'■'I don't mind that; no woman do when it conies to
agony-point, and there's no other way. "
* Then don't get down, bat sit where yon are. "
He drove past the cross-roads, one mile, two miles, with-
out showing any signs of affection.
" You love me very, very much, Izz I " he suddenly asked.
" I do — I have said I do. I loved you all the time we
was at the dairy together. "
" More than Tess t *
She shook her head.
" No, " she murmured, " not more than she. "
" How's that T "
" Because nobody could love'ee more than Tess did i
, . She would have laid down her life for'ee. I could da
no more ! "
■ Like the prophet on the top of Feor, Izz Huett would fain
have spoken perversely at such a moment, but the fascina-
tion exercised over her rougher nature by Tess's character
compelled her to grace.
Clare was silent ; his heart had risen at these straight
forward words from such an unexpected, unimpeachable
quarter. In his throat was something as if a sob had solidi-
fied there. His ears repeated, " She would have laid down
her Ufe for'ee. I could do no more! "
" Forget our idle talk, Izz, " he said, turning his horse's
head suddenly. " I dont know what I've been saying ! I
will now drive you back to where your lane branches off. "
" So much for honesty towards'ee ! O — how can I beat
it — how can I — how ean II " Izz Huett burst into wilj
tears, and beat her forehead as she saw what she had done
** Do you regret that poor little act of justice to an ah
ient one t Q Izz, don't spoil it by regrgt Vf
She stilled herself by degrees.
THE WOMAN PATS 309
" Very well, air. Perhaps I didn't know what I was say.
mg either, when I agreed to go, I wish — what cannot be. "
" Because I have a loving wife already. "
" Yes, yes t You have. "
They reached the corner of the lane which they had
passed half an hour earlier, and she hopped down.
" Yon will forget my momentary levity! " he said, " It
was ill-considered, ill-advised. "
" Forget it ! Never, never ! 0, it was no levity tome! "
He felt how richly he deserved the reproach that the
wounded cry couveyed, and, in a sorrow that was inexpres-
sible, leaped down and took her hand. " Well, but, Iza,
we'll part friends, anyhow! You don't know what I've
had to near ! "
She was a really generons girl, and allowed no further
bitterness to mar their adieus. " I forgive'ee, sir, " she said.
" Now, Izz, " he said, solemnly, while she stood beside him
there, forcing himself to the mentor's part he was far from
feeling; " I want you to tell Marian when you see hrr that
she is to be a good woman, and not to give way to folly.
Promise that, and tell Retty that there are more worthy
men than I in the world, that for my sake she is to act
wisely and well — remember the words — wisely and well —
for my sake. I send this message to them as a dying man
to the dying ; for I shall never see them again. And you,
Izzy, you have saved me by your honest words about my
wife from an incredible piece of folly and treachery. Wom-
en may be bad, but they are not so bad as men in These
things. On that one account I can never forget you. Be
always the good and sincere girl you have hitherto been ;
and think of me as a worthless lover, but a faithful friend.
Promise. "
She gave the promise gravely. " Heaven bless and keep
yon, sir. Good-by ! "
He drove on; but no sooner had Izz turned into the
ane, and Clam was out of sight, than she filing herself
IIS TKS3 OF THE D'tTRBERVILLES
down on the bank .n a fit of racking anguish ; and it was
with a strained, unnatural face that she entered her mother's
cottage late that night. Nobody ever knew how Iaz spent
the dark hours that intervened between Angel Clare's part-
ing from her and her arrival home.
Clare, too, after bidding the girl farewell, was wrought
to aching thoughts and quivering lips. But his sorrow was
not for Izz. That evening he was within a feather-weight's
turn of abandoning his road to the nearest station, and
driving across that elevated dorsal line of South Wessex
which divided him from his Tess's home. It was neither a
contempt for her nature, nor the probable state of her heart,
which deterred him.
No ; it was a sense that, despite her love, as corroborated
by Izz's admission, the facts had not changed. If he was
right at first, he was right now. And the momentum of
the course on which he had embarked tended to keep bitn
going in it, unless diverted by a stronger, more sustained
force than had played upon him this afternoon. He could
soon come back to her. He took the train that night for
London, and five days after shook hands in farewell of his
brothers at the port of embarkation.
SLL
From the foregoing events of the winter-time let us press
on to an October day, more than eight months subsequent
to the parting of Clare and Tess. We discover the latter
in changed conditions; instead of a bride with boxes and
trunks which others- bore, we see her a lonely woman with a
basket and a bundle in her own porterage, as at an earlier
ne. when she was no bride ; instead of the ample means
v - were anticipated by her husband for her comfort
THE WOMAN PATS 811
through jfiia probationary period, she can produce only a
flattened purse.
After again leaving Marlott, her home, she had got through
the spring and summer without any great stress upon her
physical powers, the time being mainly spent in rendering
light, irregular service at dairy-work near Port Bredy, to
the west of the Blackmoor Valley, equally remote from her
native place and from Talbothays. She preferred this to liv-
ing on his allowance. Mentally she remained in utter stag-
nation, a condition which the mechanical occupation rather
fostered than checked. Her consciousness was at that
other dairy, at that other season, in the presence of the
tender lover who had confronted her there — he who, the
moment she had grasped him to keep him for her own, had
disappeared like a shape in a vision.
The dairy-work lasted only till the milk began to lessen,
for she had not met with a second regular engagement as
at Talbothays, but had done duty as a supernumerary only.
However, as harvest was now beginning, she had simply
to remove from the pasture to the stubble to find plenty of
farther occupation, and this continued till harvest was done.
Of the five-and-twenty pounds which had remained to
her of Clare's allowance, after deducting the other half of
the fifty as a contribution to her parents for the trouble
and expense to which she had put them, she had as yet
spent but little. But there now followed an unfortunate
interval of wet weather, during which she was obliged to
fall back upon her sovereigns.
She could not bear to let them go. Angel had put them
into her hand, had obtained them bright and new from his
bank for her ; his touch had consecrated them to souvenirs
of himself — they appeared to have had as yet .10 other his-
tory than such as was created by his and her own experi-
ence — and to disperse them was like giving away relics.
But she had to do it, and one by one they left her hands.
She had been compelled to send her mother her address
812 TES8 OP THE ffUKHERVILLES
from time to time, but she concealed her circumstance*!,
When her money had almost gone a letter from her mother
reached her. Joan stated that they were in dreadful
difficulty ; the autumn rains had gone through the thatch
of the house, which required entire renewal ; but this could
not be done because the previous thatching had never been
paid for. New rafters and a new ceiling upstairs also were
required, which, with the previous bill', would amount to a
sum of twenty pounds. As her husband was a man of
means, and had doubtless returned by this time, could she
not send them the money 1
Tess had thirty pounds coming to her almost immediately
from Angel's bankers, and, the case being so deplorable,
as Boon as the sum was received she sent the twenty as re-
Part of the remainder she was obliged to expend in win-
ter clothing, leaving only a nominal sum for the whole in-
clement season at hand. When the last pound had gone, a
remark of Angel's that whenever she required further re-
sources she was to apply to his father, remained to be con-
sidered.
But the more Tess thought of the step the more reluctant
V was she to take it. The same delicacy, pride, false jduune,
whatever it may be called, on Clare's account, which had
led her to hide from her own parents the prolongation of
the estrangement, hindered her in owning to his that she
was in want after the fair allowance he had left her. They
probably despised her already ; how much more would they
despise her in the character of a mendicant! The conse-
quence was that by no effort could the parson's daughter-
in-fei bring herself to let him know her state.
Her reluctance to communicate with her husband's par-
ents might, she thought, lessen with the lapse of time ; Xmt
with her own the reverse obtained. On her leaving their
house after the short visit subsequent to her marriage they
''ere under the impression that she was ultimately going
THE WOMAN PAYS 318
to join her husband ; and from that time to the present she
h td done nothing to disturb their erroneous belief that she
mm awaiting his return in comfort, hoping against hope
that his journey to Brazil would result in a short stay only,
after which he would come to fetch her, or that he would
write for her to join him ; in any ease that they would soon
present a united front to their families and the world. This
hope she still fostered. To let her parents know that she
was a deserted wife, dependent, now that she had relieved
their necessities, on her own hands for a living, after the
triumph of a marriage which was to nullify the collapse of
the first attempt, would be too much indeed.
The set of brilliants returned to her mind. Where Clare
had deposited them she did not know, and it mattered
little, if it were true that she could only use and not sell
them. Even had they been absolutely hers, it would be
passing mean to enrich herself by a legal title to them which
was not essentially hers at all.
Meanwhile, her husband's days had been by no means
free from trial. At this moment he was lying ill of fever
in the clay lands near Curhaba in Brazil, having been
drenched with thunder-storms and persecuted by other hard-
ships, in common with all the English farmers and farm
laborers who, just at this time, were deluded into going
thither by the promises of the Brazilian Government, and by
the baseless assumption that those frames which, plough-
ing and sowing on English uplands, had resisted all the
weathers to whose moods they had been born, could resist
equally well all the weathers by which they were surprised
on Brazilian plains.
To return. Thus it happened that when the last of Toss's
sovereigns had been spent she was unprovided with others
to take their place, while, on account of the season, she
found it increasingly difficult to get employment. Not
being aware of the rarity of intelligence, energy, health, and
willingness in any sphere of life, she refrained from seeking
814 TESS OP THE xyUEHERVHiiES
an indoor occupation ; fearing towns, large houses, people
of means and social sophistication, and of manners other
than rural. From that direction of gentility Black Care
had come — all the troubles she had ever known. To indoor
work, indeed, Tess had never taken kindly. Mantua-mak-
ing she hated, so far as she knew anything of it ; she could
Hot stitch gloves with rapidity sufficient to earn a mainte-
nance, as some girls in the district were wont to do ; and
upon the whole, the work she was compelled to seek was the
work she preferred — that which involved living in the open
air. Of the winter wind she knew the worst, and of the
hitter sky. Society might be better than she supposed
from her slight experience of it. But she had no proof of
this, and her instinct in the circumstances was to avoid it
The small dairies in which she had served as supernumer-
ary milkmaid during the spring and summer required no
further aid. Room would probably have been made for
her at Talbothays, if only out of sheer compassion; but
comfortable as her life had been there, she could not go
back. The anti-climax would be too intolerable ; and her
return might bring reproach upon her idolized husband.
She could not have borne their pity, and their whispered
remarks to one another upon her strange situation ; though,
oddly enough, she would almost have faced a knowledge
of her circumstances by every individual there, so long as
her story had remained isolated in the mind of each. It
was the interchange of ideas about her that made her sen-
sitiveness wince. Tess could not account for this distinc-
tion i she simply knew that she felt it.
She was now on her way to an upland farm in the centre
of the county, to which she had been recommended by a
wandering letter which had reached her from Marian.
Marian had somehow heard that Tess was separated from
her husband — probably through Izz Huett — and the good-
natured and now tippling girl, deeming Tess in trouble,
id hastened to inform her former friend that she herself
THE WOMAN PATS 318
had gone to this upland spot after leaving the dairy, and
would like to see her there, where there was room for other
hands, if it was really true that she worked again as of old.
With the shortening of the days all hope of obtaining
her husband's forgiveness began to leave her; and there
was something of the habitude of the wild animal in the
unreflecting automatism with which she rambled on — dis-
connecting herself by littles from her eventful past at every
step, obliterating her identity, giving no thought to accidents
or contingencies which might make a quick discovery of
her whereabouts by others of importance to her own happi-
ness, if not to theirs.
Among the difficulties of her lonely position, not the least
was the attention she excited by her appearance, a certain
bearing of distinction, which she had caught from Clare,
being superadded to her natural attractiveness. Whilst the
clothes lasted which had been prepared for her marriage,
these casual glances of interest caused her no inconvenience,
but as soon as she was compelled to don the wrapper of a
field- woman, rude words were addressed to her more than
once ; but nothing occurred to cause her bodily fear till a
particular November afternoon.
She had preferred the fertile country of the southwest to
the upland farm for which she was now bound, because, for
one thing, it was nearer to the home of her husband's father ;
and to hover about that region unrecognized, ™ith the
notion that she might decide to call at the vicarage some
day, gave her pleasure. But having once decided to try
the higher and dryer levels, she pressed on, marching afoot
towards the village of Chalk-Newton, where she meant to
pass the night.
The lane was long and unvaried, and, owing to the rapid
shortening of the days, dusk came upon her before she was
aware. She had reached the top of a hill down which the
lane stretched its serpentine length in glimpses, when she
heard fjoteteps behind her hack, and in a few monww
aid TESS OF THE iyURBEEYIIJ.ES
she was overtaken by a man. He -stepped up alongside
Teas and said, " Good-night, my pretty maid, " to which she
civilly replied.
The light still remaining in the sky lit up her face, (hough
the landscape was nearly dark. The man turned and stared
hard at her.
■'Why, surely, it is the young wench who was at Trant-
ridge awhile — young Squire D'Urberville's fancy! I was
there at that time, though I dont live there now. "
She recognized in him the well-to-do boor whom Angel
had knocked down at the inn for addressing her coarsely,
when they went shopping together before their marriage.
A spasm of anguish shot through her, and she returned him
no answer.
" Be honest enough to own it, and that what I said at tho
public-house was true, though your fancy-man was so up
about it — hey, my sly one T Tou ought to beg my pardon
for that blow of his, considering. "
Still no answer came from Tess. There seemed only one
escape for her hunted soul. She suddenly took to her heels
with the speed of the wind, and, without looking behind
her, ran along the road till she came to a gate which opened
directly into a plantation. Into this she plunged, and did
not pause till she was deep enough in its shade to be safe
against any possibility of discovery.
Under foot the leaves were dry, and the foliage of some
holly bushes which grew among the deciduous trees was
dense enough to keep off draughts. She scraped together
the dead leaves till she had formed them into a large heap,
making a sort of nest in the middle. Into this Tess crept,
Snch sleep as she got was naturally fitful; she fancied
she heard strange noises, but persuaded herself that they
were caused by the breeze. She thought of her husband
in some vague, warm clime on the other side of the globe.
while she was here in the cold. Was there another snch
wretched being as she in the world 7 Tess asked herself 4
THE WOMAN PAYS 817
and, thinking of her wasted life, mid, " All is vanity. " She
repeated the words mechanically, till she reflected that this
was a most inadequate thought for modern days. Solomon
had thought as far as that more than two thousand years
ago ; she herself, though not in the van of thinkers, had
got much further. If all were only vanity, who would
mind it 1 All was, alas, worse than vanity ! The wife of
Angel Glare put her hand to her brow, and felt its curve,
and edges of her eye-sockets as perceptible under the soft
skin, and thought as she did so that there would be a time
when that bone would be bare. " I wish it were now, " she
said.
In the midst of these whimsical fancies she heard a new
strange sound among the leaves. It might be the wind;
yet there was scarcely any wind. Sometimes it was a pal-
pitation, sometimes a flutter ; sometimes it was a sort of
gasp or gurgle. Soon she was certain that the noises came
from wild creatures of some kind, the more so when, origi-
nating in the boughs overhead, they were followed by the
fall of a heavy body upon the ground. Had she been en-
sconced here under other and more pleasan.. conditions, she
would have become alarmed; but, outside humanity, she
had at present no fear.
Day at length broke in the sky. When it had been day
aloft for some little while it became day in the wood.
Directly the assuring and prosaic light of the world's
active hours had grown strong, she crept from under her
hillock of leaves, and looked around boldly. Then she per-
ceived what had been going on to disturb her. The plan-
tation wherein she had taken shelter ran down at this spot
into a peak, which ended it hitherward, outside the hedge
being arable ground. Under the trees several pheasants
lay about, their rich plumage dabbled with blood ; some
were dead, some feebly moving their wings, some staring
np at the sky, eome pulsating feebly, some contorted, some
stretched out — all of them writhing in agony, except tiro
818 TE & S OF T HE D'UBBERVTLLES
fortunate ones whose tortures bad ended during the night
by the inability of Nature to bear more.
Tess guessed at once the meaning of this. The birds had
been driven down into this corner the day before by some
shooting party ; and while those that had dropped dead
under the shot, or had died before nightfall, had been
searched for and carried off, the slightly wounded birds had
escaped and hidden themselves away, or risen among the
thick boughs, where they had maintained their position till
they grew weaker with loss of blood in the night-time,
when they had fallen one by one as she had heard them.
She had occasionally caught glimpses of these men in
girlhood, looking over hedges or peering through bushes,
and pointing their guns, strangely accoutred, a bloodthirsty
light in their eyes. She had been told that, rough and
brutal as they seemed just then, they were not like this all
the year round, but were, in fact, quite civil persons, save
during certain weeks of autumn and winter, when, like the
inhabitants of the Malay Peninsula, they ran amuck, and
made it their purpose to destroy life — in this case harmless
feathered creatures, brought into being by artificial means
solely to gratify these propensities — conduct at once so un-
mannerly and so imehivalrous towards their weaker fellows
in Nature's teeming family.
With the impulse of a soul who could feel for kindred .
sufferers as much as for herself, Tess's first thought was to
put the still living birds out of their torture, and to this
end with her own trembling hands she broke the necks of
as many as she could find, leaving them to lie where she
had found them till the gamekeepers should come — as they
probably would come — to look for them a second time.
" Poor darlings — to suppose myself the most miserable
being on earth in the sight of such misery as yours I*
she exclaimed. " And not a twinge of bodily pain about
me ! I be not mangled, and I be not bleeding, and I have
wo hands to feed and clothe me. " She was ashamed of
THE WOMAN PATS
herself for her gloom of the night, based. qj & _ nothing more
tan gible t han a sense of condemnation under an arbitrary
law of society which had ao foun.datio & in. nature.-*
XLH
It was now broad day, and she started again, emerging
cautiously upon the highway. Bnt there was no need for
caution ; not a soul was at hand, and Tess went onward
with fortitude, her recollection of the birds silently endur-
ing their night of agony impressing upon her the relativity
of sorrows and the tolerable nature of her own, if she could
rise high enough to despise opinion. Bnt that she could
not do so long as it was held by Clare.
She reached Chalk-Newton, and breakfasted at an inn,
where several young men were troublesomely compliment-
ary to her good looks. Somehow she felt hopeful, for was
it not possible that her husband also might say these same
things to her even yet J Surely she was bound to take care
of herself on the chance of it. To this end Tess resolved
to run no further risks from her appearance. As soon as
she got out of the village she entered a thicket and took
from her basket one of the old field-gowns which she had
never put on even at the dairy — never since she had worked
among the stubble at Marlott. She also, by a felicitous
thought, took a handkerchief from her bundle and tied it
round her face under her bonnet, covering her chin and
half her cheeks and her temples, as if she were suffering
from toothache. Then with her little scissors, by the aid of
a pocket looking-glass, she mercilessly snipped her eyebrows
off, and thus insured against aggressive admiration she
went on her uneven way.
"'What a mommet of a maid I " said the next man who
met her to a companion.
326 TfiSS 07 THE DtlRBERVILLES
Teavs c*me into her eyes for very pity of herself as she
heard him.
" But I dont care ! " said she. " Oh no — I don't carei
Fll always be ugly now, becatse Angel is not here, and I
have nobody to take care of me. My husband that was is
gone away, and never will love me any more ; but I lovs
him just the same, and hate all other men, and like to mak»
'em think scornful o'me ! "
Thus Tess walks on ; a figure which is part of the land-
scape; a field-woman pure and simple, in winter guise: a
gray serge eape, a red woollen cravat, a stuff skirt covered
by a whitey-brown rough wrapper, and buff-leather gloves.
Every thread of that old attire has become wire-drawn and
thin under the stroke of rain-drops, the burn of sunbeams,
and the stress of winds. There is no sign of young passion
in her now j
The maiden's mouth is cold,
Her hair mere brown or gold,
Fold over simple fold
Binding her head.
Inside this exterior, over which the eye might have roved
as over a thing scarcely percipient, almost inorganic, there
was the record of a pulsing life, of responsive spells, through
months of pleasure, and through months of sighing; a .
heart which had learnt of the dust and ashes of tilings,
of the cruelty of lust and the fragility of love.
Next day the weather was bad, but she trudged on, th»
honesty, directness, and impartiality of elemental enmity
disconcerting her but little. Her object being a winter's
occupation and a winter's home, there was no time to lose
Her experience of short hirings had been such that she d*
termined to accept no more.
Thus she went forward from farm to farm in the direction
of the place whence Marian had written to her, which she
1 etermined to make use of as a last shift only, its rumored
THE WOMAN PATS 321
Stringencies being the reverse of tempting. First she in-
quired for the lighter kinds of employment, and, as accept-
ance in any variety of these grew hopeless, applied next for
the lesB light, till, beginning with the dairy and poultry
tendance that she liked best, she ended with the heavy and
coarse pursuits that she liked least — work on arable land:
work of such roughness, indeed, as she would never have
deliberately volunteered for.
Towards the second evening she reached the irregular
chalk table-land or plateau, bosomed with prehistoric semi-
globular tumuli — as if Cybele the Many-breasted were su-
pinely extended there — which stretched between the vaDey
of her birth and the valley of her love.
Here the air was dry and cold, and the long cart-roads
were blown white and dusty again within a few hours after
rain. There were few trees or none, those that would have
grown in the hedges being mercilessly plashed down with
the quickset by the tenant-farmers, the natural enemies of
tree, bush, and brake. In the middle distance ahead of het
she could see the summits of Bulbarrow and of Nettle-
combe-Tout, and tfcey seemed friendly. They had a low
and unassuming aspect from this upland, though as seen
on the other side from Blackmoor in her childhood they
were as lofty bastions against the sky. Southerly, at many
miles'distance, and over the hills and ridges coastward, she
could discern a surface like polished steel: it was the Eng-
lish Channel at a point far out towards France.
Before her, in a slight depression, were the remains of a
village. She had, in fact, reached Flintcomb-Asb, the place
of Marian's sojourn There seemed to be no help for itj
hither she was doomed to come. The stubborn soil around
her showed plainly enough that the kind of labor in demand
here was of the roughest kind ; but it was time to rest from
pearching, and here she resolved to stay, particularly as it
began to rain. At the entrance to the village was a cottage
whose gable jutted into the road, and before applying for
823 TESS OF THE DTJBBEBYILLES
a lodging she stood under its shelter, and watched the
evening close in.
" Who would think I was Mrs. Angel Clare ! ■ she said.
The wall felt warm to her back and shoulders, and she
found that immediately within the gable was the cottage
fireplace, the heat of which came through the bricks. She
warmed her hands upon them, and also put her cheek — red
and moist with the drizzle — against their comforting sur
face. The wall seemed to be the only friend she had. She
had so little wish to leave it that she could have stayed
there all night.
Teas could hear the occupants of the cottage — gathered
together after their day's labor — talking to each other with-
in, and the rattle of their sapper-plates was also audible.
But. in the village street she had seen no soul as yet. The
solitude was at last broken by the approach of one femi-
nine figure, who, though the evening was cold, wore the
print gown and the tilt-bonnet of summer-time. Tess in-
stinctively thought it might be Marian, and when she came
near enough to be distinguishable in the gloom surely
enough it was she. Marian was even stouter and redder
in the face than formerly, and decidedly shabbier in attire.
At any previous period of her existence Tess would hardly
have cared to renew the acquaintance in such conditions;
but her loneliness was excessive, and she responded readily
to Marian's greeting.
Marian was quite respectful in her inquiries, but seemed
much moved by the fact that Tess should still continue in
no better condition than at first; though she had dimly
heard of the separation.
" Tess— Mrs. Clare — the dear wife of dear he t And is it
really so bad as this, my child T Why is your comely face
tied up in such a way I Anybody been beating'ee f Not
he! "
" No, no, no ! I merely did it to keep off clipsing and
filing, Marian. " She pulled off in disgust a bandage
hich could suggest such wild thoughts.
THE WOMAN PATO 32 &
" And you've got no collar on. " (Tess had been accus-
tomed to wear a little -white collar at the dairy.)
" I know it, Marian. "
" You've lost it travelling! "
" I've not lost it. The truth is, I don't care anything
shout my appearance ; and so I didn't put it on. " "
" And you don't wear your wedding-ring! "
" Yes, I do ; but not publicly. I wear it round my neck
on a ribbon. I don't wish people to think who 1 am by
marriage, or that I am married at all; it would be so awk-
ward while I lead my present life. "
Marian paused. " But you be a gentleman's wife; and
it seems hardly fair that you should live like this ! "
" Oh yes it is, quite fair ; though I am very unhappy. "
" Well, well. He married you — and you can be unhappy t*
" Wives are unhappy sometimes ; from no fault of their
husbands — from their own. "
" YouVe no faults, deary ; that I'm sure of. And he's *■
none. So it must be something outside ye both. "
" Marian, dear Marian, will you do me a good turn with-
out asking questions? My husband has gone abroad, and .
somehow I have overrun my allowance, so that I have to
fall back upon my old work for a time. Do not call me
Mrs. Clare, but Tess, as before. Do they want a hand
here I *
" Oh yes ; they'll tana one always, because few care to
come.'Tis a starve-acre place. Corn and swedes are all
they grow. Though I be here myself, I feel'tis a pity for
such as you to come. "
" But you used to be as good a dairywoman as I. "
" Yes; but Fve got out o* that since I took to drink.
Lord, thstfs the only happiness I've got now ! If you en-
gage, you'll be set swede-hacking. That's what I be doing*
bat yon wont like it "
" O — anything ! Will you speak for me I ■
" You will do better by speaking for yourself. "
" Very well. Now, Marian, remember — nothing about
|2| TESS OF THE DTJRBEBVTLLES
Aim, if I get the place. I don't wish to bring his mutts
down to the dirt. "
Marian, who was really a trustworthy girl, though of
coarser grain than Tess, promised anything she asked.
" This is pay-night, ,; she said, " and if yon were to come
with me yon would know at once. I be real sorry that
you are not happy ; but tis because he's away, I know.
Yon couldn't be unhappy if he were here, even if he gave
you do money — even if he nsed yon like a drudge. "
" That's true ; I could not ! "
They walked on together, and soon reached the farm-
house, which was almost sublime in its dreariness. There
was not a tree within sight ; there was not, at this season,
a green pasture — nothing hut fallow and turnips every-
where; in large fields divided by hedges monotonously
plashed to unrelieved levels.
Tess waited outside the door of the farmhouse till the
group of work-folk had received their wages, and then
Marian introduced her. The farmer himself, it appeared,
was not at home, but his wife, who represented him this
evening, made no objection to hiring Tess, on her agreeing
to remain till Old Lady-Day. Female field-labor was sel-
dom offered now, and its cheapness made it profitable for
tasks which women could perform as readily as men.
Having signed the agreement, there was nothing more
for Tess to do at present than to get a lodging, and she
found one in the house at whose gable-wall she had warmed
herself. It was a poor subsistence that she had ensured,
but it would afford a shelter for the winter at any rate.
That night she wrote to inform her parents of her new
address, in case a letter should arrive at Marlott from her
misband. But she did not tell them of the sorriness of ha
■situation ; it might have brought reproach upon him.
THE WOMAN PAYS
XL1U
There was no exaggeration in Marian's definition ot
JTlintcomb-Ash farm as a starve-acre place. The single fat
thing on the soil was Marian herself : and she was an im-
portation. Of the three classes of village, the village cared
for by its lord, the village cared for by itself, and the village
uncared for either by itself or by its lord — (in other words,
the village of a resident squire's tenantry, the village of
free or copyholders, and the absentee-owner's village, farmed
with the land) — this place, Flintcomb-Ash, was the third.
Bat Tess set to wort. Patien ce, that, blending_of moral ,
eonrage with p hysical timidity, was now nc longer a minor
feature in Mrs. Angel Clare ; and it sustained her.
The swede-fleld, in which she and her companion were
set hacking, was a stretch of a hundred odd acres, in one
patch, on the highest ground of the farm, rising above
stony lanchets or lynchets — the outcrop of silioious veins
in the chalk formation, composed of myriads of loose white
flints in bulbous, cusped, and phallic shapes. The upper
half of each turnip had been eaten off by the live-stock,
and it was the business of tie two women to grub out the
lower or earthy half of the root with a hooked fork called
a hacker, that this might be eaten also. Every leaf of the
vegetable having previously been consumed, the whole field
was in color a desolate drab ; it was a complexion without
features, as if a face, from chin to brow, should be only an
expanse of akin. The sky wore, in another color, the same
likeness ; a white vacuity of countenance with the linea-
ments gone. So these two upper and nether visages con-
fronted each other all day long, the white face looking
down on the brown face, and the brown face looking up at
the white face, without anything standing between them
336 TESS OF THE DTJRBERYILLES
bat the two girls crawling over the surface of the former
like flies.
Nobody came near them, and their movements showed a
mechanical regularity ; their forms enshrouded in rough
Hessian " wrappers " — sleeved brown pinafores, tied behind
to the bottom, to keep their gowns from blowing about-
short skirts revealing " skitty boots " that reached high up
the ankles, and yellow sheepskin gloves with gauntlets.
The pensive character which the curtained hood lent to
their bent heads would have reminded the observer of some
early Italian conception of the two Marys.
They worked on hour after hour, unconscious of the
forlorn aspect they bore in the landscape, not thinking of
the justice or injustice of their lot. Even in such a posi-
tion as theirs it was possible to exist in a dream. In the
afternoon the rain came on again, and Marian said that
they need not work any more, though if they did not work
they would not be paid; so they worked on. It was so
high a situation, this field, that the rain had no occasion to
fall, but raced along horizontally upon the yelling wind,
sticking into them like glass splinters, till by degrees they
were wet through. Tess had not known till now — indeed,
few people of either sex know — what is really meant by
that. There are degrees of dampness, and a very little is
called being wet through in common talk. But to stand
working slowly in a field, and feel the creep of rain-water,
first in legs and shoulders, then on hips and head, then at
back, front, and sides, and yet to work on till the leaden
light diminishes and marks that the sun is down, demands
a distinct modicum of stoicism, even of valor.
Yet they did not feel the wetness so much as might be
supposed. They were both young, and they were talking
of the time when they lived and loved together at Talbo-
thays Dairy, that happy green tract of land where summei
had been liberal in her gifts ; in substance to all, emoticst-
ally to these Tess would fain not have eonwersed wit*
THE WOMAN PATS 827
Marian of the man who was legally, if not obviously, her
husband ; but the irresistible fascination of the subject be-
trayed her into reciprocating Marian's remarks. And thus,
as has been said, though the damp curtains of their bonnets
flapped smartly into their faces, and their wrappers clung
about them to wearisomeness, they lived all this afternoon
in memories of green, sunny, romantic Talbothays.
" You can see a gleam of a hill within a few miles of
Proom Valley from here when it is fine, " said Marian.
" Ah ! Can you t " said Tess, awake to the new value of
the locality.
< feo the two forces were at work here as everywhere, the
inherent will to enjoy, and the circumstantial will against l
enjoyment^ Marian's will had a method of assisting itself
by taking from her pocket, as the afternoon wore on, a pint
bottle corked with a white rag, from which she invited Tess
to drink. Tess's unassisted power of dreaming, however,
being enough for her sublimation at present, she declined
except the merest sip, and then Marian took a pull herself
from the bottle.
" I've got used to it, " she said, " and cant leave it off
now. Tis my only comfort You see I lost him : you
didn't; and you can do without it perhaps. "
Tess thought her loss as great as Marian's, but upheld
by the dignity of being Angel's wife, in the letter at least,
she accepted Marian's differentiation.
Amid this scene Tess slaved in the morning frosts and in
the afternoon rains. When it was not swede-hacking it
was swede- trimming, in which process they sliced off the
earth and the fibres with a bill hook before storing the
roots for future use. At this occupation they could shelter
themselves by a thatched hurdle if it rained ; but if it was
frosty, even their thick leather gloves eould not prevent
the frozen masses they handled from biting their Angers.
Still Tess hoped. She had a conviction that sooner or later
the magnanimity which she persisted in reckoning as a
326 TESS OF THE DTJKBJiRVILIJSa
chief iugredient of Clara's character would lead him to
rejoin her; and what would a winter of swede-trimming
matter if it resulted in such a consummation 1
They often looked acrosc the country to where Proom
Valley was known to stretch, even though they might not
be able to see it; and, fixing their eyes on the cloaking
gray mist, imagined the old times they had spent out there.
" Ah, " said Marian, " how I should like another or two
of our old sat to come here! Then we could bring up
Talbothays every day here afield, and talk of he, and of
what nice times we had there, and o'the old things we used
to know, and make it all come back again a'most, in seem-
ing ! " Marian's eyes softened, and her voice grew vague
as the visions returned. " Pll write to Izz Huett, " she said.
" She's biding at home doing nothing now, I know, and 111
tell her we be here, and ask her to come ; and perhaps Betty
is well enongh now. "
Teas had nothing to say against the proposal, and the
next she heard of this plan for importing old Talbothays'
joys was two or three days later, when Marian informed
her that Izz had replied to her inquiry, and had promised
to come if she could.
There had not been such a winter for years. It came on
in stealthy and measured glides, like the moves of a chess-
player. One morning the few lonely trees and the thorns
of the hedgerows appeared as if they had put off a vegeta-
ble for an animal integument. Every twig was covered
with a white nap as of fur grown from the rind during the
night, giving it four times its usual dimensions ; the whole
bush or tree forming a startling sketch in white lines on the
mournful gray of the sky and horizon. Cobwebs revealed
their presence on sheds and walls where none had ever
been observed till brought out into visibility by the crys-
tallizing atmosphere, hanging like loops of white worsted
from salient points of the outhouses, posts, and gates.
After this season of congealed dampness came a spell of
THE WOMAN PATS 329
dry frost, when strange birds from behind the North Pole
began to arrive silently on the upland of FUntoomb-Ash ;
gaunt spectral creatures with tragical eyeB — eyes which
had witnessed scenes of cataelysmal horror in inaccessible
polar regions, of a magnitude such as no human being had
ever conceived, in curdling temperatures that no man could
endure; which hod beheld the crash of icebergs and the
slide of enow-hills by the shooting light of the Aurora ;
been half blinded by the whirl of colossal storms and ter-
raqueous distortions; and retained the expression of fea-
ture that such scenes had engendered. These nameless
birds came quite near to Tess and Marian, but of all they
had seen which humanity would never see they brought
no account. The traveller's ambition to tell was not theirs,
and, with dumb impassivity, they dismissed experiences
which they did not value for the immediate incidents of
this upland — the trivial movements of the two girls in
disturbing the clods with their fragile hackers so as to un-
cover something or other that these visitants relished as
food.
Then one day a peculiar quality invaded the air of this
open country. There came a moisture which was not the
moisture of rain, and a cold which was not the cold of frost.
It chilled the eyeballs of the twain, made their brows ache,
penetrated to their skeletons, affecting the surface of the
body less than its core. They knew that it meant snow,
and in the night the snow came. Teas, who continued to
live at the cottage with the warm gable that cheered the
lonely pedestrian who paused beside it, awoke in the night,
and heard above the thatch noises which seemed to signify
that the roof had turned itself into a gymnasium of all the
winds. When she lit her lamp to get up in the morning,
she found that the snow had blown through a chink in the
casement, forming a white cone of the finest powder against
the inside, and had also come down the chimney, so that it
lay sole-deep upon the floor, on which her shoes left tracks
230 TESS OF THE D'URBERYILLES
when she moved about. Without, the storm drove so fast
as to create a snow-mist in the kitchen ; but as yet it was
too dark outof-doors to see anything.
Tess knew that it was impossible to go on with the
swedes ; and by the time she had finished breakfast by the
light of the solitary little lamp, Marian arrived to tell her
that they were to join the rest of the women at reed-draw-
ing in the barn till the weather changed. As soon, there-
fore, as the uniform cloak of darkness without began to
turn to a disordered medley of feeble grays, they blew out
the lamp, wrapped themselves up in their thickest pinners,
tied their woollen cravats round their necks and across
their chests, and started for the barn. The snow had fol-
lowed the birds from the polar basin as a white pillar of a
cloud, and individual flakes could not be seen. The blast
smelt of icebergs, arctic seas, whales, and white bears, carry-
ing the snow so that it licked the land but did not lie on it.
They trudged onwards with slanted bodies through the
flossy fields, keeping as well as they could in the shelter
of hedges, which, however, acted as strainers rather than
screens. The air, afflicted to pallor with the hoary multi-
tudes that infested it. twisted and spun them eccentrically,
suggesting an achromatic chaos of things. But both the
young women were fairly cheerful ; such weather on a dry
upland is not in itself dispiriting.
" The cunning northern birds knew this was coming, "
said Marian. " Depend upon t, they kept just in front of
it all the way from the North Star. Your husband, my
dear, is, I make no doubt, having scorching weather all
this time. Lord, if he could only see his pretty wife now !
Not that this weather hurts your beauty at all — in fact, it
rather does it good. "
" You mustn't talk about him to me, Marian, " said Tess,
averely.
" Well, butn-surely you care for him. Do you 1 "
Instead of answering, Tess, with tears in her eyes, im-
THE WOMAN PAYS
pulsively faced in tie direction in wUch she imagbied
South America to lie, and, putting np her hps, blew ont a
passionate kiss upon tile snowy wind.
^Well, well I know yon do. But'pon my body, it m a
rum life for a married couple ! There-I won't say another
word'Well, as for the weather, it won't hurt ns m tno
wheatbarn i tat reed-drawing is feaj^Brtard work-worse
than swede-hacking. I can sttrfft because I'm stout, but
you be slimmer than I. I ^Tthink why msrster should
have set'ee at it. " ^w
They reached the wM & t-barn and entered it. One ena
of the long struetm/was full of corn; the middle was
where the reed-draljing was carried on, « " ia " > ™^t
radybeen placed in the reed-press the evening before as
many sheaves of w£eat as would be sufficient for the women
to draw from dudng the day.
" Why, here's Izz! " said Marian,
fa it was, a*a she cam. forward. She had walked all
the way from hj, r mother's home on the previous afternoon,
and not deenfig the distance so great had been belated
arriving, hoover, just before the snow began, and sleeping
TttiealULe. The farmer had agreed with her mother
at market L take her on if she came today, and she had
been afraid/ to disappoint him by delay.
In add-on te T.ss, Marian, and fa, there we™ two
.omen 2„m a neighboring village ; two i— • ^
ters, whiTm Tess with a start remembered as Dark Car UM
SenTf Spades, and her junior the Queen of D« < ^-
tiTose wlo had tried to nght with her in th-^-
rel at Tr»„tridge. They showed no recognition of her and
posablXd none. They did all kinds of " " -JT*^
PreferenVinclnding well-sinking, nedgmg, ditetag^and
excavating without any sense of fatigue. Noted «*■» "
ers were they too, and looked round upon the other three
with some superciliousness. .
Putting on their gloves, they all set to work, standing m
832 TESS OF THE D-UBBEBVu^LES
a row in front of the press. That erection was formed of
two upright posts connected by a cross-beam, under which
the sheaves to be drawn from were laid ears outward, the
beam being pegged down by pins in the uprights, and
lowered as the sheaves diminished. Each woman seized a
handful of the ears, and drew ont the stalks thereby, gath-
ering the straw so drawn — now straight, and called reed —
under her left arm, where, when a large armful was gath-
ered, she cut off the ears with a bill-hook.
The day hardened in color, the light coming in at the
barn-doors upwards from the ground instead of downwards
from the sky. The girls pulled handful after handful from
the press; but by reason of the presence of the strange
women, who were recounting local scandals, Marian and
Izz could not at first talk of old times as they wished to do.
Presently they heard the muffled tread of a horse, and the
farmer rode np to the barn-door. When he had dismounted
and entered he came close to Tess, and remained looking
musingly at the side of her face. She had not turned at
first, but his fixed attitude led her to look roand, when she
■perceived that her employer was the native ot i'rantridge
from whom she had taken flight on the high-mad because
of his allusion to her history.
He waited till she had carried the drawn bundles to the
pile outside, when he said, " So you be the youlg woman
who took my civility in such ill part! Be drowned if I
didn't think yon might be as soon as I heard of yoV being
hired Well, you thought yon had got the better oinie the
first time at the inn with your fancy-man, and thoeecond
time on the road, when yon bolted ; but now I tJnk Tve
got the better of you. " He concluded with a hartSangh.
Tess, between the Amazonians and the farmer, lie a bird
caught in a springe clap.net, returned no answerf, continu-
ing to pull the straw. She could read character infficiently
well to know by this time that she had nothing \k fear from
v employer's gallantry ; it was rather the tynpniy induced
I THE WOMAN PATS 333
by Mb mortification at Clare's treatment of him. Upon the
whole, she preferred that sentiment in man, and felt brave
enough to endure it.
" You thought I was in love with'ee, I suppose t Some
women are such fools, to take every look as serious earnest
But there's nothing like a winter afield for taking that non-
sense out o'young women's heads ; and you've signed and
agreed till Lady-Day. Now, are you going to beg my par-
don f*
" I think you ought to beg mina "
" Very well — as you like. But well see which is master
here. Be they all the sheaves you've done to-day t "
" Yes, sir. "
" Tis averypoor show. Just see what they've done over
there " (pointing to the two stalwart women). " The rest,
too, have done better than you. "
" They've all practised it before, and I have not. And I
thought it made no difference to you as it is task work, and
we are only paid for what we do. "
" 0, but it does. I want the barn cleared. "
" I. am going to work all the afternoon instead of leaving
at two as the others will do. "
He looked sullenly at her and went away. Tess felt that
she could not have come to a much worse place ; but any-
thing was better than gallantry, in her unprotected state.
When two o'clock arrived the professional reed-drawers
tossed off the last half -pint in their ilagon, put down their
hooks, tied their last sheaves, and went away. Marian and
Izz would have done likewise, but on hearing that Tess
meant to stay, to make up by longer hours for her lack of
skill, they would not leave her. Looking out at the snow,
which still fell, Marian exclaimed, " Now we've got it all to
ourselves. " And Bd at last the conversation turned to then-
old experiences at the dairy ; and, of course, the incidents
of their affection for Angel Clare.
" Izz and Marian, " said Mrs. Angel Clare, with a dignity
334 TESS OF THE DTRBEBVILLES
which was extremely pretty and touching, seeing how very
little of a wife she was : " I can't join in talk with you now,
as I used to do, about Mr. Clare ; you will see that I can-
not ; because, although he is gone away from me for th?
present, he is my husband. "
Izz was by nature the sauciest and most caustic of all the
four girls who had loved Clare. " He was a very splendid
lover, no doubt, " Bhe said ; " but I don't think he is a very
good husband to go away from you so soon. "
" He had to go — he was obliged to go, to see about the
land over there, " pleaded Tess.
" He might have tided'ee over the winter. "
" Ah — that's owing to an accident — a misunderstanding,
and we won't argne it, " Tess answ* ~ sd, with tearfulness in
her words. " Perhaps there's a good deal to be said for
him ! He did not go away, like some husbands, without
telling me ; and I can always nnd out where he is. "
After this, they continued to seize, pull, and cut off the
ears for some long time in z reverie, nothing sounding in
the barn but the swish of th i drawn straw and the crunch
of the hook. Then Tess suddenly flagged, and sank down
upon the heap of wheat ears at her feet.
" I knew you wouldn't be able to stand it ! " cried Marian
" It wants harder flesh than yours for this work. "
Just then the farmer entered. " 0, that's how you get
on when I am away, " he said to her.
" But it is my own loss, " she pleaded. " Not yours. "
" I want it finished, " he said, doggedly, as he crossed the
barn, and went out at the oilier door,
" Don't'ee mind him, there's a dear, " said Marian. " I've
worked here before. Now you go and lie down there, and
Izz and I will make up your nnmber. "
" I don't like to let you do that. I'm taller than you, too.*
However, she was so overcome that she consented to lie
down awhile, and reclined on a heap of pull-tails — the ref-
■ " « after the straight straw had been drawn — which had
THE WOMAN PAYS S3*
been thrown up at the farther side of the barn. Her sue.
eumbing had been as largely owing to agitation at reopen.
ing the subject of her separation from her husband as to
the hard work. She lay in a state of percipience without
volition, and the rustle of the straw and the cutting of the
ears had the weight of bodily touches.
She could hear from her corner, in addition to these
noises, the murmur of their voices. She felt certain that
they were continuing the subject already broached, but their
voices were so low that she could not catch the words. At
last Teas grew more and more anxious to know what they
were saying, and, persuading herself that she felt better,
she got up and resumed work.
Then Izz Huett broke down. She had walked more than
a dozen miles the previous evening, had gone to bed at
midnight well-nigh supperless, and had risen again at five
o'clock. Marian alone, thanks to the bottle of liquor and
her stoutness of build, stood the strain upon back and arms
without suffering. Tess urged Izz to leave off, agreeing, as
she felt better, to finish the day without her, and make
equal division of the number of sheaves.
Izz accepted the offer gratefully, and disappeared through
the great door into the snowy track to her lodging. Marian,
as was the ease every afternoon at this time, on account of
the bottle she had emptied, began to feel in a romantic vein.
" I should not have thought it of him — never ! " she said
in a dreamy tone. " And I loved him so 1 I didn't mind his
having yon. But this about Izz is too bad ! "
Tess, in her start at the words, narrowly missed cutting
off a finger with the bill-hook.
" Is it about my husband 1 " she stammered.
" Well, yes. Izz said,'Dont'ee tell her'; but I am sure
I can't help it ! It was what he wanted Izz to do. He
wanted her to go off to Brazil with him/'
Tess's face faded as white as the scene without, and its
curves straightened. " And did Izz refuse to go T " she asked
330 TESS OF THE D > URBERYILLES.
" I don't know. Anyhow, he changed his mind. "
" Pool* — (lien he didn't mean itt Twas just a man's
jest I "
" Yes, he did ; for he drove her a good way towards the
station. "
" Anyhow, he didn't take her ! *
They polled on in silence till Tess, without any premoni-
tory symptoms, burst oat crying.
" There ! " said Marian. " Now I wish I hadn't told'ee ! "
" No. It is a very good thing that yon have done ! I
have been living on in a thirtover, lackadaisical way, and
have not seen what it may lead to ! I ought to have sent
him a letter oftener. He said I could not go to him, but
he didn't say I was not to write as often as I liked. I won't
stay like this any longer ! I have been very wrong and
neglectful in leaving everything to be done by him ! "
The dim light in the barn grew dimmer, and they could
see to work no longer. When Tess had reached home that
evening, and had entered into the privacy of her little
whitewashed chamber, she began impetuously writing a
letter to Clare. But falling into doubt, she could not finish
it. Afterwards she took the ring from the ribbon on. which
she wore it next her heart, and retained it on her finger all
night, as if to fortify herself in the sensation that she was
really the wife of this elusive lover of hers, who could pro-
pose that Izz should go with him abroad, so shortly after he
had left her. Knowing that, how could she write e
to him, or show that she cared for him any more f
By the disclosure in the barn her thoughts were led anew
in the direction which they had taken more than once of
; ate — to the distant Emminster Vicarage. It was through
THE WOMAN PATS S3T
her husband's parents that she had been charged to send a
letter to Clare if she desired ; and to write to them direct
if in difficulty. But that sense of her having morally no
claim upon him had always led Tess to suspend her im-
pulses to send these notes; and to the family at the vicar-
age, therefore, as to her own parents since her marriage,
ahe was virtually non-existent. This self-effacement in both
directions had been quite in consonance with her inde-
pendent character of desiring nothing by way of favor or
pity to which she was not entitled on a fair consideration
of her deserts. She wished to stand or fall by her qualities,
and to waive such merely nominal claims upon a strange
family as she had established by the flimsy fact of a mem-
ber of that family having, in a moment of impulse, written
his name in a church-book beside hers.
But now that ahe was stung to a fever by Izz's tale there
was a limit to her powers of renunciation. Why had her
husband not written to her! He had distinctly implied
that he would at least let her know of the locality to which
he had journeyed ; but he had not sent a line to notify his
address. Was he really indifferent t But was he ill T Was
he waiting for her to make some advance 1 Surely she
might summon the courage of solicitude, call at the vicar-
age for intelligence, make herself known, and express her
grief at his silence. If Angel's father were the good man
ahe had heard him represented to be, he would be able to
enter into her heart-starved situation. Her social hard-
ships she could conceal
To leave the farm on a week-day was not in her powe*,
Sunday was the only possible opportunity. Flintcomb-Ash
being in the middle of the cretaceous table-land over which
no railway had climbed as yet, it would be necessary to
walk. And the distance being fifteen miles each way it
would be necessary to allow herself a long day for the un-
dertaking, by rising early.
A fortnight later, when the snow had gone, and had been
838 TESS OP THE I/UBBERVILLES
followed by a bard, black frost, she resolved to take advan-
tage of the state of the roads to try the experiment. At
three o'clock that Sunday morning she came downstairs
and stepped out into the starlight The weather was
still favorable, the ground ringing under her feet like an
anviL
Marian and Izz were much interested in her. excursion
knowing that the journey concerned her husband. Then
lodgings were in a cottage a little farther along the lane,
but they came and assisted Teas in her departure, and
argued that she should dress up in her very prettiest gnis4
to captivate the hearts of her parents-in-law ; though she,
knowing of the austere and Calvinistic tenets of old Mr.
Clare, was indifferent, and even doubtful. A year had now
elapsed since her sad marriage, but she had preserved suf-
ficient draperies from the wreck of her then full wardrobe
to clothe her very charmingly as a simple country girl with
no pretensions to recent fashion ; a soft gray woollen gown,
with white crape quilling against the pink skin of her face
and neck, and a black velvet jacket and hat.
"'Tis a thousand pities your husband can't see'ee now-
yon do look a real beauty ! " said Izz Hnett, regarding Tess
as she stood on the threshold, between the steely starlight
without and the yellow candle-light within. Izz spoke with
a magnanimous abandonment of herself to the situation;
she could not be — no woman with a heart bigger than a
hazel-nut could he — antagonistic to Tess in her presence,
the influence which she exercised over those of her own sex
being of a warmth and strength quite unusual, curiously
overpowering the less worthy feminine feelings of spite
and rivalry.
With a final tug and touch here, and a slight brush there,
they let her go ; and she was absorbed into the pearly air
of the fore-dawn. They heard her footsteps tap along the
hard road as she stepped out to her full pace. Even la
hoped she would win, and, though without any particular
THE WOMAN PATS 839
respect for ber own virtue, felt glad that she had been pre-
sented wronging her friend when momentarily tempted by
Clare.
It was a year ago, all but a day, that Clare had married
Tess, and only a few days less than a year that he had been
absent from her. Still, to start on a brisk walk, and on
such an errand as hers, on a dry, clear winter morning,
through the rarefied air of these chalky hogs'-backs, was
not depressing ; and there is no doubt that her dream at
starting was to win the heart of ber mottei in-law, tell her
whole history to that matron, enlist her or; her side, and so
gain back the truant
She soon reached the edge of the vast escarpment below
which stretched the wide and loamy Vale of Blackmoor,
lying now misty and still in the dawn. Instead of the
colorless air of the uplands, the atmosphere down here was
a deep blue. Instead of the great enclosures of fifty to a
hundred acres in which she was now accustomed to toil,
there were little fields below her of less than half a-dozen
acres, so numerous that they looked from this height like
the meshes of a net. Here the landscape was whitev-brown ;
down there, as in Froom Valley, it was always green. Yet
it was in that vale that her sorrow had taken shape, and
she did not love it as formerly. Beauty to-hacr-ae to all
who have felt, lay not in the thing, but in what the thing
symbolized.
Keeping the Vale on her right, she steered steadily west-
ward ; passing above the Hintocks, crossing at right angles
the high-road from Sherton- Abbas'to Castcrbridge, and
skirting Dogbnry Hill and High-Stoy, with the dell between
them called " The Devil's Kitchen. " Still following the
elevated way, she reached Cross-in-Hand, where the stone
pillar stands desolate and silent, to mark the site of a mira-
cle, or murder, or both. Three miles farther she cut across
the straight and deserted Roman road called Long-Ash
Lane ; leaving which as soon as she reached it, she dipped
340 5ESS OF THE DTJRBERVniES
down the hill by a transverse lane into the small town of
village of Evershead, being now about half-way over the
distance. She made a halt here, and breakfasted " second
time, heartily enough — not at the Sow and Acorn, for she
avoided inns, but at a cottage by the church.
The second half of her journey was through a more gen-
tle country, by way of Benvill Lane. But as the mileage
lessened between her and the spot of her pilgrimage, so did
Tesa's confidence decrease, and her enterprise loom out more
formidably. She saw her purpose in such staring lines, and
the landscape so faintly, that she was sometimes in danger
of losing her way. However, about noon she stood on the
edge of the basin in which Emminster and its vicarage lay.
Mounting upon a gate by the wayside, she sat there con-
templating the scene. The square tower, beneath which
she knew that at that moment the vicar and his household
and congregation were gathered, had a severe look in her
eyes. She wished that she had somehow contrived to come
on a week-day. Such a good man might be prejudiced
against a woman who had chosen Sunday, never realizing
the necessities of her case. But it was incumbent upon her
to go on now. She took off the thick boots in which she
had walked thus far, put on her pretty thin ones of patent
leather, and, stuffing the former into the hedge where she
might readily find them again, descended the hill ; the fresh-
ness of color she had derived from the keen air thinning
away in spite of her as she drew near the parsonage.
Tess hoped for some accident that might favor her, bnt
nothing favored her. The shrubs on the vicarage lawn
rustled uncomfortably in the frosty breeze ; she could not
feel, by any stretch of imagination, dressed to her highest
as she was, that the house was the residence of near rela-
tions; and yet nothing essential, in nature or emotion,
divided her from them : in pains, pleasures, thoughts, birth,
death, and after-death, they were the same.
8h6 nerved herself by an effort, entered the swing-gate,
THE WOMAN PAYS 341
and rang the door-bell. The thing was done ; there could
be no retreat No ; the thing was not done. Nobody an-
swered to her ringing. The effort had to be risen to and
made again. She rang a second time, and the agitation of
the act, coupled with her weariness after the fourteen miles'
walk, led her to support herself while she waited by resting
her hand on her hip, and her elbow against the wall of the
porch. The wind was so drying that the ivy-leaves had
become wizened and gray, each tapping incessantly upon
its neighbor with a disquieting stir of her nerves. A piece
of blood-stained paper, caught ap from some meatbuyer's
dust-heap, beat up and down the road without the gate ;
too flimsy to rest, too heavy to fly away ; and a few straws
kept it company.
The second peal had been louder, and still nobody came.
Then she walked out of the porch, opened the gate, and
passed through. And though, when she had half -closed it,
she retained it in her hand, looking dubiously at the house-
front as if inclined to return, it was with a breath of relief
that she closed the gate. A feeling haunted her that she
might have been observed, and recognized (though how she
could not tell), and that orders had been given not to admit
her.
Tess went as fas - 3 the corner with a sense that she had
done all she could do j but determined not to escape present
trepidation at the expense of future distress, she walked
back again quite past the house, looking np at all the win-
dows.
Ah — the explanation was that they were all at church,
avery ona She remembered her husband saying that his
father always insisted upon the household, servants in-
eluded, going to morning service, and, as a consequence,
Bating cold food when they came home. It was therefore
only necessary to wait till the service was over. She would
not make herself conspicuous by waiting on the spot, and
she started to get past the church into the lane. But as
34! TESS OF THE D'URBERVJLLES
she reached the churchyard gate the people began pouring
oat, and Tess found herself in the midst of them.
The Emminster congregation looked at her as only the
congregation of small country townsfolk walking home at
its leisure can look at a woman whom it perceives to he a
stranger. She quickened her pace, and ascended the road
by which she had come, to find a retreat between its hedges
till the vicar's family should have lunched, and it might be
convenient for them to receive her. She soon distanced the
church-goers, except two youngish men, who had come out
in the rear of the majority, and, linked arm-in-arm, were
beating up behind her at a quick step.
As they drew nearer she could hear their voices engaged
in earnest discourse, and, with the natural quickness of a
woman in her situation, did not fail to recognize in those
voices the quality of her husband's tones. The pedestrians
were his two brothers, obviously. Forgetting all her plans,
Tess's one dread was lest they should overtake her now, in
her disorganized condition, before she was prepared to con-
front them; for, though she knew that they could not
identify her, she instinctively dreaded their scrutiny. The
more briskly they walked the more briskly walked she.
They were plainly bent upon taking a short, quick stroll
before going indoors to lunch or dinner, to restore warmth
to limbs chilled with sitting through a long service.
Only one person had preceded Tess up the hill — a lady-
like young woman, somewhat interesting, though, perhaps,
a trifle guindie and prudish. Tess had nearly overtaken
her when the speed of her brothers-in-law brought them so
nearly behind her back that she could hear every word of
their conversation. They said nothing, however, which par-
ticularly interested her till, observing the yonng lady still
farther in front, one of them remarked, " There is Mercy
Chant. Let us overtake her. "
Tess knew the name. It was the woman who had been
wtined for Angel's life-companion by his and her parents,
THE WOMAN PATS 343
and whom he probably would have married but for her
intrusive self. She would have known as much without
previous information if she had waited a moment, for one
of the brothers proceeded to say : " Ah I poor Angel, poor
Angel ! I never see that nice girl without more and more
regretting his precipitancy in throwing himself away upon
a dairymaid, or whatever she may be. It is a queer busi-
ness, apparently. " Whether she has joined him yet or not
I don't know ; but she had not done so some months ago
when I heard from him. "
" I can't say. He never tells me anything nowadays.
His ill-considered marriage seems to have completed that
estrangement from me which was begun by his extraordi-
nary opinions. "
Toss beat up the long hill still faster ; but she could not
outwalk them without exciting notice. At last they out-
Bped her altogether, and passed her by. The young lady
still farther ahead heard their footsteps and turned. Then
there was a greeting and a shaking of hands, and the three
went on together.
They soon reached the summit of the hill, and, evidently
intending this point to be the limit of their promenade,
they slackened pace and turned all three aside to the
gate whereon Tess had paused an hour before that time to
reconnoitre the town before descending the hill. During
their discourse one of the clerical brothers probed the hedge
carefully with his umbrella, and dragged something to
light.
" Here's a pair of old boots, " he said. " Thrown away, I
suppose, by some tramp or other. "
" Some impostor who wished to come into the town bare-
foot, perhaps, and so excite our sympathies,''said Miss
Chant. " Yes, it must have been, for they are excellent
walking-boots — by no means worn out. What a wicked
thing to do I Til carry them home for some poor person. "
Cuthbert Clare, who had been the one to find them,
544 TE8S OF THE l^UBBEBVILLBS
picked them up for her with the crook of his stick -, vid
Tess's boots were appropriated.
She, who bad heard this, walked past under the screen of
her woollen veil, till, presently looking back, she perceived
that the church party had left the gate with her boots and
retreated down the MIL
Thereupon our heroine resumed her walk. Tears, blind-
ing tears, were running down her face. She knew that it
was all sentiment, all baseless impressibility, which had
caused her to read the scene as her own condemnation ;
nevertheless, she could not get over it ; she could not con-
travene in her own defenceless person all these untoward
omens. It was impossible to think of returning to the
vicarage. Angel's wife felt almost as if she had been
hounded up that hill like a scorned thing by those — to her
• — superfine clerics. Innocently as the slight had been
inflicted, it was somewhat unfortunate that she had encoun-
tered the sons and not the father, who, despite his narrow-
ness, was far less starched and ironed than they, and had
to the full the gift of charity. As she again thought ot her
dusty boots, she almost pitied those habiliments for the
quizzing to which they had been subjected, and felt how
hopeless life was for their owner.
" Ah! " she said, still weeping in pity of herself, " they
didn't know that I wore those over the roughest part of the
road to save these pretty ones he bought for me — no — they
did not know it! And they didn't think that he chose
the color o'my pretty frock — no — how could they! If they
had known perhaps they would not have cared, for they
don't care much for him, poor thing ! "
Then she wept for the beloved man whose conventional
standard of judgment had caused her all these latter sor-
rows; and she went her way without knowing that the
greatest misfortune of her life was this feminine loss of
courage at the last and critical moment through her esti-
tiating her father-in-law by his sons. Her present em-
THE WOMAN PATS 34*
dition was precisely one wHch would have enlisted the
sympathies of old Mr. and Mrs. dare. Their hearts went
out of them at a bound towards extreme cases, when the
subtle mental troubles of the less desperate among man-
kind failed to win their interest or regard. In jumping
at Publicans and Sinners they would forget that a word
might be said for the worries of Scribes and Pharisees ;
and this defect or limitation might have recommended their
own daughter-in-law to them at this moment as a fairly
choice sort of lost person for their love.
Thereupon she began to plod back along the road by
which she had eome not altogether full of hope, but full of
a conviction that a crisis in her life was approaching. No
crisis, apparently, had come ; and there was nothing left
(or her to do but to continue for the remainder of the win-
ter upon that starve-acre farm. She did, indeed, take suf-
ficient interest in herself to throw up her veil on this return
journey, as if to let the world see that she could at least ex-
hibit a face such as Mercy Chant could not show. Bnt it
was done with a sorry shake of the head. " It is nothings —
it is nothing ! * she said. " Nobody loves it ; nobody sees
it. Who cares about the looks of a castaway like me ! "
Her journey back was rather a meander than a march.
It had no sprightliness ; no purpose; only a tendency.
Along the tedious length of Benvill Lane she began to
grow tired, and she leaned upon gates and paused by mile-
stones.
She did not enter any house till, at the seventh or eighth
mile, she descended the steep long hill below which lay the
village or townlet of Evershead, where in the morning she
had breakfasted with such contrasting expectations. The
cottage by the church, in which she again sat down, was
almost the first at that end of the village, and while the
woman fetched her some milk from the pantry, Tess, look-
ing down the street, perceived that the place seemed quite
deserted.
846 TESS OF THE DTRFiERVTT J JIS
" The people are gone to afternoon service, I suppose!*
she said.
" No, my dear, " said the old woman.'" Tis too soon fat
that ; the bells haint strook oat yet. They be all gone to
hear the preaching in Spring Barn. A ranter preaches
there between the services — a excellent, fiery, Christian
man, they say. But, Lord, I don't go to hear'n ! * What
comes in the regular way over the pulpit is hot enough
for I. "
Teas soon went onward into the village, her footsteps
echoing against the h ousts as though it were a place of the
dead. Nearing the central part, her echoes were intruded
on by other sounds; and seeing the barn before her, she
guessed these to be the utterances of the preacher.
His voice became so distinct in the still, clear air, that
she could soon catch his sentences, though she was on the
closed side of the barn. . The sermon, as might be expected,
was the extremest antdnomian type; on justification by
faith, as expounded in the theology of St. Paul. This fixed
idea of the rhapsodist was delivered with animated enthusi-
asm, in a manner entirely declamatory, for he had plainly
no skill as a dialectician. Although Teas had not heard the
beginning of the address, she learned what the text had
been from its constant iteration :
" foolish OalaUans, who hath bewitched you, that ye
should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath
been evidently set forth, crucified among you f "
Tess was all the more interested, as she stood listening
behind, in finding that the preacher's doctrine was a vehe-
ment form of the views of Angel's father, and her interest
intensified when the speaker began to detail his own spir-
itual experiences of how he had come by those views. He
had, he said, been the greatest of sinners. He had scoffed;
he had wantonly associated with the reckless and the lewd.
But a day of awakening had come, and, in a human sense.
it had been brought about mainly by the influence of a
THE WOMAN PATS 317
certain clergyman, whom he had at first grossly insulted;
but whose parting words had sunk into bis heart, and had
remained there, till by the grace of Heaven they had worked
this change in him, and made him what they saw him .
But more startling to Tess than the doctrine had been
the voice, which, impossible as it seemed, had been precisely
like that of Alec DTJrberville. Her face fixed in painful
suspense, she came round to the front of the barn, and
passed before it. The low winter sun shone directly upon
the great double-doored entrance on this side ; one of the
doors being open, so that the rays stretched far in over the
threshing-floor to the preacher and his audience, all snugly
sheltered from the northern breeze. The listeners were en-
tirely villagers, among them being the man whom she had
seen carrying the paint-pot on a former memorable occasion.
But her attention was given to the central figure, who stood
upon some sacks of corn, facing the people and the door.
The three o'clock sun shone full upon him, and the strange
enervating conviction that her seducer confronted her,
which had been gaining ground in Tess ever since she had
heard his words distinctly, was at last established as a fact
indeed.
: > , Google
THE CONVERT.
XLV
Till this moment she had never seen or heard from
D'Urberville since her departure from Trantridge.
The rencounter came at a heavy moment, which of all
momente was calculated to permit its impact with the least
emotional shock. But such was the influence of unreason-
ing memory that, though he stood there openly and palpably
a converted man, who was sorrowing for his past irregular-
ities, a sense of fear overcame her, paralyzing her movement
«o that she neither retreated nor advanced.
To think of what emanated from that countenance when
she saw it last, and to behold it now !
There was the same handsome unpleasantness of mien,
but now he wore dark, neatly trimmed, old-fashioned whis-
kers, the sable mustache having disappeared ; and his dress
was half -clerical ; a modification which had changed his
expression sufficiently to abstract the dandyism from his
features, and to hinder for a second her belief in his identity.
To Tess's sense there was, just at first, a ghastly M-
mrrerie, a grim incongruity, in the march of these solemn
words of Scripture out of such a mouth. This too-familiar
intonation, less than four years earlier, had brought to her
ears expressions of such divergent purpose that her heart
became quite sick at the mere irony of the contrast. Yet
e was in earnest, unmistakably.
THE CONVERT 349
It was less a reform than a transfiguration. The former
carves of sensuousness were now modulated to lines of de-
votional passion. The lip-shapes that had meant seductive-
ness were now made to express divine supplication j the
glow on the cheek that yesterday could be translated as
riotousness was evangelized to-day into the splendor of
pious enthusiasm ; animalism had become fanaticism ; Pa-
ganism, Paulinism ; the bold, rolling eye that had flashed
upon her shrinking form in the old time with such gross mas-
tery now beamed with the rude energy of a theolatry that
was almost ferocious. Those hard, black angularities which
his face had used to put on when his wishes were thwarted
by her modesty now did duty in picturing the incorrigible
backslider who would insist upon turning again to his wal-
lowing in the mire.
The lineaments, as such, seemed to complain. They had
been diverted from their hereditary connotation to signify
impressions for which nature did not intend them. Strange
that their very elevation was a misapplication, that to raise
seemed to falsify.
Yet could it be so T Was she not wrong in this ! She
would admit the ungenerous sentiment no longer. DTJr-
berville was not the first wicked man who had turned away
from his wickedness to save his soul alive, and why should
she deem it unnatural in him T It was but the usage of
thought which had been jarred in her at hearing good new
words in bad old notes. The greater the sinner the greater
the saint ; it was not necessary to dive far into Christian
history to discover that.
Such impressions as these moved her vaguely, and with-
out strict deftniteness. As soon as the nerveless pause of
her surprise would allow her to stir, her impulse was to pass
on out of his sight. He had obviously not discerned her
yet in her position against the sun. But the moment that
she moved again he recognized her.
The effect upon her old lover was electric far stronger
850 TESS OF THE DtJBHEB VILLES
than the effect of bis presence upon her. His fire, the
tumultuous ring of his eloquence, seemed to go out of him.
His lip struggled and trembled under the words that lay
upon it ; but deliver them it could not as long as she faced
him. His eyes, after their first glance upon her face, hung
determinedly in every other direction but hers, but cams
back in a desperate leap every few seconds. This paralysis
lasted, however, but a short time; for Tess's energies re-
turned with the atrophy of his, and she walked as fast as
she could do past the barn and onward.
As soon as she could reflect it appalled her, this change*
in their relative platforms. He who had wrought her un.
doing was now on the side of the Spirit, while she remained
unre generate ; and, as in the legend, it had resulted that
her Cyprian image had suddenly appeared upon his altar,
and the fire of the priest had been well-nigh extinguished.
She went on without turning her head. Her back seemed
to be endowed with a sensitiveness to ocular beams — even
her clothing — so alive was she to a fancied gaze which
might be resting upon her from the outside of that barn.
All the way along to this point her heart had been heavy
with an inactive sorrow ; now there was a change in the
quality of its trouble. That hunger for affection too long
withheld was for the time displaced by an almost physical
sense of an implacable past which still engirdled her. It
intensified her consciousness of error to a practical despair;
the break of continuity between her past and present exist-
ence, which she had hoped for, had not, after alL taken
place. Bygones would never be complete bygones till she
was a bygone herself.
Thus absorbed, she recrossed the northern half of Long-
Ash Lane at right angles, and presently saw before her the
road ascending whitely to the upland along whose margin
Vhe remainder of her journey lay. Its dry, pale surface
stretched severely onward, unbroken by a single figure,
ehicle, or mark, save some occasional horse-droppings which
THE CONTEST 351
dotted its cold aridity here and there. While slowly breast-
ing this ascent Tess became conscious of footsteps behind
her, and, turning quickly, she saw approaching that well-
known form, so strangely accoutred as a minister — the one
personage in all the world she wished not to encounter alone
en this side of the grave.
There was not much time, however, for thought or elusion,
and she yielded as calmly as she could to the necessity of
letting him overtake her. She saw that he was excited,
less by the speed of his walk than by the feelings within
" Tess ! " he said.
She slackened speed without looking round.
" TeBS ! " he repeated. " It is I — Alec ! "
She then looked back at him, and he came up. " I see it
■is, " she answered, coldly.
" Well — is that all 1 Yet I deserve no more. Of course, "
he added, with a slight laugh, " there is something of the
ridiculous to your eyes in seeing me like this. But — I
must put up with that. ... I heard yon had gone away,
nobody knew where. Tess, do you wonder why I have foL
lowed you ! "
" 1 do, rather ; and I would that you had not, with all
my heart ! "
" Yes — you may well say it, " he returned, gravely, as
(hey moved onward together, she with unwilling tread.
" But don't mistake me ; and I ask this because you may
have been led to do so in noticing — if you did notice it —
how your sudden appearance unnerved me down there. It
was hut a momentary spasm ; and considering what you
had been to me, it was natural eccdsrh, B^it Eaavod
helped me through it — though perhaps yoa tjaak me a
humbug for saying it — and immediately afterwards I felt
that, of all persons in the world whom it was my duty and
desire to save from the wrath to come — sneer if you like —
•he woman whom I had so arievoudy wnmged was that
J53 TE8S OF THE D'URBBRVILLES
person. I have come with that sole purpose in view-
nothing more. "
There was the smallest vein of scorn in her words of
rejoinder : " Have you saved yourself I Charity begins at
home, they say. "
" I have done nothing I " said he, impetuously. " Heaven,
as I have been telling my hearers, has done all. No amount
of contempt that you can pour upon me, Tess, will equal
what I have poured upon myself — the old Adam of my
former years. Well, it is a strange story ; believe it or not
But I can tell you the means by which my conversion was
brought about, and I hope yon will be interested enough in
me to listen. Have yon ever heard the name of the parson
of Em minster — you must have done so T — old Mr. Clare ;
one of the most earnest of his school ; one of the few in-
tense men left in the Church ; not so intense as the ex-
treme wing of Christian believers to which I belong, bnt
quite an exception among the established clergy, the younger
of whom are gradually attenuating the true doctrines by
their sophistries, till they are bnt the shadow of what they
were. He is one who, I firmly believe, has been the humble
means of saving more souls in this country than any other
man you can name. You have heard of him I "
" I have, " she said.
" He came to Trantridge two or three years ago to preach
on behalf of some missionary society ; and 1, wretched fel-
low that I was, insulted him when, in his disinterestedness,
he tried to reason with me and show me the way. He did
not resent my conduct, he simply said that some day I
should receive the first-fruits of the Spirit— : that those who
came to scoff sometimes remained to pray. There was a
strange magic in his words. They sank into my mind,
though I did not know it at the time, nor did he j and by
degrees I was Drought to the light. Since then my one de-
sire has been to hand on the good news to others, and that
s what I was trying to do to-day ; though it is only latelv
THE CONTEST 35S
that 1 have preached hereabout : the first months of my
ministry have been spent in the North of England among
strangers, where I preferred to make my earliest clnmsy
attempts, so as to acquire courage before undergoing that
severest of all tests of one's sincerity, addressing those who
have known one, and have been one's companions in the
days of darkness. If you could only know, Teas, the sense
of security, the certainty, you would, I am sure— — "
" Dont go on with it ! " she cried, passionately, as she
turned away from liim to a stile by the wayside, on which
she bowed her face. " I can't believe in such sudden
things ! I feel indignant with you for talking to me like
this, when you know — when yon know what harm you've
done me ! You, and those like you, take your fill of pleasure
on earth by making the life of such as me bitter and black
with sorrow; and then it is a fine thing, when you have
had enough of that, to tbinTr of securing your pleasure in
heaven by becoming converted. Out upon such — I dont
believe in you — I hate it ! "
" Teas, " he insisted ; " don't speak so ! It came to me
bike a shining light ? And yon don't believe me T What
don't you believe T "
" Your conversion. "
" Whyf
She dropped her voice. " Because a better man than yon
does not believe in such. "
" What a woman's reason I Who is this better man t *
" I cannot tell yon. "
" Well, " he declared, a resentment beneath his words
seeming ready to spring out at a moment's notice ; " God
forbid that I should say I am a good man — and you know
I don't say any such thing. I am new to goodness, truly ;
but new-comers see farthest sometimes. "
" Yes, " she replied. " But I cannot believe in your con-
version to a new spirit. Such flashes as you feeL Alec, I
(ear dont last ! "
854 TESS OF THE DTIRBERVBXES
Thus speaking, she turned from the stile over which she
had been leaning, and faced him ; whereupon his eyes, fall-
ing accidentally upon the familiar countenance and form,
remained contemplating her. The inferior man was cer-
tainly quiet in him now ; but it was surely not extracted,
nor even entirely subdued.
" Don't look at me like that ! " he said, abruptly.
Tess, who had been quite unconscious of her action and
mien, instantly withdrew the large, dark gaze of her eyes,
stammering, with a flush, " I beg your pardon. " And there
was revived in her the wretched sentiment which had often
come to her before, that in inhabiting the fleshy tabernacle
with which nature had endowed her she was somehow doing
wrong.
" No, no. Don't beg my pardon. But since yon wear a
veil to hide your good looks, why don't you keep it down T r
She pulled down the veil, saying hastily, " It was to keep
off the wind. "
" It may seem harsh and imperious of me to dictate like
this, " he went on. " But it is better that I should not look
too often on you. It might be dangerous for both. "
" Ssh t " said Tess.
" Well, women's faces have had too much power over me
already for me not to fear them. An evangelist has nothing
to do with such as that ; and it reminds me of the old times
that I would forget. "
After this their conversation dwindled to a casual remark
now and then as they rambled onward, Tess ; nwardly
wondering how far he was going with her, and not liking
to send him back by positive mandate. Frequently when
they came to a gate or stile they found painted thereon in
red letters some text of Scripture, and she asked him if he
knew who had been at the pains to blazon these announce-
ments. He told her that the man was employed by him
self and others who were working with him in that district
to paint these reminders, that no means might be left jxu
THE CONVERT 8»
tried which might move the hearts of a wicked genera-
tion.
At length the road touched the spot called " Cross-in-
Hand. " Of all spots on this bleached and desolate upland
this was the most forlorn. It was so far removed from the
charm which is sought in landscape by artists and view-
seekers as to reach a new kind of beauty, a negative beaut?
of tragical blankness. The place took its name from a
stone pillar which stood there, a strange, rude monolith,
from a stratum unknown in any local quarry, on which
was rudely carved a human hand. Differing accounts
were given of its history and purport. Some authorities
stated that a devotional cross had once formed the complete
erection there, of which the present relic was but the stump }
others that the stone as it stood was entire, and that it had
been placed there to mark a boundary or a place of meet-
ing. Anyhow, whatever the origin of the relic, there was
and is something sinister, or solemn, according to mood,
in the scene amid which it stands ; something tending to
impress the most phlegmatic passer-by.
" I think I must leave you now, " he remarked, as they
drew near to this place. " I have to preach at Abbot's
Cernel at six this evening, and my way lies across to the
right from here. And you npset me somewhat too, Tessie
— I cannot, will not, say why. I must go away and get
strength. . . . How is it that you speak so fluently nowf
Who has taught you such good English 1 "
" I have learnt things in my troubles, " she said, evasively.
" What troubles have you had ! "
She told him of the first one — the only one that related
to him.
DTJrberville was struck mute. " I knew nothing of this
till now ! " he murmured. " Why didn't you write to me
when you felt your trouble coming on! "
She did not reply, and he broke the silence by adding^
u Well — you will see me again. "
tOB TESS OF THE D > URBERYILLES
" No, " she answered. " I > o not again come near me I*
" I will think. Bnt before we part, come here. " Ha
stepped np to the pillar. " This was once a Holy Cross.
Belies are not in my creed ; but I fear you at moments-
far more than you need fear me ; and to lessen my fear,
put your hand upon that stone hand, and swear that yon
will never tempt me — by your charms or ways. "
" Good God — how can you ask what is so unnecessary!
All that is furthest from my thought ! "
*'Yes — but swear it, swear it ! " he pleaded.
Teas, half frightened, gave way to his importunity, placed
her hand upon the stone and swore.
" I am sorry you are not a believer, " he continued;
" that some unbeliever should have got hold of you and
unsettled your mind. Bnt no more now. At home at
least I can pray for you ; and I will ; and who knows what
may not happen T Pra off. Good-by ! "
He turned to a gap in the hedge, and without letting his
eyes again rest upon her, leaped over, and struck out across
the down in the direction of Abbot's CerneL Ashe walked
his pace showed perturbation, and by and by, as if instigated
by a bracing thought, he drew from his pocket a small
Bible, between the leaves of which was folded a letter, wom
and soiled, as from much re-reading. D'Urberville opened
the letter. It was dated several months before this time,
and was signed by Parson Clare.
The letter began by expressing the writer's unfeigned
joy at D'Urberville's conversion, and thanked him for his
kindness in communicating with the parson on the subject
It expressed Mr. Clare's warm assurance of forgiveness for
D'Urberville's former conduct, and his interest in the young
man's plans for the future. He, Mr. Clare, wonld much
Vve liked to see D'Urberville in the Chnrch to whose min-
«try he had devoted so many years of his own life, and
would have helped him to enter a theological college to that
end ; but since his correspondent had not eared to do tha
THE CONVERT 357
on account of the delay it would have entailed, he was not
the man to insist upon its paramount importance. Every
man must work as he could best work, and in the method
towards which he felt impelled by the Spirit.
D'Urberville read and re-read this letter, and seemed to
fortify himself thereby. He also read some passages from
his Bible as he walked ; till his face assumed a calm, and
apparently the image of Teas no longer troubled his mind.
She meanwhile had kept along the edge of the hill by
which lay her nearest way home. Within this distance of
a mile she met a solitary shepherd.
" " What is the meaning of that old stone I have passed t *
Bhe asked of him. " Was it ever a Holy Cross ! "
" Cross — no ;'twere not a cross !'Tis a thing of ill-omen,
miss. It was put up in wuld times by the relations of a
malefactor who was tortured there by nailing bis hand to
a post, and afterwards hung. The bones lie underneath.
They say he sold his soul to the devil, and that he walks at
times. "
She felt the petite mort at the unexpectedly gruesome
information, and left the solitary man behind her. It was
dusk when she drew near to Flintcomb-Ash, and in the lane
~~'t the entrance to the hamlet she approached a girl and
^.vx lover without their observing her. They were talking
no secrets, and the clear, unconcerned voice of the young
woman, in response to the wanner accents of the man,
spread into the chilly air as the one soothing thing within
the dusky horizon, full of a stagnant obscurity upon which
nothing else intruded. For a moment the voices cheered
the heart of Tees, till she reasoned that this interview had
its origin, on one side or the other, in the same attraction
which had been the prelude to her own tribulation. When
she eame close the girl turned serenely and recognized her,
the young man walking off in embarrassment. The woman
was Izz Hnett, whose interest in Tess's excursion immedi-
Uely superseded her own proceedings. Tess did not ex-
J68 TESS OF THE irURBERVILUfc
plain very clearly its results, and Izz, who was a girl of tac^
began to speak of her own little affair, a phase of which
Teas had just witnessed.
" He is Amby Seedling, the chap who used to sometimes
come and help at Talbotbays, " she explained, indifferently.
" He actually inquired and found out that I had come here,
and has followed me. He says he's been in love wi'me
these two year. But I've hardly answered him.*
XLVI
Several days had passed since her futile journey, and
Tess was afield. The dry winter wind still blew, but a
screen of thatched hurdles erected in the eye of the blast
kept its force away from her. On this sheltered side was a
turnip-slicing machine, whose bright blue hue of new paint
seemed almost vocal in the otherwise colorless scene. Op
posite its front was a long mound or " grave, " in which the
roots had been preserved since early winter. Tess was
standing at the uncovered end, chopping off with a bill-
hook the fibres and earth from each root, and throwing it
after the operation into the slicer. A man was turning the
handle of the machine, and from its trough came the newly
out swedes, the fresh smell of whose yellow chips was ac-
companied by the sounds of the snuffling wind, the smart
swish of the slicing-blades, and the choppings of the hook
in Tess's leather-gloved hand.
The wide acreage of blank agricultural brownness, ap-
parent where the swedes had been pulled, was beginning to
be striped in wales of darker brown, gradually broadening
to ribands. Along the edge of each of these something
crept upon ten legs, moving without haste and without rest
r > and down the whole length of the field} eight of the
THE CONVERT 3M
lags being those of horses, two those of the man, the plow
going between them, turning np the cleared ground for &
spring sowing.
For hours nothing relieved the joyless monotony of
things. Then, far beyond the ploughing-teams, a black
speck was seen. It had come from the corner of a fence,
where there was a gap, and its tendency was up the incline,
towards the swede-cutters. Prom the proportions of a mere
point, it advanced to the shape of a ninepin, and could
soon be perceived to be a man in black, arriving from the
direction of Flintcomb-Ash. The man at the slieer, having
nothing else to do with his eyes, continually observed the
comer, but Tess, who was occupied, did not perceive him
till he was quite near, when her companion directed her at
tention to his approach.
It was not her hard taskmaster, Farmer Groby ; it was
one in a semi-cleric costume, who now represented what had
once been the dare-devil Alec IHUrberville. He had evi-
dently been hoping to fine! her there alone, and the sight of
the grinder seemed to embairrass him. Not being caught
in the midst of Ms preaching, there was less enthusiasm
about him now. A pale distress was already on Tess's face,
and she pulled her curtained hood further over it. Dili-
berville came up and said quietly, " I want to speak to yon,
Tess. "
" You have refused my last request, " said she, " not to
come near me. "
" Yes, but I have a good reason. "
" Well, tell it*
" It is more serious than you may think.''He glanced
round to see if he were overheard. They were at some
distance from the man who turned the slieer, and the move.
ment of the machine, too, sufficiently prevented Alec's words
reaching other ears. However, DTJrberville placed himself
so as to screen Tess from the laborer, turning his back to
the latter. " It is this, " he continued, with impetuous
360 TESS OP THE lyuEBEBYILLES
gravity ; " in thinking of your soul and mine when we but
met, I neglected to inquire as to your worldly condition.
You were well dressed, and I did not t hink of it. But I
see now that it is hard — harder than it used to be when I —
knew yon — harder than you deserve. Perhaps a good deal
of it is owing to me. "
She did not answer, and there they stood, he watching
her inquiringly, she, with bent head, her face completely
screened by the hood, resuming her trimming of the swedes.
By going on with her work she felt better able to keep him
outside her emotions.
" Teas, " he added, with a sigh that verged on a cry,
" yours was the very worst case I ever was concerned in.
Wretch that I was to foul that innocent life I The whole
blame was mine — the whole blackness of the sin, the awful,
-t awful iniquity. You, too, the real blood of which I am but
tile imitation, what a blind young thing you were as to
possibilities ! I say in all earnestness that it is a sinful
shame for parents to bring up their girls in such dangerous
ignorance of the gins and nets that the wicked may set for
them, whether their motive be a good one or the result of
simple indifference. "
Tess still did no more than listen, throwing down one
globular root and taking another with automatic regular-
ity, the pensive contour of the mere field-woman alone
marking her.
" But it is not that I came to say, " IVUrberville went on.
* My circumstances are these. I have lost my mother since
you were at Trantridge, and the place is my own. But I
intend to sell it, and devote myself to missionary work in
Africa, either as an ordained deacon or as an outside worker
— I care very little which. Now, what I want to ask you is,
will you put it in my power to do my duty — to make the
only reparation I can make for the wrong I did you : that
i, will you be my wife, and go with me T I have already
stained this to save time. " He drew a piece of parch'
THE CONVERT 301
ment from Ms pocket, with a alight fumbling of embarrass
menu
" What is it I " said she,
" A marriage license. "
" Oh no, sir'— no ! " she said, quickly.
" Ton will not T Why is that T " And as he asked the
question a strange wretchedness, which was not entirely
the wretchedness of thwarted duty, crossed D'Urberville's
face. It was unmistakably a symptom that something of
his old passion for her had been revived ; dnty and desire ,
ran hand-in-hand. " Surely, " he began again, in more im-
petuous tones, and then looked round at the laborer who
turned the slicer.
Tess, too, felt that the argument could not be ended
there. Informing the man that a friend had come to see
her, with whom Bhe wished to walk a little way, she moved
off with IPUrberville across the zebra-striped fitild. When
they reached the first newly ploughed section he held ont
his hand to help her over it ; but she stepped forward on
the summits of the earth-rolls as if she did not see him.
" You will not marry me, Tess t ■ he repeated, as soon as
they were over the furrows.
" I cannot. "
" Bat why! "
" I have no affection for yon. "
" But yon would get to feel that in time, perhaps— as
soon as yon really could forgive met*
" Never t "
" Why so positive! "
" I love somebody else. "
The words seemed to astonish him. " Yon do I " he said.
" Somebody else 1 But has not a sense of what is morally
tight and proper any weight with youT "
" No, no, no — don't say that ! *
" Anyhow, then, your love for this other man may be
only a passing feeling which you will overcome "
862 TESS OF THE D'UKBERVILLER
" No — no ; for ... I have married him. "
" Ah ! " he exclaimed ; and he stopped dead and gazed
at her.
* I did not wish to tell — I did not mean to ! " she went
on, rapidly. " It is a secret here, or at any rate but dimly
known. So will you, please will you, keep from questioning
me T You must remember that we axe now strangers. "
" Strangers — are we t Strangers ! ■ For a moment a
flash of his old irony marked his face ; but he determinedly
chastened it down. " Is that man your husband 1 " he
asked, mechanically, denoting by a sign the laborer who
turned the machine.
" That man I " she said, proudly. " I should think not I *
" Who then f»
" Do not ask what I do not wish to tell I " she begged,
and in her eagerness flashed an appeal to him from her up-
turned face and lash-shadowed eyes.
DTTrberville was disturbed. " But I only asked for your
sake ! " he pleadly, hotly. " Thunder of heaven, I cam*
here, I swear, as I thought for your good. Tees — don't look
at me bo — I cannot stand your looks ! There never were
such eyes, surely, before Christianity or since ! There — ]
won't lose my head ; I dare not. I own that the sight of
you has revived my love for you, which, I believed, was
extinguished with all such feelings. But I thought that
our marriage might be a sanctincation for us both.'The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the un-
believing wife is sanctified by the husband,'I said to my-
self. But my plan is prevented ; and I must bear the dis-
appointment, " He reflected with his eyes on the ground.
■ Married — married ! Well, that being so, " he added, quite
calmly, tearing the license slowly into halves, and putting
them in his pocket ; " that being prevented, I should like
to do some good to you and your husband, whoever he
" lay be. There are many questions that I am tempted to
THE CONVERT 363
ask, but I will not do so, of course, in opposition to tout
wishes. Though, if I could know your husband, I might
more easily benefit him and you. Is he on this farm t "
" No, " she murmured. " He is far away. "
" Far awayt From yout What sort of husband can
he bet "
" O, do not speak against him ! It was through you *
" Ah, is it sot . . . That's bad, Tess! "
" Yes. "
" But to stay away from you — to leave you to work like
this! "
" He does not leave me to work ! " she cried, springing
to the defence of the absent one with all her fervor. " He
dont know it It is by my own arrangement. "
" Then, does he write t "
" I — I cannot tell you. There are things which are
private to ourselves. "
" Of course that meanB that he does not. You are a de-
serted wife, my poor Tess I " In an impulse, he turned sud-
denly to take her hand ; the buff-glove was on it, and he
seized only the rough leather fingers which did not express
the life or shape of those within.
" Yon must not — yon must not I " she cried, fearfully,
slipping her hand from the glove as from a pocket, and
leaving it in his grasp. " 0, will you go away — for the
sake of me — my husband — go, in the name of your own
Christianity ! "
" Yes, yes ; I wiU, " he said, hastily, and thrusting the
glove back to her turned to leave. Facing round, however,
he said, " Tess, as God is my judge, I meant no sin in tak-
ing your hand ! "
A pattering of hoofs on the soil of the field, which they
had not noticed in their preoccupation, ceased close behind
them; and a voice reached her ear: " What the devil are
\e doing away from your work at this time o'day t "
861 TES8 OP THE D-URBEHVILIiES
Farmer Groby hod espied the two figures from the dis >
tanee, and had inquisitively ridden across, to learn what
was their business in his field.
" Don't speak like that to her! " said D'Urberville, his
face blackening with something that was not Christianity.
" Indeed, Mister ! And what mid Methodist pa'sons have
to do with she 1 "
" Who is the fellow f " asked D'Urberville, turning to
Tess.
She went close up to him. " Go — I do be " von I " she
said.
" What t And leave yon to that tyrant ! i ^an see in
his face what a churl he is. "
" He won't hurt me. He's not in love with me. I can
leave at Lady-Day. "
" Well, I have no right but to obey, I suppose. Bnt —
well, good-by. "
Her defender, whom she dreaded more than her assailant,
having reluctantly disappeared, the farmer continued his
reprimand, which Tess took with the greatness coolness,
that sort of attack being independent of sex. To have
as a master this man of stone, who would have cuffed her
if he had dared, was almost a relief, after her former ex-
periences. She silently walked back towards the summit
of the field that was the scene of her labor, so absorbed in
the interview which had just taken place that she was hardly
aware that the nose of Groby's horse almost touched her
shoulders. " If so be you make an agreement to work for
me till Lady-Day, Pll see that you carry it out, " he growled.
"'Od rot the women — now'tis one thing, and then'tis an-
other ! Bnt I'll put up with it no longer ! *
Knowing very well that he did not harass the other
women of the farm as he harassed her, out of spite for the
flooring he had onee received, she did for one moment pic-
ture what might have been the result if she had been fret
'o accept the offer just made to her, of being Alec's wit*,
THE CONVERT 360
lit would have lifted her completely out of subjection, not
~©51y to tier oppressive employer, but to a whole world whc
seemed to despise her. __J But no, no ! * Bhe said, breath,
lessly. " I could not have married him now. He is so un-
pleasant: to me ! "
That fery night she began an appealing letter to Clare,
concealing from him her hardships, and assuring him of
her undying affection. (Any one who had been in a position
to read between the lines would have seen that at the back
of her great love was some monstrous fear — almost a des-
peration — as to some secret circumstances which were not
disclosed. "'{But again she did not finish her effusion : he
had askedTzz to go with him, and perhaps he did not care
for her at alL She put the letter in her box, and wondered
if it would ever reach Angel's hands.
After this her daily tasks were gone through heavily
enough, and brought on the day which was of great import
to agriculturists — the day of the Candlemas Fair. It was
at this fair that new engagements were entered into for the
twelve months following the ensuing Lady-Day, and those
of the farming population who thought of changing their
places duly attended at the county-town where the fair was
held. Nearly all the laborers on Flinteomb-Ash Farm in-
tended flight, and early in the morning there was a general
exodus in the direction of the town, which lay at a distance
of from ten to a dozen miles over hilly country. Though
Tess also meant to leave at the quarter-day, she was one oi
the few who did not go to the fair, having a vaguely shaped
hope that something would happen to render another out-
door engagement unnecessary.
It was a peaceful February day, of wonderful softness
for the time, and one would almost have thought that win-
ter was over. She had hardly finished her dinner when
CUrberville's figure darkened the windows of the cottage
wherein she was a lodger, which she had all to herself to
day
806 TESS OF THE DTKBEBV.U.LF3
Tess instantly jumped up, but her visitor had knocked
at the door, and she could hardly in reason run away.
D'Urberville's knock, his walk up to the door, had some in-
describable quality of difference from his air when she last
saw him. They seemed to be performed as acts of which
the doer is ashamed. At first she thought that she would
not open the door; but, as there was no sense in that
either, she arose, and, having lifted the latch, stepped back
quickly. He came in, saw her before him, and flung him-
self down in a chair before speaking.
" Tess — I couldn't help it, " he began, desperately, as he
wiped his heated face, which had also a superimposed flush
of excitement. " I felt that I must call to at least ask how
you are. I assure you I had not been thinking of you at
all till I saw you that Sunday : now I cannot get rid of your
image, try how I may! It is hard that a good woman
should do harm to a bad man ; yet so it is. If you would
only pray for me, Tess ! "
The distraction of his manner was almost pitiable, and
yet Tess did not pity him. " How can I pray for you, " she
Baid, " when I am forbidden to believe that the great Power
; who moves the world would alt*.- His plans on my account t ■
I " Ton really think that I "
" Yes. I have been cured of the presumption of think-
ing otherwise. "
" Cured 1 By whom 1 *
" By my husband, if I must telL "
" Ah — your husband — your husband. How strange it
seems ! I remember you hinted something of the sort the
other day. What do you really believe in these matters,
Tessl " he asked. " Ton seem to have no religion — per-
haps owing to me. "
" But I have. "
IVUrberville looked at her with misgiving. " Do yon
think that the line I take is all wrong t* ,Goosl
" A good deal of it "
THE CONVERT SOT
" IFm — and yet I've felt so sore about it,* he said, un-
easily.
" I believe in the spirit of the Sermon on the Mount, and
bo did my dear husband. But I don't believe * Here
the gave her negations.
" The fact is, " said D'Urberville, dryly, " whatever your
tear husband believed you accept, and whatever he re-
fected you reject, without the least inquiry or reasoning
/n your own part. That's just like you women. Your
mind is enslaved to his. "
" Ah, because he knew everything! " said she, with a
triumphant simplicity of faith in Angel Clare that the
most perfect man could hardly have deserved, much less
her husband.
" Yes, but you should not take opinions wholesale from
another person like that. A pretty fellow he must be, to
teach you such scepticism ! "
" He never forced my judgment 1 He would never argue
on the subject wi'me. But I looked at it in this way;
what he believed, after inquiring deep into doctrines, was
much more likely to be right than what I might believe,
who hadn't looked into the doctrines at all "
'" What used he to say I He must have said something. 1 *
She reflected ; and with her acute memory for the letter
of Angel Clare's remarks, even when she did not compre-
hend their spirit, she recalled a merciless polemical syllo-
gism that she had heard him use when, as it occasionally
happened, he indulged in a species of thinki ng aloud with
her at his side. In delivering it she gave also Clare's accent
and manner with reverential fidelity.
" Say that again, " asked D'Urberville, who had listened
with the greatest attention.
She repeated the argument, and D'Urberville murmured
the words after her. " Anything else 1 " he presently asked.
" He said at another time something like this ; " and she
gave another, which might possibly have been paralleled
8A8 TESS OF THE DTJRBERVILLE8
in many a work of the pedigree ranging from the Dicitot
noire. Philosophigtie to Huxley's Essays.
" Ah— ha 1 How do you remember them ! *
" I wanted to believe what he believed, though he didnt
Tvish me to ; and I managed to coax him to tell me a few
of his thoughts. I cant say I quite understand that one)
bnt I know it is right ! "
" H'm. Fancy your being able to teach me what yon
don't know yourself. "
He fell into thought.
" And so I threw in my spiritual lot wi'his, " she resumed.
" I didn't wish it to be different. " What's good enough for
him is good enough for me. "
" Does he know that yon are as big an infidel as be f "
« No — I never told him — if I am an infidel. "
" Well — yon are better off to-day than I am, Tess, after
all. You don't believe that you ought to preach my doe-
trine, and, therefore, do no despite to your conscience in
abstaining. I do believe I ought to preach it, but like the
devils I believe and tremble, for I suddenly leave off preach-
ing it, and give way to my passion for you. "
" HowT "
" Why, " he said, wearily, " I have come all the way here
to see you to-day. But I started from home to go to Cas-
terbridge Pair, where I have undertaken to preach the
Word from a wagon at half-past two this afternoon, and
where all the brethren are expecting me this minute.
Here's the announcement. "
He drew from his breast-pocket a poster whereon was
printed the day, hour, and place of meeting, at which he,
D'TJrberville, would preach as aforesaid.
" But how can you get there I " said Tess, looking at tie
clock.
" I cannot get there. I have come here. "
" What — you have really arranged to preach "
" I have arranged to preach and I shall not be there— iff
THE CONVERT 860
reason of my burning desire to see a woman whom I once
despised! — No, by my word and truth, I never despised
yon ; if I had I should not love yon now. Why I did not
despise you was on account of your intrinsic purity in spite
of all ; you withdrew yourself from me so quickly and res-
olutely when yon saw the situation ; you did not remain
at my pleasure j so there was one victim in the world for
whom I had no contempt, and yon are she. But you may
well despise me now. I thought I worshipped on the moun-
tains, but I find I still serve in the groves. Ha ! ha ! "
" O Alec D'TJrberville I what does this mean f What have
I done J "
" Done? " he said, with a soulless sneer at himself.
" Nothing intentionally. But you have been the means —
the innocent means — of my backsliding, as they call it. I
ask myself, am I, indeed, one of those < servants of corrup-
tion'who,'after they have escaped the pollutions of the
world, are again entangled therein and overcome'— whose
latter end is worse than their beginning! " He laid his
hand on her shoulder. " Tess, Tess, I was on the way to,
at least, social salvation till I saw you again, " he said, shak-
ing her as if she were a child,. temper and mood showing
warm in him. " And why, then, have yon tempted me T I
was firm as a man could be till I saw that mouth again—
sorely there never was such a maddening mouth since Eve's. "
His voice sank, and a hot archness shot from his black eyes.
" You temptress, Tess; yoa dear damned witch of Babylon
— I could not resist you as soon as I met you again ! "
" I couldn't help your seeing me again ! " said Tess, re-
coiling.
" I know it — I repeat that I do not blame you. But the
fact remains. When I saw you ill-used on the farm that
day I was nearly mad to think that I had no legal right to
protect yon — that I could not have it ; whilst he who has it
seems to neglect you utterly. "
" Don't speak against him — he is absent ! " she cried, ex*
£70 TESS OF THE DTJRBERVILLES
citedly. " Treat him honorable — he has never -wronged
you ! Leave his wife, before any scandal spreads that may
do grievous harm to his honest name ! "
" I will — I will, " he said, like a man awakening from a
lurid dream. " I have broken my engagement to preach
the Gospel to those poor sinners — it is the first time I have
done such a monstrous thing ! A month ago I should have
been horrified at such a possibility. Ill go away — to bide
—and — ah, can I! — pray. " Then, suddenly: " One clasp,
Tessie — one ! Only for old friendship "
" I am without defence, Ale < 5 — a good man's honor is in
my keeping — think — think I "
" Oh yes — yes ! My God ! " He clenched his lips, morti«
fled with himself for his weakness. His eyes were equally
barren of amatory and religious hope. The corpses of those
old black passions which had lain inanimate amid the lines
of Ms face ever since his conversion seemed to wake and
come together as in a resurrection. He went out indeter-
minately, hardly responsible for bis acts.
Though D'Urberville had declared that this breach of his
engagement to-day was the simple backsliding of a believer,
Toss's words, as echoed from Angel Clare, had made a deep
impression upon him, and continued to do so after he had
left her. He moved on in silence, as if his energies were
benumbed by the hitherto undreamtof possibility that his
faith was vain. Reason had had nothing to do with his
conversion, and the drops of logic that Tess had let fall into
the sea of his enthusiasm served to chill its effervescence
to stagnation. He said to himself, as he pondered again
and again over the crystallized phrases that she had handed
on to him, " That fellow little thought that, by telling her
those things, he might be paving my way back to her! "
THK CONTEST
xlvii
It is the threshing of the last wheat-rick at FlintoomV
Ash Farm. The dawn of the March morning is singularly
inexpressive, and there is nothing to show where the east-
ern horizon lies. Against the twilight rises the trapezoidal
summit of the stack, which has stood forlornly here through
the washing and bleaching of the winter weather.
When Izz Hoett and Tess arrived at the scene of opera-
tions only a rustling denoted that others had preceded
them ; to which, as the light increased, there were presently
added the silhouettes of two men on the summit.
They were busily " onhaling " the rick, that is, stripping
off the thatch before beginning to throw down the sheaves ;
and while this was in progress Izz and Tess, with the other
women-workers, in their whitey-brown pinners, stood wait-
ing and shivering, Fanner Groby having insisted npon their
being on the spot thus early to get the job over if possible
by the end of the day. Close under the shadow of the
stack, and as yet barely visible, was the red tyrant that the
women had come to serve — a timber-framed construction,
with straps and wheels appertaining — the threshing-ma-
chine, which, whilst it was going, kept up a despotic de-
mand npon the endurance of their muscles and nerves.
A little way off there was another indistinct figure ; this
one black, with a sustained hiss that spoke of strength very
much in reserve. The long chimney running up beside
an ash-tree, and the warmth which radiated from the spot,
explained without the necessity of nraeh daylight that here
was the engine which was to act as the primum mobile of
this little world. By the engine stood a dark, motionless
being, a sooty and grimy embodiment of tallness, in a sort
of trance, with a heap of coals by his side: it was the engine.
3T3 TESS OF THE D r UBBEBVTLLES
man. The isolation of Ms manner and color lent him the
appearance of a creature from Tophet, who had strayed into
the pellucid smokelessnesB of this region of yellow grain
and pale soil, with which he had nothing in common, to
amaze and to discompose its aborigines.
What he looked he felt. He was in the agricultural
world, bnt not of it. He served fire and smoke; these
denizens of the fields sewed vegetation, weather, frost, and
sun. He travelled with this engine from farm to farm,
from county to county, for as yet the steam-threshing
machine was itinerant in Wessex. He spoke in a strange
northern accent, his thoughts turned inwards upon him.
self, his eye on his iron charge, hardly perceiving the scenes
around him, and caring for them not at all : holding only
strietly necessary intercourse with the natives, as if soma
ancient doom compelled him to wander here against his
will in the service of his Plutonic master. The long strap
which ran from the driving-wheel of his engine to the red
thresher under the rick was the sole tie-line between agri-
culture and him.
While they uncovered the sheaves he stood apathetic
beside his portable repository of force, round whose hot
blacknesB the morning air quivered. He had nothing to
do with preparatory labor. His fire was waiting incandes-
cent, his steam was at high pressure, in a few seconds he
could make the long strap move at an invisible velocity.
Beyond its extent the environment might be corn, straw,
or chaos ; it wan all the same to him. If any of the native
idlers asked him what he called himself, ha replied, shortly,
" an engineer. "
The rick was unhaled by full daylight ; the men then
took their places, the women mounted, and the work began.
Farmer Groby — or, as they called him, " he " — had arrived
ere this, and by his orders Tess was placed on the platform
of the machine, close to the man who fed it, her business
eing to untie every sheaf of corn handed on to her by la
THE CONVHiKT 875
fluett, who stood next, bat on the rick ; so that the feeder
could seize it and spread it over the revolving drum which
whisked out every grain in one moment.
They were soon in full progress, after a preparatory hitch
or two, which rejoiced the hearts of those who hated ma-
chinery. The work sped on till breakfast-time, when the
thresher was stopped for half an hour; and on starting
again after the meal the whole supplementary strength of
the farm was thrown into the labor of constructing the
rtraw-stack, which began to grow beside the stack of corn,
A. hasty lunch was eaten as they stood, without leaving their
positions, and then another couple of hours brought them
near to dinner-time ; the inexorable wheels continuing to
spin, and the penetrating hum of the thresher to thrill to
lie very marrow all wi... were near the revolving wire cage.
The old men on the rising straw-rick talked of the past
days when they had been accustomed to thresh with flails
«i the oaken barn floor ; when everything, even to winnow-
ing, was effected by hand labor, which, to their thinking,
though slow, produced better results. Those, too, on the
eorn-rick talked a little; but the perspiring ones at the
machine, including Tess, could not lighten their duties by
the exchange of many words. It was the ceaselessness of
the work which tried her so severely, and began to make
her wish that she had never come to Flintcomb-Ash. The
women on the corn-rick — Marian, who was one of them, in
particular — could stop to drink ale or cold tea from the
flagon now and then, or to exchange a few gossiping re-
marks while they wiped their faces or cleared the frag-
ments of straw and husk from their clothing ; but for Tess
there was no respite ; for, as the drum never stopped, the
man who fed it could not stop, and she, who had to supply
the man with untied sheaves, could not stop either, except
at those intervals of relief which were absolutely necessary
For some probably economical reason it was usually a
woman who was chosen for this particular duty, and Groby
JT4 TESS OP THE IVURBERVILLES
grave & z his motive in selecting Tees that she was one of those
who best combined strength with quickness in untying, and
both with staying power, and this may have been true.
The hum of the thresher, which prevented speech, increased
to a raving whenever the supply of corn was in excess of
the regular quantity. As Tess and the man who fed could
never turn their heads, she did not know that just before
the dinner-hour a person had come silently into the field by
the gate, and had been standing under a second rick watch-
ing the scene, and Tess in particular. He was in a tweed
Buit of fashionable pattern, and he twirled a gay walMng-
eane.
" Who is thatT " said Izz Hnett to Marian. She had at
first addressed the inquiry to Tess, but the latter could not
hear it.
" Somebody's fancy-man, I s'pose, " said Marian, lacon-
ically.
" 111 lay a guinea he's after Tess. " •
" Oh no. Tis a ranter pa'son who's been sniffing after
her lately, not a dandy like this. "
" Well — this is the same man. "
" The same man as the preacher t But he's quite differ-
ent. "
" He hev left off his black coat and white neckercher, and
hev cut off his whiskers ; but he's the same man for all that. "
" D'ye really think so 1 Then 111 tell her, " said Marian.
" Dont. She'll see him soon enough. "
" Well, I dont think it at all right for him to join his
preaching to courting a married woman, even though her
husband mid be abroad, and she, in a sense, a widow- "
" 0 — he can do her no harm, " said Izz, dryly. " He*
mind can no more be heaved from that one place where it
do bide than a stooded wagon from the hole he's in. Lord
love'ee, neither court-paying, nor preaching, nor the seven
thunders themselves, can wean a woman when twould ba
better for her that she should be weaned.*
THE CONTEST 37*
Dinner-time came, and the whirling ceased, whereupon
Tess left her post, her knees trembling ho wretchedly with
the shaking of the machine that she could scarcely walk.
" Tou ought to het a quart o'drink into'ee, as I've done, "
Baid Marian, " Tou wouldn't look so white then. Why,
souls above us, your face is as if you'd been hag-rode 1 "
It occurred to the good-natured Marian that, as Tess was
bo tired, her discovery of her visitor's presence might have
the bad effect of taking away her appetite ; and Marian
was thinking of inducing Tess to descend by a ladder on
the further side of the stack, when the gentleman came for-
ward and looked up.
Tess uttered a short little " O I ■ and a moment after
she said, quickly, " I shall eat my dinner here — right on the
rick. "
Sometimes, when they were so far from their cottages,
they all did this ; but as there was rather a keen wind going
to-day, Marian and the rest descended, and sat under the
growing stack of straw.
The new-comer was, indeed, Alec D'Urberville, the late
Evangelist, despite his changed attire and aspect. It was
obvious at a glance that the original WeUlust had come
back ; that he had restored himself, as nearly as a man could
do who had grown three years older, to the old jaunty, slap-
dash guise under which Tess had first known her admirer,
and cousin so-called. Having decided to remain where she
was, Tess sat down among the bundles oat of sight on the
ground, and began her meal ; till, by and by, she heard
footsteps on the ladder, and immediately after Alec ap-
peared upon the stack — now an oblong and level platform
of sheaves. He strode across them, and sat down opposite
to her without a word.
Tess continued to eat her modest dinner, a slice of thick
pancake which she had brought with her. The other work-
folk were by this time all gathered under the rick, where
the loose straw formed a comfortable nest.
876 TESS OP THE lyURBEEVILLES
" I am here again, as you see, " at length said D'Urberville,
" Why do yon tronble me so ! " she cried, reproach flash-
ing from her very finger-ends.
" I trouble you t I think I may ask, why do you tronble
met "
" Indeed I don't tronble yon ! "
" Ton say yon don't I But yon do! Ton haunt me.
Those very eyes that you turned upon me'with such a bitter
flash a moment ago, they come to me just as you showed
them then, iu the night and in the day. Tess, it is just as
if my emotions, which have been flowing in a strong stream
heavenward, had suddenly found a sluice open in the direc-
tion of you, which they have at once gushed through. The
gospel channel is left dry forthwith; and it is you who
have done it — you 1 "
She gazed with parted lips. " What — you have given up
your preaching entirely I " she asked. She had gathered
from Angel sufficient of the incredulity of modern thought
to despise flash enthusiasms ; but, as the woman, she was
somewhat appalled.
In affected lightness D'TJrberville continued: " Entirely.
I have broken every engagement since that afternoon I was
to address the drunkards at Casterbridge Fair. The deuce
only knows what I am thought of by the brethren. Ah -ha !
The brethren ! No doubt they pray for me — weep for me ;
for they are kind people in their way. But what do I care t
How could I go on with the thing when I had lost my faith
— it would have been hypocrisy of the basest kind ! Among
them I should have stood like Hymeneeus and Alexander,
who were delivered over to Satan that they might learn not
to blaspheme. What a grand revenge you have taken ! I
saw yon innocent, and I deceived you. Four years after
you find me a Christian enthusiast ; you then work upon
me, perhaps to my complete perdition. But Tess, my coz,
as I used to call you, this is only my way of talking, and
du must not look so horribly concerned. Of course yoa
THE CONVERT 371
have done nothing except retain your pretty face and
shapely figure. I saw it on the rick before you saw me —
that tight pinafore-thing sets it off, and that tilt-bonnet — ■
you field-girls should never wear those bonnets if you wish
to keep out of danger. "
He regarded her silently for a few moments, and, with a
short cynical langh, resumed ; " I believe that if the bach-
elor-apostle, whose deputy I thought I was, had been
tempted by such a pretty face he would have let go the
plough for her sake as I do. "
Teas attempted to expostulate, but at this juncture all her
fluency failed her, and without heeding he added : " " Well,
this Paradise that you supply is perhaps as good as any
other, after all. But to speak seriously, Tess. " D'Urber-
ville rose and came nearer, reclining sideways amid the
sheaves, and resting upon his elbow. " Since I last saw
you, I have been thinking of what you said that he said
about religion. I have come to the conclusion that there
does seem rather a want of common sense in the propitia-
tory echeme ; how I could have been so fired by poor old
Clare's enthusiasm, and have gone so madly to work, trans-
cending even him, I cannot make out. As for what you
said last time, on the strength of your wonderful husband's
intelligeice — whose name you have never told me — about
having what they call an ethical system without any dogma,
I don't see, my way to that at all. "
" Why, you can have the religion of loving-kindness and
purity at least, if you can't have more. "
" Oh no. I'm a different sort of fellow from that ! If
there's no Power to say,'Do this, and it will be a good
thing for you after you are dead ; do that, and it will be a
bad thing for you,'I can't warm up. Hang it, I am not
going to feel responsible for my deeds and passions any
more, if there's nobody to be responsible to ; and if I were
you, my dear, I wouldn't either. "
She tried to argue and tell him that he had mixed in Ms
ITS TESS OF THE D-UEBERVILLES
dull brain two distinct matters, theology and morals, which
in the primitive days of mankind had been quite distinct,
and had nothing in common but long association. Bui
owing to Angel Clare's reticence, to her absolute want of
training in polemics, and to her being a vessel of emotions
rather than reasons, she could not get on.
" Well, never mind, " he resumed, " here I am, ray love,
as in the old times ! "
" Not as then — never as then — it is different ! " she cried.
M And there was never warmth with me. O, why didnt you
keep your faith, if the loss of it have brought'ee to speak
to me like this ! "
" Because you've knocked it out of me; so the evil
be upon your sweet head. Tour husband little thought
how his teaching would recoil upon him! Ha-ha — I'm
awfully glad you have made an apostate of me, all the
■ame. Tess, I am more taken with you than ever, and I
pity you, too. For all your closeness, I see you are in a
bad way — neglected by one who ought to cherish you.
The words of the stern prophet that I used to read come
back to me. Don't you know them, Tess T — ■ And she shall
follow after her lover, but she shall not overtake him;
tnd she shall seek him, but shall not find hiin : then shall
(he say, I will go and return to my first husband; for then
Was it better with me than now.'"
She could not get her morsels of food down her ftroat:
her lips were dry, and she was ready to choke. The voices
and laughs of the work-folk eating and drinking under the
rick came to her as if they were a quarter of a mile off.
" It is cruelty to me 1 " she said. " How — how can you
treat me to this talk, if you care ever so little for me t *
" True, true, " he said, wincing a b'ttle. " I did not come
to reproach you for my fall. I came, Tess, to say that I dont
like you to be working like this, and I have come on pur-
pose for you. Tou say you have a husband who is not I
Wett, perhaps yon have ; but I've never seen him, and yquNl
THE CONVERT 376
not -told me Mb name ; and altogether he seems rather a
mythological personage. However, even it yon have one, I
think I am nearer to yon than he is. I, at any rate, try to
help yon out of trouble, but he does not, bless Ms invisible
face ! Teas, my trap is waiting just under the hill, and —
darling mine, not Ms ! — you know the rest. "
Her face had been rising to a dull crimson fire while he
spoke ; but she did not answer.
" Ton have been the cause of my backsliding, " he con-
tinued, stretching his arms towards her waist. " You
should be willing to share it, and leave that mule you call
husband forever. "
One of her leather gloves, which she had taken off to eat
her skimmer-cake, lay in her lap, and without the slightest
warning she passionately swung the glove by the gauntlet
directly in Mb face. It was heavy and thick as a warrior's,
and it struck him flat on the mouth. Fancy might have
regarded the act as the recrudescence of a trick in wMch
her mailed progenitors were not unpractised. Alec fiercely
started np from his reclining position; a scarlet oozing
appeared where her blow had alighted, and in a moment
the blood began dropping from his month upon the straw.
But he soon controlled himself, calmly drew his handker.
cMef from his pocket, and mopped his bleeding lips.
She too had sprung up, but she sank down again.
" Now punish me ! " she said, turning up her eyes to hi*
/with the hopelesB defiance of the sparrow's gaze before it*
" \captor twists its neck. " WMp me, crush me ; you need no*
mind those people under the rick. I shall not cry out .
Ojace-EJctim, always victim — that's the law "
" Oh no, no, Tess, " he said, blandly. " I can make full al.
lowance for this. Yet you most unjustly forget one thing,
that I would have married you if you had not put it out of
my power to do so. Did I not ask you flatly to be my wife
— -hey 1 Answer me. "
" You did. "
380 TESS OF THE OTmBERYTLLKS
" And you cannot be. But remember one thing. " -Hit
voice hardened as his temper got the better of htm with the
recollection of his sincerity in asking her and her present
ingratitude, and he stepped across to her side and held her
by the shoulders, so that she shook under his grasp. " Re-
member, my lady, I was once your master. I will be your
master again. If you are any man's wife you are mine ! "
The threshers now began to stir below. " So much for
our quarrel, " he said, letting her go. " Now I shall leave
you, and shall eome again for your answer during the
afternoon. You don't know me yet. But I know you. "
She had not spoken again, remaining as if stunned.
D'Urberville retreated over the sheaves, and descended the
ladder, while the workers below rose and stretched their
arms, and shook down the beer they had drunk. Then the
threshing-machine started afresh ; and amid the renewed
rustle of the straw Tess resumed her position by the buzz*
ing drum, untying sheaf after sheaf in endless succession.
XLVIII
In the afternoon the farmer made it known that the rick
was to be finished that night, since there was a moon by
which they could see to work, and the man with the engine
was engaged for another farm on the morrow. Hence the
twanging and humming and rustling proceeded with even
less intermission than was usual.
It was not till'nammet'time, about three o slock, that
Tess raised her eyes and gave a momentary glance round.
She felt but little surprise at seeing that Alec D'Urberville
had come back, and was standing under the hedge by the
'Tate. He had seen her lift her eyes, and waved his hand
" banely to her, while he blew her a kiss. Tess looked
THE CONVERT 38]
down again, and carefully abstained from gazing in that
Thus the afternoon dragged on. The wheat-rick shrank
lower, and the straw-rick grew higher, and the corn-sacks
were carted away. At six o'clock the wheat-rick was about
shoulder-high from the ground. But the unthreshedsheaves
remaining untouched seemed countless still, notwithstand-
ing the enormous numbers that had been gulped down by
the insatiable swallower, fed by the man and Tess, through
whose two young hands the greater part of them had
passed; and the enormous stack of straw, where in the
morning there had been nothing, appeared as the faces of
the same buzzing red glutton. From the west sky a wrath-
ful shine — all that wild March could afford in the way of
sunset — had burst forth after the cloudy day, flooding the
tired and sticky faces of the threshers and dyeing them
with a coppery light, as also the napping garments of the
women, which clung to them like dull flames.
A panting ache ran through the rick. The man who fed
was weary, and Tess could see that the red nape of his neck
was covered with dirt husks. She still stood at her post^
her flushed and perspiring face coated with the corn-dust^
and her white bonnet embrowned by it. She was the only
woman whose place was upon the machine, so as to be
shaken bodily by its spinning, and this incessant whirring
and quivering, in which every fibre of her body participated,
had thrown her into a stupefied reverie, in which her arms
worked on independently of her consciousness. She hardly
knew where she was, and did not hear Izz Huett — who, with
the sinking of the rick, had necessarily moved further down
from her side — offer to change places with her.
By degrees the freshest among them began to grow cadav-
erous and saucer-eyed. " Whenever Tess lifted her head she
beheld always the great upgrown straw-stack, with the men
in shirt-sleeves upon it, against the gray north sky ; in front
of it the long, straight elevator like a Jacob's ladder, on
881. TESS OF THE DTJRBKKVILLE8
which a perpetual stream of threshed straw ascended, a yet*
low river running up-hill, and spouting out on the top of
the rick.
She knew that Alec D'Urberville was still on the scene,
observing her from some point or other, though she could
not say where. There was an excuse for his remaining, for,
when the threshed rick drew near its final sheaves, a little
ratting was always done, and men unconnected with the
threshing sometimes dropped in for that performance —
sporting characters of all descriptions, gents with terriers
and facetious pipes, roughs with sticks and stones.
Bat there was another hour's work before the layer of
live rats at the base of the stack would be reached ; and as
the evening light in the direction of the Giant's Hill by
Abbot's Cernel dissolved away, the white-faced moon of
the season arose from the horizon that lay towards Middle-
ton and Shottsford on the other side. For the last hour or
two Marian had felt uneasy about Tess, whom she could
not get near enough to speak to, the other women having
kept up their strength by drinking ale, and Tess having
done without it through traditionary dread, owing to its
results at her home in childhood. But Tess still kept going :
if she could not fill her part she would have to leave ; and
this contingency, which she would have regarded with
equanimity, and even with relief, a month or two earner,
had become a terror since D'Urberville had begun to hover
round her.
The sheaf-pitchers and feeders had now worked the rick
so low that people on the ground could talk to them. To
Tess's surprise, Parmer Groby came up on the machine to
her, and said that if she desired to join her friend he did
not wish her to keep on any longer, and would send some-
body else to take her place. The " friend " was D'Urber-
ville, she knew, and also that this concession had been
granted in obedience to the request of that friend, or os»
iy. She shook her head and toiled on.
THE CONVERT 383
The time for the rat-catching arrived at last, and the
hunt began. The creatures had crept downwards with the
subsidence of the rick till they were all together at the
bottom, and, being now uncovered from their last refuge,
they ran across the open ground in all directions, a loud
shriek from the by this time half-tipsy Marian informing
her companions that one of the rats had invaded her per-
Bon— a terror which the rest of the women had guarded
against by various schemes of skirt-tucking and self-eleva-
tion. The rat was at last dislodged, and, amid the bark-
ing of the dogs, masculine shouts, feminine screams, oaths,
stampings, and confusion as of Pandemonium, Teas untied
her last sheaf ; the drum slowed, the whizzing ceased, and
she stepped from the platform of the machine to the ground.
Her lover, who had only looked on at the rat-catching,
was promptly at her side.
" What — after all — my insulting slap, too ! " said she in
an underbreath. She was so utterly exhausted that she
had not strength to speak louder.
" I should indeed be foolish to feci offended at anything
you say or do, " he answered, in the seductive voice of the
Trantridge time. " How the little limbs tremble ! Ton are
as weak as a bled calf, you know you are ; and yet you
need have done nothing since I arrived. How could you
be so obstinate t However, I have told the farmer that he
bds no right to employ women at steam-threshing. It is
tot proper work for them ; and on all the better class of
farms it has been given up, as he knows very well. I will
walk with you as far as your home. "
" Oh yes, " she answered, with a jaded gait. " Walk with
me if you will ! I do bear in mind that you came to marry
me before you knew of my state. Perhaps — perhaps you
be a little better and kinder than I have been thinking yon
were. Whatever is meant as kindness I am grateful for ;
whatever is meant in any other way I am angry at I can*
not sense your meanings sometimes. "
284 TESS OF THE DTOBERVILLES
" If I cannot legitimize oar former relationship, at least
I can assist you. And I will do it with much more regard
for your feelings than I formerly showed. My religions
mania, or whatever it was, is over. But I retain a little
good nature ; I hope I do. Now, Teas, by all that's tender
and strong between man and woman, trust me. I have
enough, and more than enough, to pnt you out of anxiety,
both for yourself and your parentB and sisters. I can
make them all comfortable if you will only show confidence
in me. "
" Have you seen them lately T " she quickly inquired.
" Yes. They didn't know where you were. It was only
by chance that I found you here. "
The cold moon looked aslant upon Tess's fagged face be-
tween the twigs of the garden-hedge, as she paused outside
the cottage which was her temporary home, D'Urberville
pausing beside her. " Don't mention my little brothers
and sisters— don't make me break down quite ! " she said.
" If you want to help them — God knows they need it — do
it without telling me. But no, no ! " she cried. " I will
accept nothing from you, either for them or for me. "
He did not accompany her further, since, as she lived
with the household, all was public indoors. No sooner
nad she herself entered, laved herself in a washing-tub, and
mechanically shared supper with the family, than she fell
into thought, and, withdrawing to the table under the wall
by tie bight of her own little lamp, wrote in a passionate
mood:
" My own Husband, —
" Let me call you so — I must — even if it makes you an-
gry to think of such an unworthy wife as I. I must cry to
you in my trouble — I have no one else. I am so exposed
to temptation, Angel. I fear to say who it is, and I do not
like to write about it at all. But I cling to you in a way
you cannot think ! Can yon not come to me now, at one*
THE CONVERT 381
before anything terrible happens f O, I know yon cannot
because you are bo far away. I think I must die if yon do
not come soon, or teil me to eome to yon. The punishment
you have measured out to me is deserved, indeed — I do
know that — well deserved — and you are right and just to
be angry with me. But, Angel, please, please not to be just
— only a little kind to me, even if I do not deserve it, and
come to me ! If you would eome, I could die in your arms 1
I would be well content to do that if yon had forgiven me,
" Angel, I live entirely for you. I love you too much to
blame you for going away, and I know it was necessary
you should find a farm. Do not think I shall say a word
of sting or bitterness. Only come back to me. I am deso-
late without you, my darling, O, so desolate ! I do not mind
having to work ; but if you will send me one little line, and
say,'/ am coming sooti,'I will bide on, Angel — 0, so cheer-
fully!
" It have been so much my religion ever since we were
married to be faithful to you in every thought and look,
that even when a man speaks a compliment to me before I
am aware, it seems wronging you Have you never felt
one little bit of what you used to feel when we were at the
dairy J If you have, how can yon keep away from me T T
am the same woman, Angel, as sue ycu fell in love with;
yes, the very same ! — not the one you disliked but never
saw. What was the past to me as sooc as I met you J
It was a dead thing altogether. I became another woman,
filled full of new life from you. How could I be the early
one t Why do you not see this 1 Dear, if yon would only
be a little more conceited, and believe in yourself so far as
to see that you was strong enough to work this change in
me, you would perhaps be in a mind to come to me, your
poor wife.
" How silly I was in my happiness when T thought 1
could trust you always to !ove met I ought to have
kno'vr that such as that was not for poor me. But I am
386 TESS OF THE D > UEBERVIIJ^ES
sick at heart, not only for old times, bnt for the present
Think — think how it do hnrt my heart not to see you ever
—ever ! Ah, if I could only make your dear heart ache
one little minute of each day as mine does every day and
ail day long, it might lead you to show pity to your poor
lonely one.
" People still say that I am rather pretty, Angel (hand-
some is the word they use, since I wish to be truthful).
Perhaps I am what they say. But I do not value my good
looks : I only like to have them because they belong to yon,
my dear, and that there may be at least one thing about
me worth your having. So much have I felt this, that when
I met with annoyance on account of the same I tied up
my face in a bandage as long as people would believe in it
Angel, I tell you all this not from vanity — yon will cer-
tainly know I do not — but only that you may come to me.
" If you really cannot come to me will yon let me come
to yout I am, as I say, harried, pressed to do what I will
not do. It cannot be that I shall yield one inch, yet I am
in terror as to what an accident might lead to, and I so
defenceless on account of my first error. I cannot say
more about this — it makes me too miserable. But if I
break down by f allin g into some fearful snare, my last
state will be worse than my first. Heaven, I cannot
think of it ! Let me come at once, or at once come to me t
" I would be content, ay, glad, to live with you as your ser-
vant, if I may not as your wife ; so that I could only be near
you, and get glimpses of you, and think of yon as mine.
" The daylight has nothing to show me, since yon be not
here, and I don't like to see the rooks and starlings in the
fields, because I grieve and grieve to miss you who nsed to
see them with me. I long for only one thing in heaven or
earth or under earth, to meet yon, my own dear ! Come to
me— come to me, and save me from what threatens me !
" Tom* faithful, heartbroken
THE OONVEUT
XLIX
The appeal duly found its way to the breakfast-table of
the quiet vicarage to the westward, in that valley where the
air is bo soft and the soil is so rich that the effort of growth
requires but superficial aid by comparison with the tillage
of Flintcomb-Ash, and where to Teas the human world
seemed so different (though it was much the same). It
was purely for security that she had been requested by
Angel to send her communications through his father,
Whom he kept pretty well informed of his changing ad-
dresses in the country he had gone to exploit for himself
with a heavy heart.
" Now, " said old Mr. Clare to his wife, when he had read
the envelope, " if Angel proposes leaving Rio for a visit
home at the end of next month, as he told us that he hoped
to do, I think this may hasten his plans, for I believe it to
be from his wife. " He breathed deeply at the thought of
her, and the letter was redirected, to be promptly sent on to
AngeL
" Dear fellow, I hope he will get home safely, " murmured
Mrs. Clare. " To my dying day I shall feel that he has been
ill-used. You should have sent him to Cambridge in spite
of bis heterodoxy, and given him the same chance as the
other boys had. He would have grown out of it under
proper influence, and perhaps would have taken Orders
after all. Church or no Church, it would have been fairer
to him. "
This was the only wail with which Mrs. Clare ever dis-
turbed her husband's peace in respect of their sons. And
ale did not vent this often ; for she was as considerate as
ft».6 was devout, and knew that his mind too was troubled
by doubts as to his justice in this matter. Only too often
888 TESS OF THK D > UBBEIIVILLES
had she beard him, lying awake at night, stifling sighs fca
Angel with prayers. But the uncompromising Evangelical
did not even now hold that he would have been justified in
giving his eon, an unbeliever, the same academic advan-
tages that he had given to the two brothers, when it was
possible, if not probable, that those very advantages might
have been used to decry the doctrines which he had made
it his life's mission and desire to propagate, and the mission
of his ordained sons likewise. To put with one hand a ped-
estal under the feet of the two faithful ones, and with the
other to elevate the unfaithful by the same artificial means,
he deemed to be alike inconsistent with his convictions, his
position, and his hopes. Nevertheless, he loved bis mis-
named Angel, and in secret mourned over this treatment
of him as Abraham might have mourned over the doomed
Isaac while they went up the hill together. His silent self-
generated regrets were far bitterer than the reproaches
which his wife rendered audible.
They blamed themselves for this unlucky marriage. If
Angel had never been destined for a farmer he would never
have been thrown with agricultural girls. They did not
distinctly know what bad separated him and his wife, nor
the date on which the separation had taken place. At first
they had supposed it must be something of the nature of
a serious aversion. But in his later letters he occasionally
alluded to the intention of coming home to fetch her ; from
which expressions they hoped the division might not owe
its origin to anything so hopelessly permanent as that. He
had told them that she was with her relatives, and in their
doubts they had decided not to intrude into a situation
which they knew no way of bettering.
The eyes for which Toss's letter had been intended were
gazing at this time on a limitless expanse of country from
the back of a mule, which was bearing him from the inte-
rior of the South-American Continent towards the coast
THE CONVERT 389
His experiences of this strange land had been sad. The
severe illness from which he had suffered shortly after his
arrival had never wholly left him, and he had by degrees
almost decided to relinquish his hope of farming here,
though, as long as the bare possibility existed of his re-
maining, he kept this change of view a secret from his
parents.
The crowds of agricultural laborers who had come ont to
Hie country in his wake, dazzled by representations of easy
independence, had suffered, died, and wasted away. He
Baw mothers from English farms trndging along with their
infants in their arms, when the child would be stricken
with fever and would die ; the mother would pause to dig a
hole in the loose earth with her bare hands, would bury the
infant therein with the same natural grave-tools, shed one
tear, and again trudge on.
Angel's original intention had not been emigration to
Brazil, but a northern or eastern farm in his own country.
He had come to this place in a fit of desperation, the Brazil
movement among the English agriculturists having by
chance coincided with his desire to escape from his past
existence.
During this time of his absence he had mentally aged a
dozen years. What arrested him now as of value in life
was less its beauty than its pathos. Having long discred-
ited the old systems of mysticism, he now began to dis-
credit the old appraisements of morality. He thought they
wanted readjusting. Who was the moral man 7 Still more i
pertinently, who was the moral woman ? The beauty or
ugliness of a character lay, not only in its achievements,
but in its aims and impulses ; its true history lay, not
among things done, but among things wilted.
How, then, about TessT
Viewing her in these lights, a regret for his hasty judg-
ment began to oppress him. Did he reject her eternally.
890 TESS OF THE D'TJRBERVILLES
or did he not! He could no longer say that he would
always reject her, and not to say that was, in spirit, to
accept her now.
This growing fondness for her memory coincided in point
of time with her residence at Flintcomb-Ash ; bat it was
before she had felt herself at liberty to trouble him about
her circumstances or her feelings. He was greatly per-
plexed ; and in his perplexity as to her motives in with-
holding intelligence he did not inquire. Thus her silence
of docility was misinterpreted. How much it really said,
if he had understood ! That she adhered with literal exact-
ness to orders which he had given and forgotten ; that,
despite her natural fearlessness of nature, she asserted no
rights, made no claim, admitted his judgment to be in every
respect the true one, and bent her head dumbly thereto.
In the before-mentioned journey by mules through the
interior of the country another man rode beside him. An-
gel's companion was also an Englishman, bent on the same
errand, though he came from another part of the island.
They were both in a state of mental depression, and they
spoke of home affairs. Confidence begat confidence. With
that curious tendency evinced by men, more especially when
in distant lands, to entrust to strangers details of their lives
which they would on no account mention to friends, Angel
admitted to this man as they rode along the sorrowful facts
of his marriage.
The stranger had sojourned in many more lands and
emong many more peoples than Angel; to his cosmopolitan
mind such deviations from the social norm, so immense to
domesticity, were no more than are the irregularities of
vale and mountain-chain to the whole terrestrial curve.
He viewed the matter in quite a different light from Angel ;
thought that what Tess had been was of no importance be-
side what she would be, and plainly told Clare that he was
wrong in coming away from her.
The next day they were drenched in a thunderstorm
THE CONVEBT 391
Angel's companion was struck down with fever, and died
by the week's end. Clare waited a few hours to bury him,
and then went on his way.
The cursory remarks of the large-minded stranger, of
whom he knew absolutely nothing beyond a commonplace
name, were sublimed by his death, and influenced Glare
more than all the reasoned ethics of the philosophers. His
own parochialism made him ashamed by its contrast. His
inconsistencies rushed upon him in a flood. He had per-
sistency elevated Hellenic Paganism at the expense of
Christianity ; yet in that civilization an illegal surrender
was not certain disesteem. Surely then he might have
regarded that abhorrence of the uu-iutact state, which he
had inherited with the creed of mysticism, as at least open
to correction when the result was due to treachery. A
remorse struck into him. The words of Izz Huett, never
quite stilled in his memory, came back to him. He had
asked Izz if she loved him, and she had replied in the
affirmative. Did she love him more than Tess did T No,
she had replied ; Tess would lay down her life for him ;
and she herself could do no more.
He thought of Tess as she had appeared on the day of
the wedding. How her eyes had lingered upon him ; how
she had hung upon his words as if they were a god's. And
during the terrible evening over the hearth, when her
simple soul uncovered itself to his, how pitiful her face had
looked in the rays of the fire, in her inability to realize that
his love and protection could possibly be withdrawn.
Thus from being her critic he grew to be her advocate.
Cynical things he had uttered to himself about her ; but no
man can be a cynic and live ; and he withdrew them. The
mistake of expressing them had arisen from his allowing
himself to be influenced by general principles, to the disre-
gard of the particular instance.
But the reasoning is somewhat mnsty ; lovers and hus-
bands have gone over the ground before to-day. Clare had
892 TESS OF THE ICUBBERVILLES
been harsh towards her ; there is no doubt of it Men an
too often harsh with women they love or have loved;
women with men. And yet these harshnesses are tender-
ness itself when compared with the universal harshness
out of which they grow; the harshness of the position
towards the temperament, of the means towards the aims,
ot to-day towards yesterday, of hereafter towards to-day.
The historic interest of her family — that ancient and
masterful line of D'Urbervilles — whom he had despised as
a spent force, touched his sentiments now. Why had he
not known the difference between the political value and
the imaginati " e value of these things 1 In the latter quality
her IVtJrbervule descent was a fact of great dimensions;
worthless to economics, it was a most useful ingredient to
the dreamer, to the moralizer on declines and falls. It was
a foet that would soon be forgotten — that bit of distinction
in poor Tess's blood and name, and oblivion would fall upon
her hereditary link with the marble monuments and leaded
skeletons at Kiugsbere. So does Time ruthlessly destroy
his own romances. In recalling her face again and again,
he thought now that he could see therein a flash of the dig-
nity which must have graced her grand-dames ; and the
vision sent that aura through his veins which he had for-
merly felt, and which left behind it a sense of sickness.
Despite her not inviolate past, what still abode in sucl
a woman as Tess outvalued the freshness of her fellows.
Was not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than
the vintage of Abi-ezer 1
So spoke Love renascent preparing the way for Tess's
devoted outpouring which was then just being forwarded
to him by his father, though owing to his distance inland
it was to be a long time in reaching him.
Meanwhile the writer's expectation that Angel would
come soon in response to the entreaty was alternately
great and small. What lessened it was that the facts of
her life which had led to the parting had not changed—
THE CONVERT 393
couiid never change ; and that, if her presence had not
attenuated them, her absence could not Nevertheless she
addressed her mind to the tender question of what she
could do to please him best if he should arrive.
Sighs were expended on the wish that she had taken
more notice of the tunes be played on his harp, that she
had inquired more curiously of him which were his favorite
ballads among those the country girls sang. She indirectly
inquired of Amby Seedling, who had followed Izz from
Talbothays, and by chance Amby remembered that, among
jiie snatches of melody in which they had indulged at the
Jairyman's, to induce the cows to let down their milk, Clare
had seemed to like " Cupid's Gardens, " " I have parks, I
have hounds, " and " The break & the day " ; and had seemed
not to care for " The Tailor's Breeches, " and " Such a
beauty I did grow, " excellent ditties as they were.
To perfect the ballads was her whimsical desire; she
practiced them privately at odd momenta, especially " The
break & the day " :
Arise, arise, arise !
And pick your love a posy,
All of the sweetest flowers
That in the garden grow.
The turtle doves and small birds
In every bough a building,
So early in the spring-time,
At the break o'the day !
It would have melted the heart of a stone to hear her
singing these ditties, whenever she worked apart from the
rest of the girls in this cold, dry time ; the tears running
down her cheeks all the while at the thought that perhaps
he would not, after all, come to hear her, and the simple,
silly words of the songs resounding in painful mockery of
the aching heart of the singer.
Tess was so wrapt up in this fanciful dream that she
seemed not to know how the season was advancing ; that
304 TESS OF THE iyURBEBVILLEa
the days bad lengthened, that Lady-Day was at hand, and
would Boon be followed by Old Lady-Day, the end of her
term here.
But before the quarter-day had quite eome something
happened which made Tess think of far different matters.
She was at her lodging as usual one evening, sitting in the
downstairs room with the rest of the family, when some-
body knocked at the door and inquired for Tees. Through
the doorway she saw against the declining light a figure
with the height of a woman and the breadth of a child, a
tall, thin, girlish creature whom she did not recognize in
the twilight till the girl said " Tess I "
" What — is it'Liza LuT " asked Tess, in startled accents.
Her sister, whom a little over a year ago she had left at
home as a child, had sprung up by a sudden shoot to a
form of this presentation, of which as yet Lu seemed her-
self scarce able to understand the meaning. Her thin legs,
visible below her once long frock, now short by her grow-
ing, and her uncomfortable hands and arms, revealed her
youth and inexperience.
" Tea, I have been traipsing about all day, Tess, " said Lu,
with unemotional gravity, " a trying to find'ee ; and I'm
very tired. "
" What is the matter at hornet *
" Mother is took very had, and the doctor says she's dy-
ing } and as father is not very well neither, and says *tia
wrong for a man of such a high family as his to slave and
drove at common laboring work, we don't know what to
do. "
Tess stood in reverie a long time before she thought of
asking'Liza Lu to come in and sit down. When she had
done so, and'Liza Ln was having some tea, she came to a
decision. It was imperative that she should go home. Her
agreement did not end till Old Lady-Day, the sixth of
April, but as the interval thereto was not a long one, sht
resolved to run the risk of starting at once.
THE CONVERT 891
To go that night would be a gain of twelve hoars ; but
her sister was too tired to undertake such a distance till
the morrow. Tess ran down to where Marian and Izz lived,
Informed them of what had happened, and begged them to
make the best of her case to the farmer. Returning, she
got Lu a sapper, and after that, having tacked the younger
into her own bed, packed up as many of her belongings as
wonld go into a withy basket, and started, directing La
to follow her next morning.
She plunged into the chilly equinoctial darkness as the
clock struck ten, for her fifteen miles'walk under the steely
stars. In lonely districts night is a protection rather than
a danger to a noiseless pedestrian, and knowing this from
experience, Tess pursued the nearest course along by-lanes
that she would almost have feared in the daytime j but
marauders were lacking now, and spectral fears were driven
out of her mind by thoughts of her mother. Thus she pro-
ceeded mile after mile, ascending and descending till she
came to Bulbarrow, and about midnight looked from that
height into the abyss of chaotic shade which was all that
revealed itself of the vale on whose farther side she was
born. Having already traversed about five miles on the
upland, she had now some ten or eleven in the lowland
before her journey wonld be finished. The winding road
downwards became just visible to her under the wan star-
light as she followed it, and soon she paced a soil so con-
trasting with that above it that the difference was percep-
tible to the tread afcd to the smell. It was the heavy clay
land of Blackmoor Vale, and a part of the Yale to which
tpnapjke roads had never penetrated. Superstitions linger
896 TESS OF THE DtJRBEHVIIiLKS
longest on these heavy soils. Having once been forest, at
this shadowy time it seemed to assert something of its old
character, the far and the near being blended, and every
tree and tall hedge making the most of its presence. The
harts that had been hunted here ; the witches that had been
pricked and ducked ; the green-spangled fairies that " whick-
ered " at you as you passed — the place teemed with beliefs
in them still, and they formed an impish multitude now.
At Nuzzlebury she passed the village inn, whose sign
creaked in response to the greeting of her footsteps, which
not a human soul heard bnt herself. Under the thatched
roofs her mind's eye beheld relaxed tendons and flaccid
muscles, spread out in the darkness beneath coverlets made
of little purple patchwork squares, and undergoing a bracing
process at the hands of sleep for renewed labor on the mor-
row, as soon as a hint of pink nebulosity appeared on Ham-
bledonHill.
At three she turned the last corner of the maze of lanes
she had threaded, and entered Marlott, passing the field in
which, as a club-girl, she had first seen Angel Clare, when
he had not danced with her ; the sense of disappointment
remained with her yet. In the direction of her mother's
house she saw a light. It came from the bedroom window,
and a branch waved in front of it and made it wink at her.
As soon as she could discern the outline of the house —
newly thatched with her money — it had all its old effect
upon Tess's imagination. Part of her body and life it ever
seemed to be ; the slope of its dormers, the finish of its
gables, the broken courses of brick which topped the chim-
ney, all had something in common with her personal char-
acter. A stupefaction had come into these features, to her
regard ; it meant the illness of her mother.
She opened the door so softly as to disturb nobody ; the
lower room was vacant, but the neighbor who was sitting
up with her mother came to the top of the stairs, and whis-
Ted that Mrs. Dnrbeyfield was, no better, though she wa«
THE CONVERT SOT
sleeping just then. Teas prepared herself a breakfast, and
then took her place as nurse in her mother's chamber.
In the morning, when she contemplated the children, they
had all a curiously elongated look ; although she had been
away little more than a year, their growth was astounding ;
and the necessity of applying herself heart and soul to
their needs took her out of her own cares.
Her father's ill-health was of the same indefinite kind,
and he sat in his chair as usual. But the day after her ar-
rival he was unusually bright. He had a rational scheme
for living, and Teas asked him what it was.
" I'm thinking of sending round to all the old antiqueer-
nns in this part of England, " he said, " asking them to sub-
scribe to a fund to maintain me. I'm sure they'd see it as
a romantical, artistical, and proper thing to do. They spend
lots o'money in keeping up old ruins, and finding the bones
o* things, and such like ; and living remains must be more
interesting to'em still, if they only knowed o " me. Would
that somebody would go round and tell'em what there is
living among'em, and they thinking nothing of hi-m ! If
Pa'son Tringham, who discovered me, had lived, he'd ha'
done it, Pm sure. "
Teas postponed her arguments on this high project till
she had grappled with pressing matters in hand, which
seemed little improved by her remittances. When indoor
necessities had been eased, she turned her attention to ex-
ternal things. It was now the season for planting and sow*
ing; many gardens and allotments of the villagers had
already received their spring tillage ; but the garden and
the allotment of the Durbeynelds were behindhand. She
found to her dismay that this was owing to their having
eaten all the seed potatoes — that last lapse of the improvi-
dent. With her slender means she obtained what others
she could procure^ and in a few days her father was well
enough to see to the garden under Tess's persuasive efforts :
while she herself undertook the allotment-plot which thev
3fl8 TESS OP THE DTBBERVTLLES
rented in a field a couple of hundred yards oat of the vil-
lage;
She liked doing it after the confinement of the sick cham-
ber,'where she was not now required by reason of her moth-
er's improvement. Violent motion relieved thought. The
plot of ground was in a high, dry, open enclosure, where
there were forty or fifty such pieces, and where labor was
at its briskest when the hired labor of the day bad ended.
Digging began usually at six o'clock, and extended indefi-
■ nitely into the dusk or moonlight. Just now heaps of dead
weeds and refuse were burning on many of the plots, tht
dry weather favoring their combustion.
One fine day Tess and'Liza Lu worked on here with their
neighbors till the last rays of the sun smote fiat upon the
white pegs that divided the plots. As soon as twilight suc-
ceeded to sunset, the flare of the conch-grass and cabbage-
stalk fires began to light up the allotment fitfully, their out-
lines appearing and disappearing under the dense smoke as
wafted by the wind. When a fire glowed, banks of smoke,
blown level along the ground, would themselves become
illuminated to an opaque lustre, screening the work-people
from one another; and the meaning of the " pillar of a
cloud, " which was a wall by day and a light by nighty could
be understood.
As evening thickened, some of the gardening men and
women gave over for the night, but the greater number
remained to get their planting done, Tess being among
them, though she sent her sister home. It was on one oi
the conch-burning plots that she labored with her fork, its
four shini ng prongs resounding against the stones and dry
clods in little clicks. Sometimes she was completely in-
volved in the smoke of her fire ; then it would leave her
figure free, irradiated by the brassy glare from the heap.
She was oddly dressed to-night, and presented a somewhat
staring aspect, her attire being a gown bleached by many
ashings, with a short black jacket over it, the effect of tW
THE CONTEST
whole being that of a wedding and funeral guest in one.
!The women farther back wore white aprons, which, with
their pale faces, were all that could be Been of them in the
gloom, except when at moments they caught a flash from
Westward, the wiry boughs of the bare thorn hedge which
lormed the boundary of the field rose against the pale
opalescence of the lower sky that deepened upward to blue-
black, where Jupiter hung like a full-blown jonquil, so-
bright as almost to throw a shade. A few small nonde-
script stars were appearing elsewhere. In the distance a
dog barked, and wheels occasionally rattled along the dry
road.
Still the prongs continued to click busily, for it was not
late, and though the air was fresh and keen there was a
whisper of spring in it that cheered the workers on. Some-
thing in the place, the hour, the crackling fires, the fantastic
mysteries of light and shade, made others as well as Tess
enjoy being there. Nightfall, which in the frost of winter
comes as a fiend, and in the warmth of summer as a lover,
came as a tranquillizer on this March day.
Nobody looked at his or her companions. The eyes of
all were on the soil as its turned surface was revealed by
the fires. Hence, as Tess stirred the clods, and sang her
foolish little songs with scarce now a hope that Clare would
ever hear them, she did not for a long time notice the per-
son who worked nearest to her — a man in a long smock-
frock who, she found, was forking the same plot as herself,
and whom she supposed her father had sent there to ad-
vance the work. She became more conscious of him when
the direction of his digging brought him closer to her.
Sometimes the smoke divided them ; then it swerved, and
the two were visible to each other, but divided from all the
rest
Tess did not speak to her fellow-worker, nor did he sneak
to her. Nor did she think of him further than to recollect
tOO TESS OP THE IVORBERVTLLES
that he had not been there when it was broad daylight, and
that she did not know him as any one of the Marlott labor-
ers, which was no wonder, her absences having been so long
and frequent of late years. By and by he dug so close to
her that the fire-beams were reflected as distinctly from
the steel prongs of his fork as from her own. On going
up to the fire to throw a pitch of dead weeds upon it, she
found that he did the same on the other side. The fire
flared up, and she beheld the face of D'Urberville.
The unexpectedness of his presence, the grotesqaeness
of his appearance in a gathered smock-frock, such as was
now worn only by the most old-fashioned of the laborers,
had a ghastly comicality that chilled her as to its bearing.
D'Urberville emitted a low, long laugh.
" If I were inclined to joke I should say, How much this
seems like Paradise ! " he remarked, whimsically looking
at her with an inclined head.
" What do you say J " she weakly asked.
" A jester might say this is just like Paradise. Yon an
Eve, and I am the old Other One come to tempt you in the
disguise of an inferior animal. I used to be quite np in
that scene of Milton's when I was theological. Some of it
"'Empress, the way is ready, and not long.
... If thou aoeept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither Boon.'
'Lead then,'said Eve.
And so on. My dear, dear Tess, I am only putting this to
yon as a thing that yon might have supposed or said quite
untruly, because you think so badly of me. "
" I never said you were Satan, or thought it I dont
think of yon in that way at all. My thoughts of you are
quite cold, except when you affront me. What, did yon
come digging here in such a dress entirely because of me f *
" Entirely. To see you; nothing more. The smock-
THE CONVERT 401
frock, which I saw hanging for sale as I came along, was
an after thought, that I mightn't be noticed. I come to
protest against your working like this. "
" Bnt I like doing it — it is for my father. "
" Tour engagement at the other place is ended f "
" Yes. "
" Where are yon going to next J To join your dear hus-
band T "
She could not hear the humiliating reminder. " O — I
don't know, " she said, bitterly. " I have no husband ! "
" It is quite true — in the sense yon mean. But you have
a friend, and I have determined that yon shall be comfort-
able in spite of yourself. When you get down to your
house you will see what I have sent there for you. "
" O Alec, I wish yon wouldn't give me anything at
all ! I cannot take it from you ! I don't like — it is not
right ! "
" It is right ! " he cried, firmly. " I am not going to see
a woman whom I feel so tenderly for as I do for you in
trouble without trying to help her. "
" Bnt I am very well off ! I am only in trouble about —
about — not about living at all ! * She turned, and desper-
ately resumed her digging, tears dripping upon the fork-
handle and upon the clods.
" About the children — your brothers and sisters, " he re-
sumed. " I've been thinking of them. "
Toss's heart quivered — he was touching her in a weak
place. He had divined her chief anxiety. Since returning
home her soul had gone out to those children with an affec-
tion that was passionate.
" If your mother does not recover, somebody ought to do
something for them ; since your father will not be able to
do much, I suppose. "
" He can with my assistance. He most 1 "
" And with mine. "
" No, sir ! "
402 TESS OP THE DTTRBEBTILLES
" How damned foolish this is ! * hurst oat DtJrberville.
" Why, he thinks we are the same family ; and will be quite
" He don't. IVe undeceived him. "
" The more fool you ! " D'Urberville in anger went away
from her to the hedge, where he pulled off the long smock-
frock which had disguised him ; and rolling it up and push-
ing it into the couch-fire, went away.
Tess could not get on with her digging after this ; she
felt restless; she wondered if he had gone back to her
father's house ; and, taking the fork in her hand, proceeded
homewards.
Some twenty yards from the house she was met by one
of her sisters. " O Tess — what do you think !'Liza Lu is
a-crying, and there's a lot of folk in the house, and mother
is a good deal better, but they think father is dead ! "
The child realized the grandeur of the news, but not as
yet its sadness, and stood looking at Tess with round-eyed
importance, till, beholding the effect it produced upon her,
she said, " What, Tess, shan't we talk to father never nc
more t "
" But father was only a little bit ill ! " exclaimed Tess,
distractedly.
'Liza Lu came up. " He dropped down just now, and
the doctor who was there for mother said there was no
chance for him, because his heart was growed in. "
Yes; the Durbeyfield couple had changed places; the :
dying one was out of danger, and the indisposed one was
dead. The news meant even more than it sounded. Her j
father's life had a value apart from his personal achieve- I
ments, or perhaps it would not have had much. It was thp
last of the three lives, for whose duration the house and
premises were held under a lease ; and it had long been
eoveted by the tenant-farmer for his regular laborers, who
were stinted in cottage accommodation. Moreover, " livi-
ers " were disapproved of in villages almost as much as
THE CONVERT 408
little freeholders, because of their independence of manner,
and when a lease determined it was never renewed.
Thus the Durbeyfields, once iyUrbervilles, saw descend-
ing upon them the destiny which, no doubt, when they were
among the Olympians of the county, they had caused to
descend many a time, and severely enough, upon the heads
of such landless ones as they themselves were now. So do
flux and reflux — the rhythm of change — alternate and per-
sist in everything under the sky. ?
LI
At length it was the eve of Old Lady-Day, and the agri.
cultural world was in a fever of mobility such as only oc-
curs at that particular date of the year. It is a day of
fulfilment ; agreements for outdoor service during the en-
suing year, entered into at Candlemas, are to be now car-
ried out. The laborers — or " workfolk, " as they used to
call themselves immemoriaUy, till the other word was intro-
duced from without — who wish to remain no longer in old
places are removing to the new farms.
These annual migrations from farm to farm were on the
increase here. When Tess's mother was a child, the major-
ity of the field-folk about Marlott had remained all their
lives on one farm, which had been the home also of their
fathers and grandfathers ; but latterly the desire for yearly
removal had risen to a high pitch. With the younger fam-
ilies it was a pleasant excitement which might possibly be
an advantage. The Egypt of one family was lie Land of
Promise to the family who saw it from a distance, till by
residence there it became in turn their Egypt also ; and so
they changed and changed.
However, all the mutations so increasingly discernibl "
|04 TESS OF T HB TVITB.BIT.B. VTT J .HiH
in village life did not originate entirely in the agricultural
unrest A depopulation was also going on. The villag*
had formerly contained, side by side with the agricultural
laborers, an interesting and better-informed class, ranking
distinctly above the former — the class to which Tess's father
and mother had belonged — and including the carpenter, the
smith, the shoemaker, the huckster, together with nonde-
script workers other than farm-laborers ; a set of people
who owed a certain stability of aim and conduct to the fact
of their being life-holders like Tess's father, or copyholders,
or, occasionally, small freeholders. But as the long hold-
ings fell in they were seldom again let to similar tenants,
and were mostly pulled down, if not absolutely required by
the farmer for his hands. Cottagers who were not directly
employed on the land were looked upon with disfavor as a
rule, and the banishment of some starred the trade of others,
who were thus obliged to follow. These families, who had
formed the backbone of the village life in the past, who
were the depositaries of the village traditions, had to seek
refuge in the large centres ; the process, humorously desig-
nated by statisticians as " the tendency of the rural popula-
tion towards the large towns, " being really the tendency of
water to flow up-hill when forced by machinery. The cot-
tage accommodation at Marlott having been in this manner
considerably curtailed by demolitions, every house which
remained standing was required by the agriculturist for his
work-people. Ever since the occurrence of the event which
had cast such a shadow over Tess's life, the Durbeyfield
family (whose descent was not cretLrod) had been tacitly
looked on as oue which would have io go when their lease
ended, if only in the interests of morality. It was, indeed,
quite true that this household had not been shining exam-
ples, either of temperance, soberness, or chastity. The
father, and even the mother, had got drunk at times, t & 9
younger children seldom had gone to church, and the eldest
daughter hod made queer unions. By some means the vil
THE CONTEST 406
lage had to be kept pure. So, on this the first Lady-Day
on which the Durbeyfields were expellable, the house, being
roomy, was required for a carter with a large family ; and
Widow Joan, her daughters Teas and'Liza Lu, the boy
Abraham (now the representative of the D'Urberville male
line), and the younger children, had to go elsewhere.
On the evening preceding their removal it was getting
dark betimes, by reason of a drizzling rain which blurred
the sky. As it was the last night they wonld spend in the
village which had been their home and birthplace, Mrs.
Durbeyneld,'Liza Ln, and Abraham had gone out to bid
some friends good-by, and Tess was keeping house till they
should return.
She was kneeling in the window -bench, her face close to
the casement, where an outer pane of rain-water was sliding
down the inner pane of glass. Her eyes rested on the web
of a spider, probably starved long ago, which had been
mistakenly placed in a corner where no flies ever came, and
shivered in the slight draught through the casement. Tess
was reflecting on the position of the household, in which
she perceived her own evil influence. Had she not come
home, her mother and the children might probably have
been allowed to stay on as weekly tenants. But she had
been seen almost immediately on her return by some people
of scrupulous character and great influence : they had seen
her idling in the churchyard, restoring as well as she could
a baby's grave. By this means they had found that she
was living here again ; her mother was scolded for " har-
boring " her; sharp words had ensued from Joan, who had
independently offered to leave at once ; she had been taken
at her word ; and here was the result.
" I ought never to have come home, " said Tess to herself,
bitterly.
She was so intent upon these thoughts that she hardly at
first took note of a man in a white mackintosh whom she
saw riding down the street. Possibly it was owing to her
f06 TES8 OF THE IVUEBERVnjjES
face being near to the pane that he saw her so quickly, and
directed his horse so close to the cottage front that his
hoofs ■were almost upon the narrow border for plants grow-
ing under the wall. It was not till he touched the window
with his riding- whip that she observed him. The rain had
nearly ceased, and she opened the casement in obedience
to his gesture.
" Didn't you see me t " asked D'Urberville.
" I was not attending, " she said. " I heard you, I believe,
though I fancied it was a carriage and horses. I was in a
sort of dream.''
" Ah ! you heard the D'Urberville Coach, perhaps. You
know the legend, I suppose t "
" No. My — somebody was going to tell it me once, bat
didn't "
" If you are a genuine D'Urberville I ought not to tell
you either, I suppose. As for me, I'm a sham one, so it
doesn't matter. It is rather dismal It is that this sound
of a non-existent coach can only be heard by one of D'Ur-
berville blood, and it is held to be of ill-omen to the one
who hears it It has to do with a murder, committed by
one of the family centuries ago. "
" Now you have begun it, finish it "
" Very welL One of the family is said to have abducted
some beautiful woman, who tried to escape from the coach
in which he was carrying her off, and in the struggle he
killed her — or she killed him — I forget which. Such is the
tale. I see that your tubs and buckets are packed together.
Going away, aren't you T "
" Yes, to-morrow — Old Lady-Day. "
" I heard you were, but could hardly believe it ; it seems
so sudden. " Why is it ! "
" Father's was the last lif e on the property, and when
that dropped we had no further right to bide. Though we
might, perhaps, have stayed as weekly tenants — if it had
not been for me. "
" Wbat about yonl*
THE CONVERT 403
*I am not a — bright example. "
DTJrberville's face flushed.
" What a blasted shame ! Miserable snobs ! May their
lirty souls be burned to cinders, " he exclaimed in tones
at fierce resentment. " That's why you are going, is itf
Turned outt "
" We are not turned out exactly; but as they said we
should have to go soon, it was best to go now everybody
was moving, because there are better chances. "
" Where are you going tot "
" Kingsbere. We have taken rooms there. Mother is so
foolish about father's people that she will go there. "
" But your mother's family are not fit for lodgings, and
in a tittle hole of a town like that ! Now, why not come to
my garden-house at Trantridgel There are hardly any
poultry now since my mother's death ; but there's the house,
as you know it, and the garden. It can be whitewashed in
a day, and your mother can live there quite comfortably ;
and I will put the children to a good school. Really I ought
to do something for you ! "
" But we have already taken the rooms at Kingsbere 1 ■
she declared. " And we can wait there "
" Wait, what fori For that nice husband, no doubt.
Now look here, Tess. I know what men are, and bearing
in mind the grounds of your separation, I am quite positive
he will never make it up with you. Now, though I have
been your enemy, I am your friend, even if you won't be-
lieve it. Come to this cottage of mine. We'll get up a regu-
lar colony of fowls, and your mother can attend to them
excellently ; and the children can go to school. "
Tess breathed more and more quickly, and at length she
said, " How do I know that you would do all this! Your
views may change — and then — we should be — my mother
Would be — homeless again. "
" Oh no — no. I would guarantee yon against such ay
that in writing, if necessary. Think it over. "
Tess shook her head. But D'Urberville persisted; she
408 TE38 OF THE D-UBBERVILLES
h*d seldom seen him bo determined ; he would not take «
negative. " Please just tell your mother, " he said, ;n em-
phatic tones. " It is her business to judge — not yours. I
shall get the house swept out and whitened to-morrow
morning, and fires lit ; and it will be dry by the evening,
bo that you can come straight there. Now mind, I shall
expect you. "
Tees again shook her bead, her throat swelling with com-
plicated emotion. She could not look up at D'Urberville.
" I owe you something for the past, you know, " he re-
sumed, " And yon cured me, too, of that craze ; so I am
glad »
" I would rather you had kept the craze, bo that you had
kept the practice which went with it ! "
" I am glad of this opportunity of repaying you a little.
To-morrow I shall expect to hear your mother's goods un-
loading. . . . Give me your hand on it now — dear, beauti-
ful Tess ! "
With the last sentence he had dropped his voice to a mur-
mur, and put his hand in at the half opened casement. She
pulled the stay-bar quickly, and, in doing so, caught his
arm between the casement and the stone mullion.
" Damnation — you are very cruel ! " he said, snatohing
out his arm. " No, no ! — I know you didn't do it on pur-
pose. Well, I shall expect you, or your mother and the
children, at least. "
" I shall not come — I have plenty of money ! " she cried.
" Where! "
" At my father-in-law's, if I ask for it.
" If you ask for it. But you won't, Tess ; I know you ;
you'll never ask for it — you'll starve first ! "
With these words he rode off. Just at the corner of the
street he met the man with the paint-pot, who asked him
if he had deserted the brethren.
" You go to the devil ! " said D'Urberville.
Tess remained where she was a long while, till a sudden
THE CONVERT 40S
rebellions sense of injustice caused the region of her eyes
to swell with the rash of hot tears thither. Her husband.
Angel Clare himself, had, like others, dealt out hard meas-
ure to her ; surely he had 1 She had never before admitted
such a thought j but he had surely I Never in her life —
she could swear it from the bottom of her soul — had she
intended to do wrong; yet these hard judgments had come.
Whatever her sine, they were not sins of intention, but of
inadvertence, and why Bhould she have been punished so
persistently t
She passionately seized the first piece of paper that came
to hand, and scribbled the following lines:
" 0, why have you treated me so monstrously, Angel 1 1
do not deserve it. I have thought it all over carefully, and
I can never, never forgive you ! You know that I did not
intend to wrong yon — why have you so wronged me I Ton
are cruel, cruel indeed ! I will try to forget you. It is all
injustice I have received at your hands 1 — T. "
She watched till the postman passed by, ran out to him
with her epistle, and then again took her listless place in-
side the window-panes.
It was just as well to write like that as to write tenderly.
How could he give way to entreaty ! The facts had not
changed : there was no new event to alter his opinion.
It grew darker, the fire-light shining over the room. The
two biggest of the younger children had gone out with their
mother; the four smallest, their ages ranging from three
and a half years to eleven, all in black frocks, were gathered
round the hearth babbling their own little subjects. Tess
at length joined them, without lighting a candle.
" This is the last night that we shall sleep here, dears, in
the house where we were born, " she said, quickly. " We
ought to think of it, oughtn't we ! "
They all becamq silent : with the impressibility of their
410 TESS OP THE DTJBBEBTILLES
age, they were ready to burst into tears at the picture ol
finality she had conjured up, though all the day hitherto
they had been rejoicing in the idea of a new place. Tesa
changed the Bubject.
" Sing to me, dears, " she said.
" What shall we singf
" Anything you know ; I don't mind what "
There was a momentary pause ; it was broken, first, by
one little tentative note ; then a second voice strengthened
it, and a third and a fourth chimed in in unison, with words
they had learnt at the Sunday-school :
Here we suffer grief and pain,
Here we meet to part again ;
In heaven we part no more.
The four sang on with the phlegmatic passivity of per-
sons who had settled the question a long time ago, and,
there being no mistake about it, felt that further thought
was not required. With features strained hard to enunciate
the syllables, they continued to regard the centre of th«
flickering fire, the notes of the youngest straying over into
the pauses of the rest
Tess turned from them, and went to the window again.
Darkness had now fallen without, but she put her face to
the pane as though to peer into the gloom. It was really
to bide her tears. If she could only believe what the chil-
dren were singing; if she were only sure, how different all
would now be ; how confidently she would leave them to
Providence and their future kingdom ! But, in default of
that, it behooved her to do something; to be their Provi.
dence ; for to Tess, as to some few millions of others, then
was ghastly satire in the poet's lines:
Not In utter nakedness
But trailing clouds of glory do we come.
THE OONVKHT 4U
To her and her like, birth itself was an ordeal of degrading
personal compulsion, whose gratuitousness nothing in the
result seemed to justify, and at best could only palliate./
In the shades of the wet road she soon discerned her
mother with'Liza Lu and Abraham. Mrs. Durbeyfleld's
pattens clicked np to the door, and Tess opened it.
" I see the tracks of a horse outside the window, " said
Joan. " Hev somebody called t "
" No, " said Tess.
The children by the fire looked gravely at her, and one
murmured, " Why, Tess, the gentleman a-horseback ! "
" He didn't call,''said Tess. " He spoke to me in passing. "
" Who was the gentleman T " asked her mother. " Tour
husband 1 "
" No, no ; he will never, never come, " answered Tess, in
stony hopelessness.
" Then who was it 1 "
" O, you needn't ask. You've seen him before, and so
have L "
" Ah ! What did he sayl " said Joan, curiously.
" I will tell you when we are settled in our lodgings at
Kingsbere to-morrow — every word. "
LH
During the small hours of the next morning, while it
was still dark, dwellers near the highways were conscious
of a disturbance of their night's rest by rumbling noises,
intermittently continuing till daylight — noises as certain to
recur in this particular first week of the month as the voice
of the cuckoo ; .u the third week of the same. They were
the preliminaries of the general removal, the passing of the
empty wagons and teams to fetch the goods of the migrat-
'412 TESS OP THE DtJRBEBYILliES
ing families ; for it was always by the vehicle of the farmer
who required his services that the hired man was conveyed
to his destination. That this might be accomplished within
the day was the explanation of the reverberation occurring
so soon after midnight, the aim of the carters being to reach
the door of the outgoing households by six o'clock, when
the loading of their movables at once began.
But to Tess and her mother's household no such anxious
farmer sent his team. They were only women, they were
not regular laborers ; they were not particularly required
anywhere ; hence they had to hire a wagon at their own
expense, and got nothing sent gratuitously.
It was a relief to Tess, when she looked out of the win-
dow that morning, to find that, though the weather was
windy and lowering, it did not rain, and that the wagon
had come. A wet Lady-Day was a spectre which removing
families never forgot ; damp furniture, damp bedding, damp
clothing accompanied it, and left a train of ills.
lifer mother,'Liza Lu, and Abraham were also awake,
but the younger children were let sleep on. The four
breakfasted by the thin light, and the " house-ridding*
was taken in hand.
It proceeded with some cheerfulness, a friendly neighbor
or two assisting. When the large articles of furniture had
been packed in position a circular nest was made of the
beds and bedding, in which Joan Durbeyfield and the young
children were to sit through the journey. After loading
there was a long delay before the horses were brought, these
having been unharnessed during the ridding ; but at length,
about two o'clock, the whole was under way, the cooking-
pot swinging from the axle of the wagon, Mrs. Durbeyfield
and family at the top, the matron having in her lap, to pre-
vent injury to its works, the head of the clock, which, at
any exceptional lurch of the wagon, struck one, or one and
a half, in thin tones. Tess and the next eldest girl walked
'ongside till they were out of the village.
THE CONVERT 413
They had called on a few neighbors that morning and the
previous evening, and some came to Bee them off, all wish-
ing them well, though, in their secret hearts, hardly expect-
ing welfare possible to such a family, harmless people as
the Durbeynelds were to all except themselves. Soon the
equipage began to ascend to higher ground, and the wind
grew keener with the change of level and soil.
The day being the sixth of April the Durbeyfleld wagon
met many other wagons with families on the summit of the
load, which was built on a well-nigh unvarying principle,
as peculiar, probably, to the rural laborer as the hexagon
to the bee. The groundwork of the arrangement was the
position of the family dresser, which, with its shining han-
dles, and finger marks, and domestic evidences thick upon
it, stood importantly in front, over the tails of the shaft-
horses, in its erect and natural position, like some Ark of
the Covenant which must not be carried slightingly.
Some of the households were lively, some mournful; some
were stopping at the doors of wayside inns ; where, in due
time, the house of Durbeyfleld also drew up to bait horses
and refresh the travellers.
During the halt Tess's eyes fell upon a three-pint blue
mug, which was ascending and descending through the air
to and from the feminine section of a household, sitting on
the summit of a load that had also drawn up at a little dis-
tance from the same inn. She followed one of the mug's
journeys upward, and perceived it to be clasped by hands
whose owners she well knew, Tess went towards the wagon.
" Marian and Izz ! " she cried to the girls, for it was they,
Bitting with the moving family at whose house they had
lodged.''Are you house-ridding to-day, like everybody
elset "
They were, they said. It had been too rough a life for
them at Flinteomb-Ash, and they had come away, almost
without notice, leaving Groby to prosecute them if he chose,
5*hey told Tess their destination, and Tess told them hers
414 TESS OP THE DTJRBERVTIjLES
i Marian leaned over the load, and lowered her voice. " Do
ye know that the gentleman who follows'ee — you'll guess
who I mean — came to ask for'ee at Flintcomb after yon
had gone? We didn't tell'n where yon was, knowing yon
wouldn't wish to see him. "
" Ah — but I did see him, " Tess murmured. " He found
me. "
" And do he know where you be going! "
" I think so. "
" Husband come back 7 "
" No. "
She bade her acquaintance good-by — for the respective
carters had now come out from the inn — and the two
wagons resumed their journey in opposite directions ; the
vehicle whereon sat Marian, Izz, and the ploughman's fam-
ily with whom they had thrown in their lot, being brightly
painted, and drawn by three powerful horses with shining
brass ornaments on their harness; while the wagon on
which Mrs. Durbeyfield and her family rode was a creaking
erection that would scarcely bear the weight of the super-
incumbent load ; one which had known no paint since it
was made, and drawn by two horses only. The contrast
well marked the difference between being fetched by a
thriving farmer and conveying one's self whither no hirer
waited one's coming.
The distance was great, and though they had started so
early it was quite late in the day when they turned tie
Hank of an eminence which formed part of the upland called
Greenhill. " While the horseB stood to stale and breathe
themselves Tess looked around. Under the hill, and just
ahead of them, was the half -dead townlet of their pilgrim-
age, Kingsbere, where lay those ancestors of whom her
father had spoken and sung to painfulness : Kingsbere, the
spot of all spots in the world which could be considered the
TfTMug-vjnwt* home, since they had resided there full five
nunarea yeair
THE CO^'VEKT 418
A man could be seen advancing from the outskirts to-
wards them, and when he beheld the nature of their
wagon-load he quickened bis steps.
" You be the woman they call Mrs. Durbeyfield, I
reckon V be said to Tess's mother, who had descended to
walk the remainder of the way.
She nodded. " Though widow of the late Sir John
D'Urberville, poor nobleman, if I cared for my rights;
and returning to the domain of my knight's forefathers. "
" O ? Well, I know nothing about that ; but if you be
Mrs. Durbeyfield, I am sent to tell'ee that the rooms you
wanted be let. We didn't know you was coming till we
got your letter this morning — when'twas too late. But
no doubt you can get other lodgings somewhere. "
The man had noticed the face of Tess, which had be-
come ash-pale at his intelligence. Her mother looked
hopelessly at fault. " What shall we do now, Tess t " she
said, bitterly. " Here's a welcome to your ancestors'
lands 1 However, let's try farther. "
They moved on into the town, and tried with all their
might, Tess remaining with the wagon to take care of the
children whilst her mother and'Liza Lu made inquiries.
At the last return of Joan to the vehicle, an hour later,
when hersearch for accommodation hadstill beenfruitless,
the driver of the wagon said the goods must be unloaded,
as he was bound to return part of the way that night
" Very well — unload it here, " said Joan, recklessly.
" I'll get shelter somewhere. "
The wagon had drawn up under the churchyard wall, in
a spot screened from view, and the driver, nothing loth,
soon hauled down the poor battered heap of household
goods. She paid him with almost her last shilling, and he
moved off and left them, only too glad to get out of
further dealings with such a family. It was a dry night,
and he guessed that they would come to no harm.
Tess gazed desperately at the pile of furniture. The cold
41ft TESS OF THE miHBEBVII < LES
sunlight of this spring evening peered invidiously npon the
crocks and kettles, upon the bunches of dried herbs shiver'
ing in the breeze, upon the brass handles of the dresser,
upon the wicker-cradle they had all been rocked in, and'
upon the well-rubbed clock-ease, all of which gave ont the
reproachful gleam of indoor articles exposed to the vicissi-
tudes of a roofless exposure for which they were never made.
Hound about were deparked bills and slopes — now cat " Dp
into little paddocks — and the green foundations that showed |
where the D'Urberville mansion once bad stood ; also an'
outlying stretch of Egdon Heath that had always belonged
to the estate. Hard by, the aisle of the church called th#
D'Urberville Aisle looked on impertnrbably.
" Isn't your family vault your own freehold T " said Toss's
mother, as she returned from a reconnoitre of the church
and graveyard. " Why, of course'tis, and that* s where we
will camp, girls, till the place of your ancestors nods as a
roof ! Now, Tess and'Liza and Abraham, yoa help me.
We'll make a nest for these children, and then weTl have
another look round. "
Tess listlessly lent a hand, and in a quarter of an hour
the old four-post bedstead was dissociated from the heap of
goods, and erected under the south wall of the church, the
part of the building known as the D'Urberville Aisle, be-
neath which the huge vaults lay. Over the tester of the
bedstead was a beautifully traceried window, of many lights,
its date being the fifteenth century. It was called the DTJr >
berville Window, and in the upper part could be discerned
heraldic, emblems like those on Durbeyfield's old seal and
spoon.
Joan drew the curtains round the bed so as to make an
excellent tent of it, and put the smaller children inside.
''If it comes to the worst we can sleep there too, for on«
night, " she said. " But let us try farther on, and get some-
thing for the dears to eat ! Tess, what's the use of your
" Maying at marrying gentlemen, if it leaves us like this I **
Accompanied by'Liza Lu and the boy, she again ascender!
the little lane which secluded the church from the townlet.
As soon as they got into the street they beheld a man on
horseback gazing up and down. " Ah — I'm looking for
you, " he said, riding up to them. " This is indeed a family
gathering on the historic spot ! "
It was Alec iHUrberville. " Where is Teas 1 " he asked.
Personally Joari had no liking for Alec. She cursorily
signified the direction of the church, and went on, D'Urber-
ville saying that he would see them again, in case they
should be again unsuccessful in their search for a house, of
which he had just heard. When they had gone D'Urber-
ville rode to tue inn, and shortly after came out on foot.
In the interim Tess, left with the children inside the bed-
stead, remained talking with them a while, till, seeing that
no more could be done to make them comfortable just then,
she walked about the churchyard, now beginning to be em-
browned by the shades of nightfall. The door of the church
was unfastened, and she entered it for the first time in her
life.
Within the window under which the bedstead stood were
tne tombs of the family, covering in their dates several cen-
turies. They were canopied, altar-shaped, and plain ; their
carvings being defaced and broken ; their brasses torn from
the matrices, the rivet-holes remaining like marten-holes in
a sand-cliff. Of all the reminders that she had ever received
that her people were socially extinct there was none so
forcible as this spoliation.
She drew near to a dark stone on which was inscribed :
XWutn stputefiri anttqua familfa D'l & xbtMllt,
Tess did not read Church-Latin like a Cardinal, but she
knew that tiliia was the door of her ancestral sepulchre, and
that the tall knights of whom her father had chanted in his
«opslay inside.
418 TBSS OP THE IVURBERVILLES
She nmaingly turned to withdraw, passing near an altar.
tomb, the oldest of them all, on which was a recumben*.
figure. In the dusk Bhe had not noticed it before, and would
hardly have noticed it now but for an odd fancy that the
effigy moved. As soon as she drew close to it she discov-
ered all in a moment that the figure was a living person ;
and the shock to her sense of not having been alone was so
violent that she was quite overcome, and sank down nigh
to fainting, not, however, till she had recognized Alec Dtlr-
berville in the form. I
He leapt off the slab and supported her.
" I saw you come in, " he said, smiling, " and would not
interrupt your meditations. A family gathering, is it not*
with these old fellows under ns here ¥ Listen. "
He stamped with his heel heavily on the floor, whereupon
thera arose a hollow echo from below.
" That shook them a bit, 111 warrant ! " he continued.
" And you thought I was the mere stone reproduction of j
one of them. But no. The old order changeth. The little
finger of the sham D'Urberville can do more for you than j
the whole dynasty of the real underneath. . . . Now com- j
mand me. What shall I do ? *
" Go away ! " she murmured. j
" I will — III look for your mother, " said he, blandly. But
in passing her he whispered : " Mind this ; you'll be civil'
yet! "
When he was gone she bent down upon the entrance to
the vaults, and said :
" Why am I on the wrong side of this door ! *
In the meantime Marian and Izz Huett had journeyed I
onward with the chattels of the ploughman in the direction i
of their land of Canaan — the Egypt of some other family
who had left it only that morning. But the girls did not !
for a long time think of where they were going. Their
talk was of Angel Clare and Tees, and her persistent lovei^
THE CONVERT 418
whose connection with Tess's previous history they had
partly heard and partly guessed ere this.
'" Tisn't as though she had never known him afore, " said
Marian. " His having won her once makes all the differ-
ence in the world.'Twould be a thousand pities if he were
to tole her away again. Mr. Clare can never be anything
to us, Izz ; and why should we grudge him to her, and not
try to mend this quarrel! If he could on'y know what
straits she's put to, and what's hovering round, he might
come to take care of his own. "
" Could we let him knowf "
They thought of this all the way to their destination;
but the bustle of re-establishment in their new place took
np all their attention then. But when they were settled, a
month later, they heard of Clare's approaching return,
though they had learnt nothing more of Tess. Upon that^
agitated anew by their attachment to him, yet honorably
disposed to her, Marian uncorked the penny ink-bottle they
shared, and a few lines were concocted between the two
girls.
" HoNOR'oSra,—
" Look to your Wife if you do love her as much as she
do love yon. For she is sore pnt to by an Enemy in the
shape of a Friend. Sir, there is one near her who ought to
be Away. A woman should not be try'd beyond her
Strength, and continual dropping will wear away a Stone
— ay, more — a Diamond.
" From Two Wbult-'Wishers.''
This they addressed to Angel Clare at the only place they
nad ever heard him to be connected with, Emminster Vicar-
age ; after which they continued in a mood of emotional
exaltation at their own generosity, which made them sinp
in hysterical snatches and weep at the same time.
FULFILMENT
Lm
I^was evening at Emminster Vicarage. The two ens
tomary shaded candles were burning in the vicar's study,
but he had not been sitting there. Occasionally he came
in, stirred the small fire which sufficed for the increasing
mildness of spring, and went out again ; sometimes pausing
at the front door, going on to the drawing-room, then re-
turning again to the front door.
It faced westward, and though gloom prevailed indoors,
there was still light enough without to see with distinct/iest.
Mrs. dare, who had been sitting in the drawing-roorr fol-
lowed him hither.
u Plenty of time yet, " said the vicar. " He doesn't reach
Chalk-Newton till six, even if the train should be punctual,
and ten miles of country road, five of them in Crimmer-
erock Lane, are not jogged over in a hurry by our old
horse. "
" But he has done it in an hour with us, my dear.*
" Tears ago. "
Thus they passed the minutes, each well knowing that
this was only waste of breath, the one essential being sim-
ply to wait
At length there was a slight noise in the lane, and th*
old pony-chaise appeared indeed outside the railings. They
FULFILMENT 421
Baw alight therefrom a form -which they affected to recog
nize, bat would actually have passed by in the street with-
out identifying had he not got out of their carriage at the
particular moment when a particular person was due.
Mrs. Glare rushed through the dark passage to the door,
and her husband came more slowly after. The new arrival,
who was just about to enter, saw their anxious faces in the
doorway and the gleam of the west in their spectacles be-
cause they confronted the last rays of day, but they could
only see his shape against the light.
" O my boy, my boy — home again at last ! " cried Mrs
Clare, who cared no more at that moment for the stains oi
heterodoxy which had caused all this separation than for
the dust upon his clothes. What woman, indeed, among
the most faithful adherents to the truth, believes in the
promises and threats of the Word in the sense in which
she believes in her own children, or would not throw her
theology to the wind if weighed against their happiness f
As soon as they reached the room where the candles were
lighted she looked at his face.
" O, it is not Angel — not my son — the Angel who wen-.
away ! " she cried, in all the irony of sorrow, as she turned
herself away.
His father, too, was shocked to see him, so reduced was
that figure from its former contours by worry and the bad
season which Clare had experienced, in the climate to whicfi
he had so rashly hurried in his first aversion to the mockery
of events at home. Ton could see the skeleton behind the
man, and almost the ghost behind the skeleton. His sunken
jye-pits were of morbid hue, and the light in his eyes had
waned. The angular hollows and lines of his aged ances-
tors had succeeded to their reign in his face twenty yearc
before their time.
" I was ill over there, you know, " he said. " I am all
light uow. "
As if, however, to falsify this assertion, his legs seemc*
m TESS OF THE D-UBBERVILLES
to give way, and be suddenly sat down to save himself from
railing. It was only a slight attack of faintness, resulting
from the tedious day's journey and the excitement of arrival.
" Has any letter come for me lately t " he asked. " I re
ceived the last you sent on by the merest chance, and af te:
considerable delay through being inland, or I might havt
come sooner. "
" It was from your wife, we supposed 1 ■
" It was. "
Only one other had recently come. They had not sen!
it on to him, knowing he would start for home so soon.
He hastily opened the letter produced, and was much
disturbed to read in Tess's handwriting the sentiments ex-
pressed in her last hurried scrawl to him.
" O, why have you treated me so monstrously, Angel !
I do not deserve it, I have thought it all over carefully,
and I can never, never forgive you ! You know that I did
not intend to wrong you — why have you so wronged me !
You are cruel, cruel indeed ! I will try to forget you. It
is all injustice I have received at your hands ! — T . "
" It is quite true ! " said Angel, throwing down the lettei.
•'Perhaps she will never be reconciled to me ! "
" Dont, Angel, be so anxious about a mere child of the
soil ! " said his mother.
" Child of the soil ! Well, we are all children of the
soil ; but let me now explain to you what I have never ex-
plained before, that her father is a descendant in the male
line of one of the oldest Norman houses, like a good many
nthers who lead obscure agricultural lives in our villages,
ind are dubbed'sons of the soil.'"
He soon retired to bed ; and the next morning, feeling
exceedingly unwell, he remained in his room pondering. The
circumstances amid which he had left Tess were such that
•rough, while on the south of the equator and just in re
FULFILMENT 423
eelpt of her loving epistle, it had seemed the easiest thing
in the world to rush baefc into her arms ; now that he had
arrived it was not so easv as it had seemed. She was Das-
sionate, and her present letter, showing that her estimate of
him had changed under his delay — too justly changed, he
sadly owned, made him ask himself if it would be wise to
confront her unannounced in the presence of her parents.
Supposing that her love had indeed turned to dislike dur-
ing the separation, a sudden meeting might lead to bitter
words.
Clare therefore thought it would be best to prepare Tess
and her family by sending a line to Marlott announcing
his return, and his hope that she was still living with them
there, as he had arranged for her to do when he left Eng-
land. He despatched the inquiry that very day, and before
the week was out there came a short reply from Mrs. Dur-
beyfield, which did not remove his embarrassment, for it
bore no address, though it was not written from Marlott
" Sra,—
" J wrote these few lines to say that my Daughter is away
from home at present, and J am not sure when she will re-
turn, but J will let you know as Soon as she do. J do not
feel at liberty to tell you Where she is staying. J should
say that me and my Family have left Marlott for some Time.
" Tours,
" J. DURBEYFTELD. "
It was such a relief to Clare to learn that Tess was at
least still alive that her mother's reticence as to her where-
abouts did not long distress him. He would wait till Mrs.
Durbeyfield could inform him of Tess's return, which her
letter implied to be soon. He deserved no more. His had
been a love " which alters when it alteration finds. " He
had undergone some strange experiences in his absence ;
he had seen the virtual Faustina in the literal Cornelia, 9
124 TESS OP THE D'UBBEBVILLES
spiritual Lucretia in a corporeal Phryne ; he had thought
of the woman taken and set in the midst as one deserving
to be stoned, and of the wife of Uriah being made a queen ;
and he had asked himself why had he not judged Tess con-
structively rather than biographically, by the will rather
than by the deed T
Day after day passed while he waited at his father's
house for the promised second letter from Joan Durbeyneld,
and indirectly to recover a little more strength. The
strength showed signs of coming back, but there was no
sign of the letter. Then he hunted up the old letter sent
on to him in Brazil, which Tess had written from Flint-
comb-Ash, and which had brought him back. He re-read
it. The sentences touched him as much as when he had
first perused them.
" I must cry to you in my trouble — I have no one else.
. . I think I must die if yon do not come soon, or tell me
to come to you. . . Please, please not to be just — only a
little kind to me. ... If you would come, I could die in
your arms ! I would be well content to do that if so be
you had forgiven me. ... If you will send me one little
line, and say,'J am coming soon'I will bide on, Angel— 0, so
cheerfully ! . . . Think how it do hurt my heart not to see
yon ever — ever ! Ah, if I could only make your dear heart
ache one little minute of each day as mine does every day
and all day long, it might lead you to show pity to your
poor lonely one. ... I would be content, ay, glad, to live
with you as your servant, if I may not as your wife ; so
that I could only he near you, and get glimpses of you, and
think of you as mine. ... I long for only one thing in
heaven or earth or under the earth, to meet you, my own
'lear ! Come to me. come to me, and save me from what
threatens me ! "
Clare determined he would no longer believe in her mors
FULFILMENT 425
recent and severer regard of him ; but would go and find
her immediately. He asked his father if she had applied
for any money during his absence. His father returned a
negative, and then for the first time it occurred to Angel
that her pride had stood in her way, and that she had suf-
fered privation. From his remarks his parents now gath-
ered the real reason of the separation ; and their Christian-
ity was such that, reprobates being their especial care, the
tenderness towards Tess which her blood, her simplicity,
even her poverty, had not engendered, was instantly excited
by her sin.
Whilst he was hastily packing together a few articles for
bis journey he glanced over a poor, plain missive lately
«ome to hand, the one from Marian and Izz Huett, begin-
ning;
" Honob'd Sib, —
" Look to your Wife if you do love her as much as she
do love you, " and signed,
" Fbom Two Well-Wkherb. "
LIV
In a quarter of an hour Clare was leaving the house,
whence Ms mother watched his thin figure as it disappeared
into the street. He had declined to borrow his father's old
mare, well knowing of its necessity to the household. He
went to the inn, where he hired a trap, and could hardly
wait during the harnessing. In a very few minutes after
he was driving up the hill out of the town, which, three or
four months earlier in the year, TeBS had descended with
such hopes, and ascended with such shattered purposes.
BenvUl Lane soon stretched before him, its hedges and
trees purple with buds; but he was looking at other things
and only recalled himself to the scene sufficiently to enable
him to keep the way. In something less than an hour and
a half he had skirted the south of the King's Hintock estates
and ascended to the untoward solitude of Cross-in-Hand,
the unholy stone whereon Tess had been compelled by Alec
D'Urberville, in his converted character, to swear the strange
oath that she would never wilfully tempt him again. The
pale and blasted nettle-stems of the preceding year even
now lingered nakedly in the banks, young green nettles of
the present spring growing from their roots.
Thence he went along the verge of the upland overhang-
ing the other Hintoeks, and, turning to the right, plunged
into the bracing calcareous region of Flintcomb-Ash, the
address from which she had written to him in one of the
letters, and which he supposed to be the place of sojourn
referred to by her mother. Here, of course, he did not find
her now ; and what added to his depression was the dis-
covery that no " Mrs. Clare " had ever been heard of by the
cottagers or by the farmer himself, though Tess was re.
membered well enough by her Christian name. His name
she had obviously never used during their separation, and
her dignified sense of their total severance was shown not
much less by this abstention than by the hardships she had
chosen to undergo (of which he now learned for the first
time) rather than apply to his father for more funds.
From this place they told him Tess Durbeyfield had gone,
without due notice, to the home of her parents on the other
side of Blackmoor, and it therefore became necessary to find
Mrs. Durbeyfield. She had told him she was not now at
Marlott, but had been curiously reticent as to her actual ad-
dress, and the only course was to go to Marlott and inquire
for it The farmer who had been so churlish with TeBs
was quito smooth-tongued to Clare, and lent him a horse
and man to drive him to Marlott, the gig he had arrived in
being sent back to Emminster ; for the limits of a day's
urney with that horse was reached.
FULFILMENT 427
Clare would not accept the loan of the fanner's vehicle
tor a farther distance than to the outskirts " of the Vale, and,
sending it buck with the man who had driven him, he put
up at an inn, and next day entered on foot the region
wherein was the spot of his dear Tess's birth. It was as
yet too early in the year for much color to appear in the
gardens and foliage; the scene was but winter overlaid
with a thin coat of green, and it was of a parcel with his
expectations.
The house in which Tess had passed the years of her
childhood was now inhabited by another family who had
never known her. The new residents were in the garden,
taking as much interest in their own doings as if the home-
stead had never passed its primal time in conjunction with
the histories of others, beside which the histories of these
would be but as a tale that is told. They walked about the
garden paths with thoughts of their own concerns entirely
uppermost, bringing their actions at every moment into
jarring collision with the dim figures behind them, talkii g
as though the time when Tess lived there were not one wh t
intenser in story than now. Even the spring birds sanj
over their heads as if they thought there was nobody miss-
ing in particular.
On inquiry of these precious innocents, to whom even
the name of their predecessors was a fading memory, Clare
learned that John Durbeyfield was dead ; that his widow
and children had left Marlott, declaring they were going to
live at Kingsbere, but instead of doing so they had gone
on to a place near Chaseborough. By this time Clare ab-
horred the house for ceasing to contain Tess, and hastened
away from its hated presence without once looking back.
His way was by the field in which he had first beheld her
at the dance. It was as bad as the house — even worse. He
passed on through the churchyard, where, among the new
headstones, he saw one of a somewhat superior design to the
rest. The inscription ran thus :
138 TE8S OF THE DtlRBEBVILLES
" In Memory of John Durbeyfield, rightly DTTrbervflle,
of the once Powerful Family of that Name, and Direct
Descendant through an Illustrious Line from Sir Bryan
D'Urberville, one of the Knights of the Conqueror. Died
March 10th, 18—.
" How are the Mighty Falien.™
Some man, apparently the sexton, had observed Clare
standing there, and drew nigh. " Ah, sir, now that's a man
who didn't want to lie here, hut wished to be carried to
Kingsbere, where his ancestors be. "
* And why didn't they respeet his wish 1 "
" 0 — no money. Bless your soul, sir, why — there, I
wouldn't wish to say it everywhere, but— even this head-
stone, for all the flourish wrote upon en, is not paid tor. "
« Ah — who put it up T "
The man told the name of a mason in the village, and,
on leaving the churchyard, Glare called at the mason's
house. He found that the statement was true, and paid
the bill. This done, he turned in the direction of Chase-
borough.
The distance was too long for a walk, but Clare felt such
a strong desire for isolation that at first he would neither
hire a conveyance nor go to a circuitous line of railway by
which he might eventually reach the place. At Shaston,
however, he found he must hire ; but the way was such that
he did not approach Joan's retreat till about seven o'clock
in the evening, having traversed a distance of over twenty
miles since leaving Marlott.
The village being small, he had little difficulty in finding
Mrs. Durbeyfield's tenement, which was a houBe in a walled
garden remote from the main street, where she had stowed
away her awkward old furniture as best she could. It was
plain that for some reason or other she had not wished him
to visit her, and he felt his call to he somewh & t of an intra
FULFILMENT 420
■ion. She came to the door herself, and the light from the
evening sky fell upon her face.
This was the first time that Clare had ever met her, but
he was too preoccupied to observe more than that she was
still a handsome woman, in the garb of a respectable widow.
He was obliged to explain that he was Tess'e husband, and
his object in coming there, and he did it awkwardly enough.
" I want to see her at once, " he added. " You said yon
would write to me again, but you have not done so. "
" Because aheVe not come home, " said Joan.
" Do you know if she is well ! "
" I don't But yon ought to, sir, " said Bhe.
" I admit it Where is she staying J "
From the beginning of the interview Joan had disclosed
her embarrassment by keeping her hand to the side of her
cheek. " I — dont know exactly where she is staying, " she
answered. " She was — but — — "
" Where was she 1 "
" Well, she is not there now. " In her evasiveness she
paused again, and the younger children had by this time
crept to the door, where, pulling at his mother's skirts, the
youngest murmured, " Is this the gentleman who is going
to marry TessT "
" He has married her, " Joan whispered. " Go inside. "
Clare saw her efforts for reticence, and asked, " Do yon
think Tess would wish me to try and find her! If not, of
" I dont think she would. "
" Are you sure T "
" I am sure she wouldn't "
He was turning away; and then he thought of Toss's
tender letter. " I am sure she would ! " he retorted, passion-
ately. " I know her better than you do. "
" That's very likely, sir} tor I have never really known
tua "
t3U TESS OF THE DTJRBEK VILLUS
" Please tell me her address, Mrs. Dui-beyfield. in kindness
to a lonely, wretched man. "
Tess's mother again restlessly swept her cheek with her
vertical hand, and seeing that he suffered, she at but said,
in a low voice, " She is at Sandbourne. "
" Ah — where there t Sandbourne has become a large
place, they say. "
" I don't know more particularly than I have said — Sand-
bourne. Fpr myself, I was never there. "
It was apparent that Joan spoke the truth in this, and
he pressed her no further.
" Are you in want of anything! " he said, gently.
" No, sir, " she replied. " We are fairly well provided for. "
Without entering the house, Clare turned away. There
was a station three miles ahead, and paying off his coach-
man, he walked thither. The last train to Sandbourne left
shortly after, and it bore Clare on its wheels,
LV
At eleven o'clock that night, having secured a bed at one
of the hotels and telegraphed his address to his father im-
mediately on his arrival, he walked out into the streets of
Sandbourne. It was too late to call on or inquire for any
one, and he reluctantly postponed his purpose till the morn-
ing. But he could not retire to rest just yet.
This fashionable watering-place, with its eastern and its
western stations, its piers, its groves of pines, its prome-
nades, and its covered gardens, was, to Angel Clare, like a
fairy place suddenly created by the stroke of a wand, and
allowed to get a little dusty. An outlying easternmost
tract of the enormous Egdon Waste was close at hand, yet
the very verge of that tawny piece of antiquity sueh a
FULFILMENT 431
glittering novelty as this pleasure-city had chosen tc spring
np. Within the space of a mile from its outskirts every
irregularity of the soil was prehistoric, every ravine an un-
disturbed British trackway, not a sod having been turned
since the days of the Ciesars. Yet the exotic had grown
here, suddenly as the prophet's gourd; and had drawn
hither Tess.
By the midnight lamps he went np and down the wind-
ing ways of this new world in an old one, and could discern
between the trees and against the stars the lofty roofs, chim-
neys, gazebos, and towers of the numerous fanciful resi-
dences of which the place was composed. It was a city of
detached mansions ; a Mediterranean lounging-place on the
English Channel ; and as seen now by night, it seemed even
more imposing than it was.
The sea was near at hand, but not intrusive ; it murmured,
and he thought it was the pines ; the pines murmured in
precisely the same tones, and he thought they were the sea.
Where could Tess possibly be, a cottage girl, his young
wife, amidst all this wealth and fashion 1 The more he
pondered the more was he puzzled. Were there any eows
to milk here 1 There certainly were no fields to till. She
was most probably engaged to do something in one of these
large houses ; and he sauntered along, looking at the cham-
ber-windows, and their lights going out one by one, and
wondered which of them might be hers.
Conjecture was useless, and just after twelve o'clock he
entered and went to bed. Before putting out his light, he
re-read Toss's impassioned letter. Sleep, however, he could
not — bo near her, yet so far from her — and he continually
lifted the window-blind and regarded the backs of opposite
houses, and wondered behind which of the sashes she re
posed at that moment.
He might almost as well have sat up all night. In the
morning he arose at seven, and shortly after went out, tak-
ing the direction of the chief post-office. At the door he
432 TESS OF THE IXURBEBVILLES
met an intelligent postman coming out with letters for the
morning delivery.
" Do you know the address of a Mrs. Clare I " asked
AngeL
The postman shook his head. Then, remembering that
she would have heen likely to continue the use of her
maiden name, Clare said, " Or a Miss Durbeyfield f *
" Durbeyfield t " This also was strange to the postman
addressed. " There's visitors coming and going every day,
as you know, sir, " he said ; " and without the name of the
house'tis impossible to find'em. "
One of his comrades hastening out at that moment, the
name was repeated to him.
" I know no name of Durbeyfield ; but there is the name
of D'Urberville at The Herons, " said the second.
" That's it, " cried Clare, pleased to think that she had re-
verted to the real word. " What place is The Herons 1 "
" A stylish lodging-house. Tis all lodging-houses here,
bless'ee. n
Clare received directions how to find the house, and
hastened thither, arriving with the milkman. The Herons,
though an ordinary villa, stood in its own grounds, and was
certainly the last place in which one would have expected to
find lodgings, so private was its appearance. If poor Teas
were a servant here, as he feared, she would go to the ba " k
door to that milkman, and he was inclined to go thither
also. However, in his doubts he turned to the front, and
rang.
The hour being early, the landlady herself opened fl»e
door. Clare inquired for Teresa D'Urberville or Durbey
field.
" Mrs. D'Urberville T "
" Yes. "
Tees, then, passed as a married woman, and he felt glad
sven though she had not adopted his name. " Win yw
kindly tell her that a relative is anxious to see hert "
'FULFILMENT 431
'It is rather csriy. What name shall I give, sirt "
" Angel. "
" Mr. Angel? "
" No; Angel. It is my Christian name. She'll understand/
" Pll see if she is awake. "
He was shown into the front room — the dining-room—
and looked out through the spring curtains at the little
lawn, and the rhododendrons and other shrubs upon it.
Obviously, her position was by no means so bad as he had
feared, and it crossed his mind that she must somehow have
claimed and sold the jewels to attain it. He did not blame
her for one moment. Soon his sharpened ear detected
footsteps npon the stairs, at which his heart thumped so
painfully that he could hardly stand firm. " Dear me!
what will she think of me, so altered as I am 1 " he said to
himself ; and the door opened.
Tess appeared on the threshold — not at all as he had ex-
pected to see her — bewilderingly otherwise, indeed. Her
great natural beauty was, if not heightened, rendered more
obvious by her attire. She was loosely wrapped in a gray-
white cashmere dressing-gown embroidered in half -mourn'
ing tints, and she wore slippers of the same hue. Her neck
rose out of a frill of down, and her well-remembered cable
of dark-brown hair was partially coiled up in a mass at the
back of her head and partly hanging on her shoulder — the
evident result of haste.
He held out his arms, but they had fallen again to his
side ; for she had not come forward, remaining still in the
opening of the doorway. Mere yellow skeleton that he was
now, he felt the contrast between them, and thought his
appearance distasteful to her.
" Tessie I " he said, huskily, " can you forgive me for
going away! Cant you — come to me? How do you get
to be — like this I *
" It is too late t " said she, her voice sounding hare 1
through the room, and her eyes shining unnaturally.
134 TESS OP THE IX'URBERYILLES
" 1 did not think rightly of you — I did not see you as
you were, " he continued to plead. " I have learnt to since,
dearest Tessie mine ! "
" Too late, too late ! " she said, waving her hand in th«
impatience of a person whose tortures cause every instant
to feel an hour. " Don't come close to me, Angel 1 No-
yon must not. Keep away I "
" But don't you love me, my dear wife, because I havt
been so pulled down by illness t You are not so fickle — 1
am come on purpose for you — my mother and father will
welcome you now. "
" Yes — oh yes, yes ! But I say, I say, it is too late I " she
almost shrieked. She seemed like a fugitive in a dream,
who tried to move away, but could not. " Don't yon know
all— don't you know it 1 Yet how do you come here if you
do not know ! "
« I inquired here and there, and I found the way. "
" I waited and waited for yon ! " she went on, her tones
suddenly resuming their old fluty pathos. " But yon did
not come, and I wrote to you, and yon did not come ! He
kept on saying you would never come anymore, and that I
was a f oolish woman. He was very kind to me, and mother,
and to ail of us after father's death. He "
" I don't understand. "
" He has won me — back to him. "
Clare looked at her keenly, then, gathering her meaning,
flagged like one plague-stricken, and his glance sank; it
fell on her hands, which, once rosy, were now white and
She continued: " He is upstairs. ... I hate him now,
because he told me a lie — that you would not come again ;
and you have come. These clothes are what he has put
upon me : I didn't care what he did wi'me. But will you
go away, Angel, please, and never come any more ! "
They stood fixed, their baffled hearts looking out of then 7
FULFILMENT 486
eyes with a joylessness pitiful to see. Both seemed to im-
plore something to shelter them from reality.
" Ah — it is my fault! " said Clare. Bat he could not get
on. Speech was as inexpressive as silence. But he had
a vague consciousness of one thing, though it was not clear
to him till later ; that his original Tess had spiritually ceased
to recognize the body before bim as hero — allowing it to
drift, like a corpse upon the current, in a direction dissoci-
ated from its living will.
A few instants passed, and he found that Tess was gone.
His face grew colder and more shrunken as he stood, con-
centrated on the moment, and a minute or two after he
found himself in the street, walking along, he did not know
whither.
LTI
Mrs. Brooks, the lady who was the householder at The
Herons, and owner of all the handsome furniture, was not
a person of an unusually curious turn of mind. She was
too deeply materialized, poor woman, by her long and en.
forced bondage to that arithmetical demon, Pront-and-Loss,
to retain much cariosity for its own sake, and apart from
possible lodgers'pockets. Nevertheless, the visit of Angel
Clare to her well-paying tenants, Mr. and Mrs. D'UrberviUe,
was sufficiently exceptional in point of time and manner to
reinvigorate the feminine proclivity which had been stifled
down as useless, save in its bearing on the letting trade.
Tess had spoken to her husband from the doorway, with-
ont entering the dining-room, and Mrs. Brooks, who stood
within the partly closed door of her own sitting-room at
the- hftnt of the nassacre. could hf-ar trwmfi* > ** at £b» ™ > «.
vernation — if conversation it could be called— between tuost
488 TB8S OF THE lyUEBEKYlLLKB
two wretched souls. She heard Tess reascend the stairs to
the first floor, and the departure of Clare, and the closing
of the front door behind him. Then the door of the room
above was shut, and Mrs. Brooks knew that Tess had re-
entered her apartment. As the young lady was not fully
dressed, Mrs. Brooks knew that she would not emerge again
for some time.
She accordingly ascended the stairs softly and stood at
the door of the front room — a drawing-room, connected
with the room immediately behind it (which was a bedroom)
by folding-doors in the common manner. This first floor,
containing Mrs. Brooks's best upartments, had been taken
by the week by the D'Urbervilles. The back room was now
in silence ; but from the drawing-room there came sounds.
All that she could at first distinguish of them was one
syllable, continually repeated in a low note of moaning, as
if it came from a soul bound to some Ixionian wheel —
" 0,0,0! "
Then a silence, then a heavy sigh, and again —
" 0,0,0! "
The landlady looked through the keyhole. Only a small
space of the room inside was visible, but within that space
came a corner of the breakfast-table, which was already
spread for the meal, and also a chair beside. Over the seat of
the chair Tes^s face was bowed, her posture being a kneeling
one in front of it; her hands were clasped over her head,
the skirts of her dressing-gown and the embroidery of her
nightgown flowed upon the floor behind her and upon the
chair, and her stockingless feet, from which the slippers had
fallen, protruded upon the carpet. It was from her lips
that came the murmur of unspeakable despair.
Then a man's voice from the adjoining bedroom, " Whatf s
the matter I "
She did not answer, but went on in a tone which was a
soliloquy rather than an exclamation, and a dirge rather
" lan a soliloquy. Mrs. Brooks could only catch aportioni
Ffl] J PTT .MKM T 421
" And then my dear, dear husband came home tome . . .
snd I did not know it 1 . . . And you had used your cruel
persuasion upon me . . . yon did not stop using it — no —
you did not stop ! My little sisters and brothers and my
mother's needs — they were the things you moved me by
. . . and you said my husband would never come back-
never ; and you taunted me, and said what a simpleton I
was to expect him. . . . And at last I believed you and
gave way ! And then he came back ! Now he is gone.
Gone a second tiu^,, end I have lost him now forever . .
and he will not love me the littlest bit ever any more — only
hate me ! ... Oh yes, I have lost him now — again because
of — you ! *
In writhing, with her head on the chair, she turned her
face towards the door, and Mrs, Brooks could see the pain
upon it ; and that her lips were bleeding from the clench
of her teeth upon them, and that the long lashes of her
closed eyes stuck in wet tags to her cheeks. She con-
tinued: " And he is dying — he looks as if he is dying I
. . And my sin will kill him and not kill me ! . . . O,
you have torn my life all to pieces . . . made me a victim,
a caged wretch! . . . My own true husband will never,
never — Heaven — I cant bear this ! — I cannot ! *
There were more and sharper words from the man ; then
a sudden rustle ; she had sprung to her feet. Mrs. Brooks,
thinking that the speaker was coming to rush out of the
door, hastily retreated down the stairs.
She need not have done so, however, for the door of the
sitting-room was not opened. Mrs. Brooks felt it unsafe
to listen on the landing again, and entered her own parlor
below. She could hear nothing through the floor, although
she listened intently, and thereupon went to the kitchen to
finish her interrupted breakfast. Coming up presently to
the front room on the ground floor, she took up some sew-
ing, waiting for her lodgers to ring, that she might take
away the breakfast, which she meant to do herself, to di»
•88 TBSS 07 THE D < URBERVILLBa
eover what was the matter, if possible. Overhead, as she
sat, she could now hear the floor-boards slightly creak, as if
some one were walking about, and presently the movement
was explained by the rustle of garments against the banis-
ters, the opening and the closing of the front door, and the
form of Tess passing to the gate on her way into the street.
She was fully dressed now in the walking-costume of a well-
to-do young lady, in which she had arrived, with the sole
addition that over her hat and black feather a veil was
drawn. Mrs. Brooks had not been able to catch any word
of farewell, temporary or otherwise, between the tenants
of the rooms above. They might have quarrelled, or Mr.
D'Urborville might still be asleep, for he was not an early
riser.
She went into the back room which was more especially
her own apartment, and continued her sewing there. The
lady lodger did not return, nor did the gentleman ring his
bell. Mrs. Brooks pondered on the delay, and on what
probable relation the visitor who had called so early stood
to the couple upstairs. In reflecting she leant back in her
As she did so her eyes glanced casually over the ceiling
till they were arrested by a spot in the middle of its white
surface which she had never noticed there before. It was
about the size of a wafer when she first observed it, but it
speedily grew as large as the palm of her hand, and then
Bne could perceive that it was red. The oblong white ceil-
ing, with its scarlet blot in the midst, hau the appearance
of a gigantic ace of hearts.
Mrs. Brooks had strange qualms of misgiving. She got
upon the table, and touched the spot in the ceiling with her
fingers. It was damp, and she fancied that it was a blood
stain.
Descending from the table, she left the parlor, and went
upstairs, intending to enter the room overhead, which was
e chamber at the back of the drawing-room. But, nerve-
FULFILMENT 489
/ess woman as she bad now become, she could not bring
herself to attempt the handle. She listened. The dead
silence within was broken only by a regular beat.
Drip, drip, drip.
Mrs. Brooks hastened downstairs, opened the front door,
and ran into the street. A man she knew, one of the work-
men employed at an adjoining villa, was passing by, and
she begged him to come in and go upstairs with her; she
feared something had happened to one of her lodgers. The
workman assented, and followed her to the landing.
She opened the door of the drawing-room, and stood back
for him to pass in, entering herself behind him. The room
was empty; the breakfast— a substantial repast of coffee,
eggs, and a cold ham — lay spread upon the table untouched,
as when she had taken it up, excepting that the carving-
knife was missing. She asked the man to gf through the
folding-doors into the adjoining room.
He opened the door, entered a step or two, and came
back almost instantly, with a rigid face. " My good ,
the gentleman in bed is dead! I think he has been hurt
with a knife — a lot of blood has nn down upon the floor ! *
The alarm was Boon given, and the house which had lately
been so quiet resounded with the tramp of many footsteps,
a surgeon among the rest. The wound was deep ; the point
of the blade had touched the heart of the victim, who lay
on his back, pale, fixed, dead, as if he had scarcely moved
after the infliction of the blow. In a quarter of an hour
the news that a gentleman who was a temporary visitor to
the town had been stabbed to the heart in his bed, spread
through every street and villa of the popular watering
place.
: > , Google
TESS OF TUB IfUaBEBVILLlB
Lvn
Meanwhile Angel Clare had walked automatically along
the way by which he had come, and entering his hotel, sat
down over the breakfast staring at nothingness. He went
on eating and drinking unconsciously, till on a sudden he
demanded his bill ; having paid which, he took his dressing-
bag in his hand, the only luggage he had brought with him,
and went out.
At the moment of his departure a telegram was handed
to him — a few words from his mother, stating that they
were glad to know his address, and informing him that Ms
brother Guthbert had proposed to and been accepted by
Mercy Chant.
Clare crumpled up the paper, and followed the route tn
the station ; reaching it, he found that there would be no
train leaving for an hour and more. He sat down to wait;
and having waited a quarter of an hour, felt that he could
wait there no longer. Broken in heart and numbed, he had
nothing to hurry for, but he wished to get out of a town
which had been the Bcene of such an experience, and turned
to walk to the first station onward, and let the train pick
him up there.
The highway that he followed was open, and at a little
distance dipped into a valley, across which it could be sees
running from edge to edge. He had traversed the greater
part of this depression, and was climbing the western
acclivity, when, pausing for breath, he unconsciously looked
back. Why he did so he could not say, but something
seemed to impel the act. The tape-like surface of the road
diminished in his rear as far as he could see, and as he gazed
a moving spot intruded on the white vacuity of its per-
" rwctive.
FULFILMENT 411
It was a human figure, running. Clare waited, with a
dim sense that Bomebody was trying to overtake him.
The form descending the incline was a woman's, yet so
entirely was his mind blinded to the idea of hiB wife's fol-
lowing him that, even when she came nearer, he did not .
recognize her under the totally changed attire in which he
now beheld her. It was not till she was quite close that he
could believe her to be Tees.
" I Baw you — turn away from the station — just before I
got there — and I have been following yon all this way ! *
She was so pale, so breathless, so quivering in every
muscle, that he did not ask her a single question, but seiz-
ing her hand, and pulling it within his arm, he led her along.
To avoid meeting any possible wayfarers, he left the high-
road, and took a footpath under some fir-trees. When they
were deep among the moaning boughs he stopped and
looked at her inquiringly.
" An gel/'she said, as if waiting for this, " do you know
what I have been running after you for ! To tell you that
I have killed him 1 " A pitiful white smile lit her face as
she spoke.
" What 1 * said he, thinking from the strangeness of her
manner that she was in some delirium.
" I have done it — I don't know how, " she continued.
" Still, I owed it to'ee, and to myself, Angel. I feared long
ago, when I struck him on the mouth with my glove, that
I might do it some day for the wrong he did to me in my
simple youth, and to you through me. He has come be-
tween us and ruined us, and now he can never do it any
more. I never loved hi " i at all, Angel, as I loved you.
Yon know it, don't you 1 You believe it T Yon didnt come
back to me, and I was obliged to go back to him, or sell
what was not mine to sell, the heir-things of your family.
Why did you go away — why did yon — when I loved you
so I I cant think why yon did it But I dont blame yon j
only, Angel, will you forgive me my sin against yon, nc
fit TES8 OF THE CUBBfcBVILLBB
I have killed him? I thought as I ran along that you
would be sure to forgive me now I have done that. It
came to me as a shining light that I should get yon back
that way. I conld not bear the loss of'ee any longer — yon
don't know how entirely I was unable to bear your not lov-
ing me. Say yon do now, dear, dear husband : say'yon
do, now I have killed him ! "
" I do love you, Tesa — O, I do— it is all come back ! ■ he
Baid, tightening his arms round her with fevered pressure.
" But how do you mean — yon have killed himt "
" I mean that I have, " she murmured in a reverie,
" What, bodily 1 Is he dead * "
" Yes. He heard me crying about yon, and he bitterly
taunted me ; and called you by a foul name ; and then I
did it My heart could not bear it He had taunted me
about you before. And then I dressed myself and came
away to find you. "
By degrees he was inclined to believe that she had faintly
attempted, at least, what she said she had done ; and his hor-
ror at her impulse was mixed with amazement at the strength
of her affection for himself, and at the strangeness of its
quality, which had apparently extinguished her moral sense
altogether. Unable to realize the gravity of her conduct,
she seemed at last content ; and he looked at her as she lay
upon his shoulder, weeping with happiness, and wondered
:what obscure strain in the D'Urberville blood had led to
this aberration — if it were an aberration. There momen-
tarily flashed through his mind that the family tradition
might have arisen because the D'Urbervilles had been
known to do these things. As well as his confused and
excited ideas could reason, he supposed that in the mo-
ment of mad grief of which she spoke her mind had
lost its balance, and plunged her into this abyss. It was
very terrible if true; if a temporary hallucination, sad.
^nt, anyhow, here was this deserted wife of his, this pas-
nately fond woman, clinging to him without a suspicion
FULFILMENT MS
that lie would be anything to her but a protector. He saw
that for him to be otherwise was not, in her mind, within
the region of the possible. Tenderness was absolutely
dominant in Glare at last. He kissed her endlessly with
his white lips, and held her hand, and said, " I will not de-
sert you! I will protect yoa by every means in my power,
dearest love, whatever you may have done or not have
done ! "
They then walked on tinder the trees, Teas turning her
head every now and then to look at him. Worn and un-
handsome as he had become, it was plain that she did not
discern the least fault in his appearance. To her he was,
as of old, all that was perfection, personally and mentally.
He was still her Antinous, her Apollo even ; his sickly face
was beautiful as the morning to her affectionate regard on
this day no less than when she first beheld him; forwas it
not the face of the one man on earth who had loved her
purely, and who had believed in her as pore 1
With an instinct as to possibilities, he did not now, as
he had intended, make for the first station beyond the
town, but plunged still farther under the firs, which here
abounded for miles. Each clasping the other round the
waist, they promenaded over the dry bed of fir-needles,
thrown into a vague, intoxicating atmosphere at the con-
sciousness of being together at last, with no living soul be-
tween them, ignoring that there was a corpse. Thus they
proceeded for several miles till Tess, arousing herself, looked
about her, and said, timidly, " Are we going anywhere in
particular 1 "
" I don't know, dearest Why ! " •
" I dont know. "
" Well, we might walk a few miles farther, and when it
is evening find lodgings somewhere or other — in a lonely
cottage, perhaps. Can you walk well, Tesaie ? "
" Ob yes ! I could walk for ever and ever with your arm
round me 1 "
tU TEB8 OF THE DTJBBERYILLES
Upon the whole it seemed a good thing to do. There.
upon they quickened their pace, avoiding high-roads, and
following obscure paths tending more or less northward*.
But there was an unpractical vagueness in their movements
throughout the day: neither one of them seemed to con-
sider auy question of effectual escape, disguise, or long con-
cealment. Their every idea was temporary and unforef end-
ing, like the plans of two children.
At midday they drew near to a roadside inn, and Teas
would have entered it with him to get something to eat,
but he persuaded her to remain among the trees and bushes
of this half-woodland, half -moorland part of the country
till he should come back. Her clothes were of recent
fashion; even the ivory-handled parasol that she carried
was of a shape unknown in the retired spot to which they
had now wandered ; and the cut of such articles would have
attracted attention in the settle of a tavern. He soon re-
turned, with food enough for half a dozen people, and two
bottles of wine — enough to last them for a day or more,
should any emergency arise.
They sat down upon some dead boughs and shared their
meal Between one and two o'clock they packed up the re-
mainder and went on again.
" I feel strong enough to walk any distance,''said she.
" I think we may as well steer in a general way towards
the interior of the country, where we can hide for a time,
and are less likely to be looked for than anywhere near the
coast,* " Clare remarked. " Later on, when they have for-
gotten us, we can make for some port. "
She made no reply to this beyond that of clasping him
more tightly, and straight inland they went. Though the
season was an English May, the weather was serenely
bright, and during the afternoon it was quite warm.
Through the latter miles of their walk their footpath had
taken them into the depths of the New Forest, and, towards
veiling, turning the corner of a lane, they perceived be-
FULFILMENT 44*
bind an ornamental gate a large board on which was painted
in white letters, " This desirable Mansion to be Let Fur-
nished " ; particulars following, with directions to apply to
some London agents. Passing throngh the gate they could
see the house, a dignified building, of regular design and
large accommodation.
" I know it, " said Clare. M It is Bramshnrst Manor-
house. Yon can Bee that it is shut up, and grass is growing
on the drive. "
" Some of the windows are open, " said Teas.
" Just to air the rooms, I suppose. "
" AD these rooms empty, and we without a roof to our
heads I "
" Ton are getting tired, my Teas, " he said. " Well stop
Boon. " And kissing her sad month, he again led her on-
wards.
He was growing weary likewise, for they had walked not
less than twenty miles, and it became necessary to consider
what they should do for rest. They looked from afar at
isolated cottages and little inns, and were inclined to ap-
proach one of the latter, when their hearts failed them, and
they sheered off. At length their gait dragged, and they
stood still
" Could we sleep under the trees! " she asked.
He thought the season insufficiently advanced. " I have
been thinking of that empty mansion we passed, " he said.
" Let us go back towards it again. "
They retraced their steps, but it was half an hour before
they stood without the entrance-gate as earlier. He then
requested her to stay where she was, whilst he went to see
who was within.
She sat down among the bushes within the gate, and
Glare crept towards the house. His absence lasted some
considerable time, and Tess was wildly anxious, not for
herself, but for him. He had found out from a boy that
(here was only an old woman in charge as care-taker, and
4ib TESS OF THE OUBBKBTIU1B8
■he only came there on fine days, from the hamlet near, to
open and shut the windows. She would come to shut them
at sunset. " Now, we can get in through one of the lover
windows, and rest there, " said he.
Under his escort she went tardily forward to the main
front, whose shuttered windows, like sightless eyeballs, ex-
eluded, the possibility of watchers. The door was reached
by a Sight of steps, and one of the windows beside it was
open. Clare clambered in, and pulled Tess in after him.
Except the hall, the rooms were all in darkness, and they
ascended the staircase. Up here also the shutters were
tightly closed, the ventilation being perfunctorily done, for
the day at least, by opening the hall window in front and
an upper window behind. Clare unlatched the door of a
large chamber, felt his way across it, and parted the shut-
ters to the width of two or three inches. A shaft of daz-
zling sunlight glanced into the room, revealing heavy, old-
fashioned furniture, crimson damask hangings, and an
enormous four-post bedstead, along the bead of which were
carved running figures, apparently Atalanta's race.
" Best at last 1 " said he, setting down his bag and the
parcel of viands.
They remained in great quietness till the care-taker should
have come to shut the windows ; as a precaution, putting
themselves in total darkness by barring the shutters as be-
fore, lest the woman should open the door of their chamber
for any casual reason. Between six and seven o'clock she
came, but did not approach the wing they were in. They
heard her close the windows, fasten them, lock the door,
and go away. Then Clare again stole a chink of light from
the window, and they'shared another meal, till by and by
they were enveloped in the shades of night, which they had
no candle to disperse.
■ Google
Lvm
The night- waa strangely solemn and still. In the small
Wars she whispered to him the whole story of how he had
walked in his sleep with her in his arms across the Froom
stream, at the imminent risk of both their lives, and laid
her down in the stone coffin at the ruined abbey. He had
never known of that till now.
" Why didn't yon tell me next day I * he said, " It might
have prevented much misunderstanding and woe.*
" Don't think of what's past 1 * said she. " I am not
going to think outside of now. Why should we f Who
knows what to-morrow has in store t "
Bnt it apparently had no sorrow. The morning was wet
and foggy, and Glare, rightly informed that the care-taker
only opened the windows on Ane days, ventured to creep
out of their chamber and explore the house, leaving Tess
asleep. There was no food on the premises, bnt there was
water, and he took advantage of the fog to emerge from
the mansion, and fetch tea, bread, and butter from a shop
in the little town two miles beyond, as also a small tin ket-
tle and spirit-lamp, that they might get fire without smoke.
His re-entry awoke her; and they breakfasted on what he
had brought.
They were indisposed to stir abroad, and the day passed,
and the night following, and the next, and the next ; till,
almost without their being aware, five days had slipped by
in absolute seclusion, not a sight or sound of a human
being disturbing their peaeefulness, such as it was. The
changes of the weather were their only events, the birds of
*he New Forest their only company. By tacit consent they
nardry once spoke of any incident of the past subsequent
to their wedding-day. The gloomy intervening time seemei?
«8 TOSS OF THE lyUEaKETUXBB
to flbk into chaos, over -which the present and prior tmwe
dosed as if it never had been. Whenever he suggested
that they should leave their shelter and go forward to-
wards Southampton or London, she showed a strange un-
willingness to move. " Why should we pnt an end to all
that's sweet and lovely! " she deprecated. " What most
come will come, " And, looking through the shutter-chink,
" All is trouble outside there : inside here content I ■
He peeped out also. It was quite true ; within was af-
fection, union, error forgiven ; outside was the inexorable.
" And — and,''she said, pressing her cheek against his, " I
fear what you think o* me now may not last. I do not
wish to outlive your present feeling for me. I would rather
not. I would rather be dead and buried when the time
comes for you to despise me, so that it may never be known
to me that you despised me. "
" I cannot ever despise yon. "
" I also hope that. But considering what my life haa
been, I cannot see why any man should, sooner or later,
be able to help despising me. . . . How wickedly mad I
was ! Yet formerly I never could bear to hurt a fly or a
worm, and the sight of a bird in a cage used often to make
me cry.*
They remained yet another day. In the night the dull
sky cleared, and the result was that the old care-taker at
the cottage awoke early. The brilliant sunrise made her
unusually brisk, and she decided to open the contiguous
mansion immediately, and to air it thoroughly on snch a
day. Thus it occurred that, having arrived and opened the
lowers rooms before six o'clock, she ascended to the bed-
chambers, and was about to turn the handle of the one
wherein they lay. At that moment she fancied she could
hear the breathing of persons within. Her slippers and
her antiquity had rendered her progress a noiseless one so
far, and she made'or instant retreat; then, deeming that
fir hearing might have deceived her, she turned anew to
the doer, and softly tried the handle. The lock was out
of order, bat a piece of furniture had been moved forward
on the inside, which prevented her opening the door more
Shan an inch or two. A stream of morning light through
the shutter-chink fell upon the faces of the pair, wrapped
in profound slumber, Toss's lips being parted like a half*
open flower near his cheek. The eare-taker was so struck
with their innocent appearance, and with the elegance of
Tees's gown hanging across a chair, her silk stockings be-
side it, and the other habits in which she had arrived, be-
cause she had none else, that her first indignation of the
effrontery of tramps and vagabonds gave way to a momen-
tary sentimentality over this genteel elopement, as it seemed
She closed the door, and withdrew as softly as she had come,
to go and consult with her neighbors on the odd discovery.
Not more than a minute had elapsed after her withdrawal
when Tess woke, and then Clare. Both had a sense that
something had disturbed them, though they could not say
what; and the uneasy feeling which it engendered grew
stronger. As soon as he was dressed he narrowly scanned
the lawn through the two or three inches of shutter-chink.
" I think we will leave at once, " said he. " It is a fine day.
And I cannot help fancying somebody is about the house
At any rate, the woman will be sure to come to-day. "
She passively assented, and, putting the room in order,
they took op the few articles that belonged to them, and
departed noiselessly. When they had got into the forest she
turned to take a last look at the house. " Ah, happy house
— good-by I " she said. " My life can only be a question
of a few weeks. Why should we not have stayed there I s
" Don't say it, Tess'We shall soon get out of this dis-
trict altogether. Well continue our course as we have
begun it, and keep straight north. Nobody will think of
looking for us that way. We shall he looked for at the
Wessex ports if we are sought at all. When we are in the
north we will get to a port and away, "
460 HESS Of THE ITUBBERVILLES
Having thus persuaded her the plan «u pursued, and
they kept a bee-line northward. Their long repose at the
manor-house lent them walking power now ; and towards
midday they approached the steepled city of Melchester,
which lay directly in their way. He decided to rest her in
a dump of trees daring the afternoon, and push onward
under cover of darkness. At dusk dare purchased food as
usual, and their night march began, the boundary between
Upper and Mid-Wessex being crossed about eight o'clock.
To walk across country without mudi regard to roads
was not new to Teas, and she showed her old agility in
the performance. The intercepting city, ancient Melchester,
they were obliged to pass through in order to take advan-
tage of the town bridge for crossing a large river that ob-
structed them. It was about midnight when they went
along the deserted street, lighted fitfully by their few lamps,
keeping off the pavement that it might not echo their foot-
steps. The graceful pile of cathedral architecture rose on
their right hand, but it was lost upon them now. Once out
of the town they followed the turnpike road, which plunged
across an open plain.
Though the sky was dense with cloud, a diffused light
from some fragment of a moon had hitherto helped them a
jitfle. But the moon had now sunk, the clouds seemed to
settle almost on their heads, and the night grew as dark as
a cave. However, they found their way along, keeping aa
much on the turf as possible, that their tread might not
resound, which it was easy to do, there being no hedge or
fence of any kind. All around was open loneliness and
black solitude, over which a stiff breeze blew.
They had proceeded thus gropingly several miles when
on a sudden Clare became conscious of some vast erection
close in his front* rising sheer from the grass. They had
almost struck themselveB against it,
" What monstrous place is this! " said Angel
" It hums, " said she. " Hearken I *
He listened. The wind, playing upon the edifice, pro
duced a booming tune, like the ndte of some gigantic one-
stringed harp. No other sound came from it, and lifting
his hand and advancing a step or two, Clare felt the vertical
surface of the wall. It seemed to be of solid stone, without
joint or moulding. Carrying his fingers onward, he found
that what he had come in contact with was a colossal rect-
angular pillar; by stretching out his left hand he could
feel a similar one adjoining. At an indefinite height over-
head something made the black sky blacker, which had the
semblance of a vast architrave uniting the pillars horizon-
tally. They carefully entered beneath and between ; the sur-
faces echoed their soft rustle ; but they seemed to be still
out-of-doors. The place was roofless. Teas drew her breath
fearfully, and Angel, perplexed, said, " What can it bet*
Feeling sideways, they encountered another tower-like
pillar, square and uncompromising as the first ; beyond it
another and another. The place was all doors and pillars,
some connected above by continuous architraves.
" A very Temple of the Winds, " he said.
The next pillar was isolated ; others composed a trilithon j
others were prostrate, their flanks forming a causeway wide
enough for a carriage ; and it was soon obvious that they
made up a forest of monoliths grouped upon the grassy
expanse of the plain. The couple advanced farther into
this pavilion of the night, till they stood In its midst
" It is Stonehenge 1 * said Clare.
L The heathen temple, yon mean f *
" Tea. Older than the centuries; older than theDTJr-
bervilles. Well, what shall we do, darling f We may find ,
shelter farther on. "
But Teas, really tired by this time, flung herself upon an
oblong slab that lay close at hand, and was sheltered from
the wind by a pillar. Owing to the action of the sun dur-
ing the preceding day the stone was warm and dry, in
comforting contrast to U» loogh and chill grass aroupd-
|B2 TE83 07 THB! DTJEBIiBVIIjLBS
which Had damped her skirts and shoes. " I dont wantt*
go any farther, Angel, "'she said, stretching out her hand
(or his. " Cant we bide here 1 *
u I fear not. This spot is visible for miles by day, aV
thongh it does not seem bo now. "
w One of my mother's people was a shepherd hereabouts,
Dow I thick of it And yon used to say at Talbothays that
I was a heathen. So now I am at home. "
He knelt down beside her outstretched form, and put nil
lips upon hers. " Sleepy are you, dearf I think you art
lying on an altar. "
* I like very much to be here, " she murmured. M It is so
solemn and lonely — after my great happiness — with nothing
but the sky above my face. It seems as if there were no
folk in flie world but we two ; and I wish there were not—
except Tdza Lu. "
Clare thought she might as well rest here till it should
get a little lighter, and he flung his overcoat upon her, and
sat down by her side.
" Angel, if anything happens to me, will you watch over
liiza Lu for my sake t " she asked, when they had listened
a long time to the wind among the pillars.
" I will "
M She is so good and simple and pure. O Angel — T wish
yon would marry her if you lose me, as you will do shortly.
O, if you would I "
" If I lose you I lose all f And she is my sister-in-law.*
" That's nothing, dearest. People marry sister-laws oon-
tlnnally about Marlott; and liiza Lu is so gentle and
sweet. 0, 1 could share yon with her willingly when we
are spirits 1 If you would train her, Angel, and bring her
up for your own self I She has all the best of me without
the bad of me, and if she were to become yours It would
almost seem as if death had not divided us. Well, I
have said it I won't mention it again. How would I ex-
«*tit! " She ceased, and ho fell into thought In the
FULFILMENT 468
far northeast sty he could see between the piUan* a level
streak of light The uniform concavity of black cloud was
lifting bodily like the lid of a pot, letting in at the earth's
edge the coming day, against which the towering monoliths
and trilithons began to be blackly defined.
" Did they sacrifice to God here t * asked she-
" No, " said ha
" Who to! "
" I believe to the sun. That lofty stone set away by itself
Is in the direction of the sun, which will presently rise be
hind it "
u This reminds me, dear, " she said. " You remember you
oever would interfere with any belief o > mine before we
were married T But I knew your mind all the same, and I
thought as yon thought — not from any reasons o'my own,
but because you thought so. Tell me now, Angel, do you
think we shall meet again after we are dead t I want to
know. "
He kissed her to avoid a reply at snch a time.
" O Angel — I fear that means no 1 " said she, with a sup-
pressed sob. " And I wanted so to see yon again — so
much, so much ! What — not even yon and 1, Angel, who
love each other so well t "
Like a greater than himself, to the critical question at
the critical time he did not answer; and they were again
silent In a minute or two her breathing became more
regular, her clasp of his hand relaxed, and she fell asleep.
The band of silver paleness along the east horizon made
even the distant parts of the Great Plain appear dark and
near ; and the whole enormous landscape bore that impress
of reserve, taciturnity, and hesitation which is usual just
before day. The eastward pillars and their architraves
stood up blackly against the light, and the great flame.
shaped Sun-stone beyond them ; and the stone of sacrifice
midway. Presently the night wind died out, and the quiv-
ering little pools in the cap-like hollows of the stones lay
454 TESS OP THB D*UKBERVILLra,
gtUL At the same time something seemed to move on. tha
verge of the dip eastward — a mere dot It was the head
of a man approaching them from die hollow beyond the
Sun-atone. Clare wished they had gone onward, but m the
circumstances decided to remain quiet. The figure came
straight towards the circle of pillars in which they were.
He heard something behind him, the brush of feet.
Turning, he saw over the prostrate column another figure -,
then, before he was aware, another was at hand on the
right, under a trilithon, and another on the left. The dawn
shone full on the front of the man westward, and Clare
could discern from this that he was talL and walked as if
trained. They all closed in with evident purpose. Her
story then was true I Springing to his feet, he looked
around for a weapon, means of escape, anything. By this
time the nearest man was upon him.
" It is no use, sir, 5 he said. " There are sixteen of us on
the Plain, and the whole country is reared. "
" Let her finish her sleep 1 " he implored in a whisper of
the men as they gathered round.
When they saw where she lay, which they had not don*
till then, they showed no objection, and stood watching
her, as still as the pillars around. He went to the stone,
and bent over her, holding one poor little hand ; her breath-
ing now was quick and small, like that of a lesser creator*
than a woman. All waited in the growing light, their facet
and hands as if they were silvered, the remainder of their
figures dark, the stones glistening a green-gray, the Plain
still a mass of shade. Soon the light was strong, and a
ray shone upon her unconscious form, peering under her
eyelids and waking her.
" What is it, Angel 1'she said, starting up. " Havethejr
come for me ! *
" Yes, dearest, " he said. " They have come. "
" It is as it should be, " she murmured. " Angel, I am
'•nost glad— yes, glad I This happiness could, not havs
Hated. It was too much. I have had enough ; and now J
shall not lire for you to despise me I *
She stood up, shook herself, and went forward, nefrfcet
Of the men having moved.
" I am ready, " she said, quietly.
LEE
The eity of Wintoneester, that fine old city, aforetime
capital of Weasei, lay amidst its convex and concave down-
lands in all the brightness and warmth of a July morning.
The gabled briek-and-tile and freestone houses had almost
dried off for the season their integument of lichen, the
streams in the meadows were low, and in the sloping High
Street, from the West Gateway to the mediaeval cross, and
from the mediaeval cross to the bridge, that leisurely dust-
ing and sweeping was in progress which usually ushers in
an old-fashioned market-day.
From the western gate aforesaid the highway, as every
Wintoncestrian knows, ascends a long and regular incline
of the exact length of a measured mile, leaving the houses
gradually behind. Up this road from the precincts of the
eity two persons were walking rapidly, as if unconscious of
the trying ascent— unconscious through preoccupation, and
not through buoyancy. They had emerged upon this road
through a narrow barred wicket in a high wall a little lower
down. They seemed anxious to get out of the sight of the
nouses and of their kind, and this road appeared to offer
the quickest means of doing so. Though they were young*
they walked with bowed heads, Which gait of grief the sun's
■raj's smiled on pitilessly.
One of the pair was Angel dare, the other a tall, slim,
Budding creature— half girl, half woman— a spiritualize'
4M TE88 OP THB DTH1BKBV1LLE8
Image of Teaa, slighter than she, trat frith the same beantt >
Eul eyes — Clare's sister-in-law,'Liza Lu. Their pale facet
seemed to have shrank to half their natural size. They moved
on hand in band, and never spoke a word, the drooping of
their heads being that of Giotto's " Two Apostles.*
When they had nearly reached the top of the great West
Bill the clocks in the town struck eight Each gave a start
at the notes, and, walking onward yet a few steps, they
reached the first mile-stone, standing whitery on the green
margin of the grass, and backed by the down, which here
was open to the road. They entered npon the turf, and,
Impelled by a force which seemed to overrule their will, sud-
denly stood still, turned, and waited in paralyzed suspense
behind the stone.
The prospect from this summit was almost unlimited,
In. the valley beneath lay the city they had just left, its
more prominent buildings showing as in an isometric
drawing — among them the broad cathedral tower, with its
Norman windows and immense length of aisle and nave,
the spires of St Thomas's, the pinnacled tower of the Col-
lege, and, more to the right, the tower and gables of the
ancient hosploe, where to this day the pilgrim may receive
his dole of bread and ale. Behind the city swept the rotund
upland of St Catherine's Kill ; farther off, landscape be-
yond landscape, till the horizon was lost in the radiance of
the sun hanging above it
Against these far stretches of country rose, in front of
the other city edifices, a large red-brick building, with level
gray roofs, and rows of short barred windows bespeaking
captivity, the whole contrasting greatly by its formalism
with the quaint irregularities of the Gothic erections; It
was somewhat disguised from the road in passing it by
yews and evergreen oaks, but it was visible enough up here.
The wicket from which the pair had lately emerged was in
the wall of this structure. From the middle of the build-
'ng an ugly flat-topped octagonal tower ascended against
the east horizon, and viewed from this spot, on its shady
side and against the light, it seemed the one blot on the
city's beauty. Yet it was with this blot, and not with the
beanty, that the two gazers were concerned.
Upon the cornice of the tower a tall staff was fixed.
Their eyes were riveted on it A few minutes after the
hour had struck something moved slowly np the staff, and
extended itself upon the breeze. It was a black flag.
" Justice " was done, and the President of the Immortals
(in ^sehylean phrase) had ended his sport with Toss. And
the DTJrverville knights and dames slept on in their tombs
unknowing. The two speechless gazers bent themselves
down to the earth, as if in prayer, and remained thus a
long time, absolutely motionless ; the flag continued tc
wave silently. As soon as they had strength they arose
joined hands agflip, and went on.
THE END.
..:■,.:■ „Gl).OyIc
: > , Google
: > , Google
s.
■ Google
jpiizsiB, Google
jpiizsiB, Google
