

I
i'H

I •
! \
- k

li

BIRTHPLACE OP
TSE SAWOBTH EDITIOlf
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
Bi EMILY BEOKTE
(«^ > ^)
aud
AGNES GREY
Br ANNE BBONTfi
(aoioh bill)
WITH AS DITBODUCTIOH
MRS. HUUPHRT WARD
KIW YORK AND tONDON
aiHPBK * BBOTHEES FUBLISHSBS

OoRfrighi, 1900, hf Mabt a. Wumk
^iif^to
" ^'" introduction
In these critical'introdactions to the books of the
Bronte sisters I have so far endeavoured, and most
still endeavour, to speak, not the language of mere
panegyric, but that natural to a reader whose critical
sense, no less than his sense of enjoyment, shares in
the general stimulus which is derived from the power
and vitality of the books themselves. The Brontes
are searching personalities. They challenge no less
than they attract. Their vigorous effect upon the
reader's sympathies and judgment has been always
part of their ascendency, and one great secret of their
enduring fame. To handle their work in a spirit of
flat eulogy and recommendation would be an offence
to it and to them. Its technical faultiness, moreover,
'The last issue of this new edition will consist of Mrs. Gaskell's
lAfe of GharloUe Bronti, edited and brought up to date by Mr.
Clement Shorter, with the help of all that store of fresh biographi-
cal material, concerning not only Charlotte Bronte but Emily and
Anne also, which he has been some years patiently accumulating.
To that book we all look forward Meanwhile the aim of these In-
troductions is only biographical so far as the suggestions of biog-
raphy are necessary to literary understanding.
xu WUTHERING HEIGHTS
is an element of its oharm. The romantic inequalities,
the romantic alternations of power and weakness which
these books show, appeal to those deep and mingled
instincts of the English mind which have produced our
rich, violent, faulty, incomparable English literature.
When we are under the spell of the Bronte stories we
admire and we protest with almost equal warmth ; we
lavish upon them the same varieties of feeling as the
poet, who brings to his love no cold, monotonous hom-
age, but — ^ praise, blame, kisses, tears and smiles.'For
inevitably the critic's manner catches the freedom of
the author's. He will not hesitate dislike; such a
mental attitude cannot maintain itself in the Brontes'
neighboarhood. He will strike when he is hurt, and
raise the pasans of praise when he is pleased, with the
frankness which such combatants deserve. In each of
her novels, as it were, Charlotte Bronte touches the
shield of the reader; she does not woo or persuade
him ; she attacks him, and, complete as his ultimate
surrender may be, he yields fighting. He ^ will still be
talking,'and there is no help for it.
And if this is the case with Charlotte Bronte, it is
still more so with Emily. Emily's genius was the
greater of the two, yet of a similar quality and fibre.
It provokes even more vivid reactions of feeling in the
reader ; and yet, in those who have felt her spell, she
wins an ultimate sympathy and compels an ultimate
admiration so strong that no one wishes to examine the
stages of his own conquest. We passionately accept
her, or we are untouched by her. And if we passion-
ately accept her, we are apt to forget our own critical
wrestles by the way ; we are impatient of demurs, of
INTRODUCTION xiii
half-words, and all mere ingenuities of opinion con-
cerning her and that work which is her direct and
personal voice.
Nevertheless, criticism has still a real work to do
with this strange novel and these few passionate
poems of Emily Bronte's. In the first place, the novel
has not even yet taken the place which rightly belongs
to it. In Mr. Saintsbary's belief, for instance, Emily
Bronte's work, though he grants its originality, has
been'extravagantly praised,'and is ^ too small in bulk
and too limited in character to be put really high.'(It
may be remarked in {Massing that it is, indeed, smaller
in balk than Mr. Saintsbury imagines, since he attrib-
utes to Emily the book of her sister Anne,'The Tenant
of Wild fell Hall.')* And even for Mr. Leslie Stephen's
generous and catholic taste, Emily Bronte in'Wuther-
ing Heights''feels rather than observes ;'so that ^ her
feeble grasp upon external facts makes her book a kind
of baseless nightmare, which we read with wonder and
with distressing curiosity, but with even more pain
than pleasure or profit.'Matthew Arnold, indeed, in
the well-known lines —
whose soul
Knew no fellow for might,
Passion, vehemence, grief.
Daring, since Byron died —
— ^has paid the natural tribute of one true poet to an-
other. But it may be doubted whether in writing it
he thought of ^ Wuthering Heights,'and not rather of
■ MneieerUh Omtury LitercOwre, p. 819.
xiv WUTHERING HEIGHTS
those four or five poems of the first order which Emily
Bronte has added to our literature. While for an
earlier generation of critics, * Wuthering Heights'was,
as a rule, matter for denunciation rather than praise ;
and it was again a poet — Sydney Dobell in the'Palla-
dium'— who, almost alone, had the courage to under
stand. The pathetic letter written by Charlotte to
Mr. Williams, little more than three weeks before
Emily^s death, which describes the reading by the sis-
ters of an article on their books in the'Korth Ameri-
can Beview,'shows that Emily lived long enough to
know that her novel had outraged the common literary
opinion of her day; while before the criticism in the
^ Palladium'appeared she had been more than a year
in her grave.''What a bad set the Bells must be V
says Charlotte, mocking at their critic. ^ What ap-
palling books they write ! To-day, as Emily appeared
a little easier, I thought the " Review " would amuse
her, so I read it aloud to her and Anne. As I sat be-
tween them at our quiet but now somewhat melancholy
fireside, I studied the two ferocious authors. Ellis, the
^^man of uncommon talents, but dogged, brutal, and
'Sydney DobeU's brilliant and sympathetic paper (which has been
republished in his Life and Works) is marred by the obstinacy with
which, in spite of the disclaimer in the preface to Shirley, he persists
in attributing both Wuthering Heights and Wildfdl Hall to Currer
Bell. But apart from this fundamental mistake, which betrays surely
a curious insensibility to the determining facts of style, the paper is
full of clear insight expressed in sharp and subtle phrase. It is the
language of a new criticism, while Miss Rigby^s article in the Quar-
terly ^ which preceded it by a few weeks, represents the narrow vigour
and violence of a declining school, the school of Croker and Lock-
hart
INTRODUCTION
morose/'sat leaning back in his easy - chair, drawing
his impeded breath as he best conld, and looking, alas I
piteonsly pale and wasted ; it is not his wont to laugh,
but he smiled, half amused and half in soom, as he lis-
tened. Acton was sewing ; no emotion ever stirs him
to loquacity ; so he only smiled too, dropping at the
same time a single word of calm amazement to hear
his character so darkly portrayed. I wonder what the
reviewer would have thought of his own sagacity,
could he have beheld the pair as I did.'*
Nevertheless, the'North American Review'was only
swimming with the stream, anticipating by a few
months the violence of the ^ Quarterly,'and expressing
the verdict of an overwhelming majority of the public.
Moreover, those among us of a later generation who
have now reached middle age can well remember that
while Charlotte Bronte was a name of magic to our
youth, and Mrs. Oaskell's wonderful biography had
stamped the stories and personalities of her two sisters
upon the inmost fibres of memory and pity,'Wuther-
ing Heights,'if we read it at all, was read in baste,
and with a prior sense of repulsion, which dropped a
veil between book and reader, and was in truth only
the result of an all but universal tenor of opinion
amongst our elders.
Indeed, Charlotte Bronte herself, in the touching
and eloquent preface which she wrote for a new edition
of'Wuthering Heights'in 1850, adopts a tone towards
her sister's work which contains more than a shade of
'First printed by Mr. Shorter in Charlotte Bronti and her Circle,
p. 169 The whole series of these Williams letters form an inyalua-
ble addition to our knowledge of the Brontes.
xvi WUTHERING HEIGHTS
apology. She ^scarcely thinks'that it is ^ right or ad-
visable to create beings like Heathcliff .'She admits
that the chisel which hewed him was rude and un-
taught. But she pleads that the book contains'at
least one element of grandeur — power ;'that there are
*'some glimpses of grace and gaiety* in the portrait of
the younger Catherine, and some touches of ^ a certain
strange beauty'in the fierceness of her mother, of a
redeeming honesty amid her perversity and passion.
She points out the wilfulness of the creative gift, and
the incalculable dominance that it acquires over the
artist. She vindicates her sister from the charge of
any personal association with the brutalities she de-
scribes.'She had scarcely more practical knowledge
of the people round her than a nun has of the country
folk who sometimes pass her convent gates.'For
Heathcliff she had no model but the'vision of her own
meditations.'And yet, as Charlotte persists, she knew
the North, and the moors, and the dwellers upon them,
with the sufficient knowledge of the artist ; and only
those will find her wholly unintelligible or repulsive
'to whom the inhabitants, the customs, the natural
characteristics of the outlying hills and hamlets in the
West Riding of Yorkshire are things alien and unfa-
miliar.'
Mrs. Gaskell's comments upon'Wuthering Heights'
betray a similar note of timidity.'They might be mis-
taken,'she says, speaking of Emily and Anne Bronte ;
Hhey might err in writing at all,'seeing that they
could not write otherwise; but all their work, she
pleads, was done in obedience to stern dictates of con-
science, and under the pressure of'hard and cruel
INTRODUCTION xvii
facts ;'by which are meant, of course, the facts con-
nected with BranweU Bronte.'All I say is, that never,
I believe, did women possessed of such wonderful gifts
exercise them with a fuller feeling of responsibility for
their use. As to mistakes, they stand now — as authors
as well as women — before the judgment-seat of God.'
One hears in these sentences, with their note of pro-
testing emotion, no less than in Charlotte's tender and
dignified defence, the echo of an angry public opinion,
indignant in the typical English way that any young
woman, and especially any clergyman's daughter, should
write of such unbecoming scenes and persons as those
which form the subject of * Wuthering Heights,'and
determined if it could to punish the offender.
But for us, fifty years later, how irrelevant are both
the attack and the defence ! One might as well plead
that Marlowe meant no harm by creating Tamburlaine,
or Victor Hugo in imagining Quasimodo or the fight
with the pieuvre^ or the central incident of * Le Koi
s'amuse.''Wuthering Heights'lives as great imagi-
nation, of which we must take the consequences, the
bad with the good ; and will continue to live, whether
it pleases us personally or no. Moreover, the book has
much more than a mere local or personal significance.
It belongs to a. particular European moment, and like
Charlotte's work, though not in the same way, it holds
a typical and representative place in the English litera-
ture of the century. If we look back upon the circum-
stances of its composition, the main facts seem to be
these.
iviii WUTHERING HEIGHTS
n
Emily Bronte, like her sister, inherited Celtic blood,
together with a stem and stoical tradition of daily life.
She was a wayward, imaginative girl, physically deli-
cate, brought up in loneliness and poverty, amid a
harsh yet noble landscape of hill, moor and stream.
Owing to the fact that her father had some literary
cultivation, and an Irish quickness of intelligence be-
yond that of his brother-clergy, this child of genius had
from the beginning a certain access to good books, and
through books and newspapers to the central world of
thought and of affairs. In 1827, when Emily was nine,
she and her sisters used to amuse themselves in the
wintry firelight by choosing imaginary islands to gov-
ern, and peopling them with famous men. Emily
chose the Isle of Arran, and for inhabitants Sir Walter
Scott and the Lockharts; while Charlotte chose the
Duke of Wellington and Christopher North. In 1829,
Charlotte, in a fragment of journal, describes the news-
papers taken by the familj'in those troubled days of
Catholic emancipation and reform, and lets us know
that a neighbour lent them'Blackwood's Magazine,'
Hhe most able periodical there is.'It was, indeed, by
the reading of'Blackwood'in its days of most influ-
ence and vigour, and, later, of'Eraser'(from 1832 ap-
parently), that the Bronte household was mainly kept
in touch with the current literature, the criticism,
poetry, and fiction of their day. During their eager,
enthusiastic youth the Bronte sisters, then, were readers
of Christopher North, Hogg, De Quincey, and Maginn
INTRODUCTION xix
in * Blackwood/ of Oarlyle's early essays and transla-
tions in ^ Fraser,'of Soott and Lockhart, no less than
of Wordsworth, Southey, and Coleridge. Charlotte
asked Sonthey for an opinion on her poems ; Bran well
did the same with Hartley Coleridge ; and no caref nl
reader of Emily Bronte's verse can fail to see in it the
fiery and decisive influence of S. T. C.
So mneh for the inflnences of youth. There can be
no question that they were'romantic'influences, and
it can be easily shown that among them were many
kindling sparks from that ^ nnextingnished hearth'of
German poetry and fiction which played so large a part
in English imagination during the first half of the
century. In 1800, Hannah More, protesting against the
Germamsing invasion, and soandalieed by the news that
Bchiller's ^ Rftuber'^ is now acting in England by per-
sons of quality,'sees, ^ with indignation and astonish-
ment, the Huns and Yandals once more overpowering
the Greeks and Bomans,'and English minds ^ hurried
back to the reign of Chaos and old Night by distorted
and unprincipled compositions, which, in spite of strong
flashes of genius, unite the taste of the Goths'with
the morals of the * road.'In 1880, Carlyle, quoting the
passage, and measuring the progress of English knowl-
edge and opinion, reports triumphantly *a rapidly grow-
ing favour for German literature.'^ There is no one
of our younger, more vigorous periodicals,'he says,
^but has its German craftsman gleaning what he can';
and for twenty years or more he himself did more than
any other single writer to bring the German and Eng.
lish worlds together. During the time that he was
writing and translating for the * Edinburgh,'the ^For-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
eign Review'and ^Fraser,'— in * Blackwood'also,
through the years when Charlotte and Emily Bronte,
then at the most plastio stage of thought and imagina-
tion, were delighting in it, one may find a constant
series of translations from the German, of articles on
German memoirs and German poets, and of literary re-
flections and estimates, which testify abundantly to
the vogue of all things Teutonic, both with men of let-
ters and the public. In 1840, ^ Maga,'in the inflated
phrase of the time, says, indeed, that the Germans are
aspiring ^ to wield the literary sceptre, with as lordly a
sway as ever graced the dynasty of Yoltaire. No one
who is even superficially acquainted with the floating
literature of the day can fail to have observed how
flauntingly long-despised Germanism spreads its phy-
lacteries on every side.'In the year before, (1839)
^ Blackwood'published a translation of Tieck's'Pietro
d'Abano,'a wild robber-and-magician story, of the type
which spread the love of monster and vampire, witch
and werewolf, through, a Europe tired for the moment
of eighteenth-century common-sense ; and, more impor-
tant still, a long section, excellently rendered, from
Goethe's ^ Dichtung und Wahrheit.'In that year
Emily Bronte was alone with her father and aunt at
Haworth, while her two sisters were teaching as gover-
nesses. ^Blackwood'came as usual, and one may
surely imagine the long, thin girl bending in the fire-
light over these pages from Goethe, receiving the im-
press of their lucidity, their charm, their sentiment and
^natural magic,'nourishing from them the vivid and
masterly intelligence which eight years later produced
* Wuthering Heights.'
INTRODUCTION
But she was to make a nearer acquaintanoe with
German thought and fancy than could be got from the
pages of ^ Blackwood'and ^ Fraser.'In 1842 she and
Charlotte journeyed to Brussels, and there a certain
divergence seems to have declared itself between the
literary tastes and affinities of the two sisters. While
Charlotte, who had already become an eager reader of
French books, and was at all times more ready to take
the colour of an environment than Emily, was carried,
by the teaching of M. H6ger acting upon her special
qualities and capacities, into that profounder apprecia-
tion of the French Bomantic spirit and method which
shows itself thenceforward in all her books, Emily set
herself against Brussels, against M. Heger, and against
the French models that he was constantly proposing to
the sisters. She was homesick and miserable ; her atti-
tude of mind was partly obstinacy, partly, perhaps, a
matter of instinctive and passionate preference. She
learnt German diligently, and it has alwaj^s been as-
sumed, though I hardly know on what first authority,
that she read a good deal of German fiction, and especial-
ly Hoif mann's tales, at Brussels. Certainly, we hear of
her in the following year, when she was once more at
Ha worth, and Charlotte was still at Brussels, as doing
her household work * with a German book open beside
her,'though we are not told what the books were;
and, as I learn from Mr. Shorter, there are indications
that the small library Emily left behind her contained
much German literature.
Two years later, Charlotte, in 1845, discovered the
poems which, at least since 1834, Emily had been writ-
ing. ^ It took hours/ says the elder sister^ ^ to reconcile
xxii WUTHERING HEiaHTS
her to the discovery I had made, and days to persaade
her that such poems merited publication.'But Char-
lotte prevailed, and in 1846 Messrs. Aylott & Jones
published the little volume of ^ Poems by Ourrer, Ellis,
and Acton Bell.'It obtained no success; but Hhe mere
effort to succeed,'says Charlotte,'had given a wonder-
ful zest to existence ; it must be pursued. We each set
to work on a prose tale : Ellis Bell produced'^ Wuther-
ing Heights, " Acton Bell " Agnes Grey, " and Currer
Bell also wrote a narrative in one volume'—'The Pro-
fessor.'For a year and a half * Wuthering Heights,'
in common with ^ Agnes Grey'and'The Professor,'
travelled wearily from publisher to publisher. At last
Messrs. !Newby accepted the first two. But they lin-
gered in the press for months, and'Wuthering Heights'
appeared at last, after the publication of'Jane Eyre,'
and amid the full noise of its fame, onlv to be re-
ceived as an earlier and cruder work of Ourrer Bell's,
for which even those who admired'Jane Eyre'could
find little praise and small excuse. Emily seems to
have shown not a touch of jealousy or discouragement.
She is not known, however, to have written anything
more than a few verses — amongst them, indeed, the im-
mortal'Last Lines'— later than'Wuthering Heights,'
and during the last year of her life she seems to have
given herself — true heart, and tameless soul ! — now to
supporting her wretched brother through the final
stages of his physical and moral decay, and now to
consultation with and sympathy for Charlotte in the
writing of'Shirley.'Branwell died in September, and
Emily was already ill on the day of his funeral. By
the middle of December, at the age of thirty, she was
INTRODUCTION xxiii
dead; the struggle of her iron will and passionate
vitaUty with hampering circumstances was over. The
story of that marvellous dying has been often told, by
Charlotte first of all, then by Mrs. Gaskell, and again
by Madame Darmesteter, in the vivid study of Emily
Sronte, which represents the homage of a new poetic
generation. Let us recall Charlotte^s poignant sen-
tences —
Never in all her life had she lingered over any task
that lay before her^ and she did not linger now. She sank
rapidly. She made haste to leave us. Yet while physi-
cally she i > eri8hed9 mentally she grew stronger than we
had yet known her. Day by day, when I saw with what
a front she met suffering, I looked on her with an anguish
of wonder and love. I have seen nothing like it ; but in-
deed I have never seen her parallel in anything. Stronger
than a man, simpler than a child, her nature stood alone.
The awful point was, that while full of ruth for others,
on herself she had no pity ; the spirit was inexorable to
the flesh ; from the trembling hand, the unnerved limbs,
the faded eyes, the same service was exacted as in health.
. . . She died December 19, 1848.
^ Stronger than a man, simpler than a child :'— these
words are Emily Sronte's true epitaph, both as an
artist and as a human being. Her strength of will and
imagination struck those who knew her and those who
read her as often inhuman or terrible ; and with this
was combined a simplicity partly of genius partly of a
strange innocence and spirituality, which gives her a
place apart in English letters. It is important to reat
ise that of the three books written simultaneously by
the three sistei^, Emily's alone shows genius already
ixiv WUTHERING HEIGHTS
matured and master of its tools. Charlotte had a steady
development before her, especially in matters of method
and style ; the comparative dulness of ^ The Professor/
and the crudities of ^ Jane Eyre'made way for the ac-
complished variety and brilliance of ^Yillette.'But
though Emily, had she lived, might have chosen many
happier subjects, treated with a more flowing unity
than she achieved in ^Wuthering Heights,'the full
competence of genius is already present in her book.
The common, hasty, didactic note that Charlotte often
strikes is never heard in ^ Wuthering Heights.'The
artist remains hidden and self-contained; the work,
however morbid and violent may be the scenes and
creatures it presents, has always that distinction which
belongs to high talent working solely for its own joy
and satisfaction, with no thought of a spectator, or any
aim but that of an ideal and imaginative whole. Char-
lotte stops to think of objectors, to teach and argue,
to avenge her own personal grievances, or cheat her
own personal longings. For pages together, she often
is little more than the clever clergyman's daughter,
with a sharp tongue, a dislike to Bitualism and Bo-
manism, a shrewd memory for persecutions and af-
fronts, and a weakness for that masterful lover of
whom most young women dream. Sut Emily is pure
mind and passion ; no one, from the pages of ^ Wuther-
ing Heights'can guess at the small likes and dislikes,
the religious or critical antipathies, the personal weak-
nesses of the artist who wrote it. She has that high-
est power — which was typically Shakespeare's power,
and which in our day is typically the power of such an
artist as Turgueniev— the power which gives life, in-
INTRODUCTION xxv
tensest life, to the creatares of imagination, and, in
doing so, endows them with an independence behind
which the maker is forgotten. The puppet show is
everything; and, till it is over, the manager — ^nothing.
And it is his delight and triumph to have it so.
Yet, at the same time,'Wuthering Heights'is a
book of the later Romantic movement, betraying the
influences of Oerman Romantic imagination, as Char-
lotte's work betrays the influences of Victor Hugo and
George Sand. The Romantic tendency to invent and
delight in monsters, the. eosaltation du moi^ which has
been said to be the secret of the whole Romantic revolt
against classical models and restraints; the love of
violence in speech and action, the preference for the
hideous in character and the abnormal in situation — of
all these there are abundant examples in ^ Wuthering
Heights.'The dream of Mr. Lockwood in Catherine's
box bed, when in the terror of nightmare he pulled the
wrist of the little wailing ghost outside on to the broken
glass of the window,'and rubbed it to and fro till the
blood ran down and soaked the bed-clothes'— one of
the most gruesome fancies of literature I — HeathclifTs
long and fiendish revenge on Hindley Eamshaw ; the
ghastly quarrel between Linton and Heathcliff in Cath-
erine's presence after HeathclifTs return; Catherine's
three days'fast, and her delirium when she ^ tore the
pillow with her teeth;'Heathcliff dashing his head
against the trees of her garden, leaving his blood
upon their bark, and'howling, not like a man, but
like a savage beast being goaded to death with knives
and spears;'the fight between Heathcliff and Earn-
shaw after Heathdiff's marriage to Isabella ; the kid-
icxn WtJTHERlKG HEIGHTS
napping of the younger Catherine, and the horror
rather suggested than described of fieathcliffs brutal-
ity towards his sickly son : — all these things would not
have been written precisely as they were written, but
for the ^ Germanism'of the thirties and forties, but for
the translations of ^ Blackwood'and ^ Fraser,'and but
for those German tales, whether of Hoffmann or others,
which there is evidence that Emily Bronte read both at
Brussels and after her return.
As to the ^ exaltation of the Self,'its claims, sensibil-
ities and passions, in defiance of all social law and duty,
there is no more vivid expression of it throughout Eo-
mantic literature than is contained in the conversation
between the elder Catherine and Nelly Dean before
Catherine marries Edgar Linton. And th« violent,
clashing egotisms of Heathcliff and Catherine in the
last scene of passion before Catherine's death, are as it
were an epitome of a whole genre in literature, and a
whole phase of European feeling.
Nevertheless, horror and extravagance are not really
the characteristic mark and quality of'Wuthering
Heights.'If they were, it would have no more claim
upon us than a hundred other forgotten books — Lady
Caroline Lamb's ^Glenarvon'amongst them — which
represent the dregs and refuse of a great literary move-
ment. As in the case of Charlotte Bronte, the peculiar
force of Emily's work lies in the fact that it represents
the grafting of a European tradition upon a mind al-
ready richly stored with English and local reality, pos-
sessing at command a style at once strong and simple,
capable both of homeliness and magnificence. The
form of Romantic imagination which influenced Emily
INTRODUCTION xivii
was not the same as that which influenced Charlotte ;
whether from a secret stubbornness and desire of dif-
ference, or no, there is not a mention of the French
language, or of French books, in Emily's work, while
Charlotte's abounds in a kind of display of French
affinities, and French scholarship. The dithyrambs of
'Shirley'and'Villette,'the * Vision of Eve'of'Shir-
ley,'and the description of Rachel in'Yillette,'would
have been impossible to Emily ; they come to a great
extent from the reading of Victor Hugo and G^rge
Sand. But in both sisters there is a similar fond% of
stem and simple realism ; a similar faculty of observSr
tion at once shrewd, and passionate ; and it is by these
that they produce their ultimate literary effect. The
difference between them is almost wholly in Emily's
favour. The uneven, amateurish manner of so many
pages in ^ Jane Eyre'and * Shirley;'the lack of liter-
ary reticence which is responsible for Charlotte's fre-
quent intrusion of her own personality, and for her oc-
casional temptations to scream and preach, which are
not wholly resisted even in her masterpiece * Villette;'
the ugly tawdry sentences which disfigure some of her
noblest passages, and make quotation from her so diffi-
cult : — you will find none of these things in'Wuther-
ing Heights.'Emily is never flurried, never self-con-
scious; she is master of herself at the most rushing
moments of feeling or narrative ; her style is simple,
sensuous, adequate and varied from first to last ; she
has fewer purple patches than Charlotte, but at its
best, her msight no less than her power of phrase, is of
a diviner and more exquisite quality.
xxviii WUTHERING HEIGHTS
III
'Wuthering Heights'then is the product of roman-
tic imagination, working probably under inflaences
from German literatare, and marvellously fused with
local knowledge and a realistic power which, within its
own range, has seldom been surpassed. Its few great
faults are soon enumerated. The tendency to extrava-
gance and monstrosity may, as we have seen, be taken
to some extent as belonging more to a literary fashion
than to the artist. Tieck and Hoffmann are full of rav-
ing and lunatic beings who sob, shout, tear out their
hair by the roots, and live in a perpetual state of per-
sonal violence both towards themselves and their neigh-
bours. Emily Bronte probably received from them an
additional impulse towards a certain wildness of manner
and conception which was already natural to her Irish
blood, to a woman brought up amid the solitudes of the
moors and the ruggedness of Yorkshire life fifty years
ago, and natural also» alas I to the sister of the opium-
eater and drunkard Branwell Bronte.
To this let us add a certain awkwardness and con-
fusion of structure ; a strain of ruthless exaggeration
in the character of Heathcliff; and some absurdities
and contradictions in the character of Nelly Dean.
The latter criticism indeed is bound up with the first.
Nelly Dean is presented as the faithful and affectionate
nurse, the only good angel both of the elder and the
younger Catherine. But Nelly Dean does the most
treacherous, cruel, and indefensible things, simply that
'the story may move. She becomes the go-between for
INTRODUCTION xxix
CatberiDe and Heathcliff; she knowingly allows her
charge Catherine, on the eve of her confinement, to
fast in solitade and delirium for three days and nights,
without saying a word to Edgar Linton, Catherine's
affectionate husband, and her master, who was in the
house all the time. It is her breach of trust which
brings about Catherine's dying scene with Heathcliff,
just as it is her disobedience and unfaith which really
betray Catherine's child into the hands of her enemies.
Without these lapses and indiscretions indeed the story
could not maintain itself ; but the clumsiness or care-
lessness of them is hardly to be denied. In the case
of Heathcliff, the blemish lies rather in a certain de-
liberate and passionate defiance of the reader's sense of
humanity and possibility; partly also in the innocence
of the writer, who, in a world of sex and passion, has
invented a situation charged with the full forces of
both, without any true realisation of what she has
done. Heathcliff's murderous language to Catherine
about the husband whom she loves with an affection
only second to that which she cherishes for his hateful
self; his sordid and incredible courtship of Isabella
under Catherine's eyes ; the long horror of his pursuit
and capture of the younger Catherine, his dead love's
child; the total incompatibility between his passion
for the mother and his mean ruffianism towards the
daughter; the utter absence of any touch of kindness
even in his love for Catherine, whom he scolds and
rates on the very threshold of death ; the mingling in
him of high passion with the vilest arts of the sharper
and the thief: — these things o'erleap themselves, so
that again and again the sense of tragedy is lost in
WUTHEltlNG HEIGHTS
mere violence and excess, and what might have been
a man becomes a monster. There are speeches and
actions of Catherine's, moreover, contained in these
central pages which have no relation to any life of
men and women that the true world knows. It may
be said indeed that the writer's very ignorance of cer-
tain facts and relations of life, combined with the force
of imaginative passion which she throws into her con-
ceptions, produces a special poetic effect — a strange
and bodiless tragedy — unique in literature. And there
is much truth in this ; but not enough to vindicate these
scenes of the book, from radical weakness and falsity,
nor to preserve in the reader that ^illusion, that inner
consent, which is the final test of all imaginative effort.
IV
Nevertheless there are whole sections of the story
during which the character of Heathcliff is presented
to us with a marvellous and essential truth. The scenes
of childhood and youth ; the up - growing of the two
desolate children, drawn to each other by some strange
primal sympathy, Heathcliff ^the little black thing,
harboured by a good man to his bane,'Catherine who
^ was never so happy as when we were all scolding her
at once, and she defying us with her bold saucy look,
and her ready words ;'the gradual development of the
natural distance between them, he the ill - mannered
ruffianly no - man's - child, she the young lady of the
house; his pride and jealous pain; her young fondness
for Edgar Linton, as inevitable as a girl's yearning for
INTRODtJCTION
pretty finery, and a new frock with the spring ; Heath-
cliflPs boyish vow of vengeance on the brutal Hindley
and his race; Cathy's passionate discrimination, in the
scene with Nelly Dean which ends as it were the first
act of the play, between her affection for Linton and
her identity with HeatholiflF's life and being: — for the
mingling of daring poetry with the easiest and most
masterly command of local truth, for sharpness and
felicity of phrase, for exuberance of creative force, for
invention and freshness of detail, there are few things
in English fiction to match it. One might almost say
that the first volume of ^ Adam Bede'is false and man-
nered beside it, — the first volumes of * Waverley'or
'Guy Mannering'flat and diiluse. Certainly, the first
volume of'Jane Eyre,'admirable as it is, can hardly be
set on the same level with the careless ease and effort-
less power of these first nine chapters. There is al-
most nothing in them but shares in the force and the
effect of all true'vision'— Joseph,'the wearisomest
self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to
rake the promises to himself, and fling the curses to his
neighbours;'old Earnshaw himself, stupid, obstinate
and kindly ; the bullying Hindley with his lackadaisi-
cal consumptive wife ; the delicate nurture and superior
wealth of the Lintons ; the very animals of the farm,
the very rain- and snow-storms of the moors, — all live,
all grow together, like the tangled heather itself, harsh
and gnarled and ugly in one aspect, in another beauti-
ful by its mere unfettered life and freedom, capable
too of wild moments of colour and blossoming.
And as far as the lesser elements of style, the mere
technique of writing are concerned, one may notice the
xxxii WUTHERING HEIGHTS
short elastic vigour of the sentences, the rightness of
epithet and detail, the absence of any care for effect,
and the flashes of beauty which suddenly emerge like
the cistus upon the rock.
'Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams P said Cathe-
rine suddenly, after some minutes^ reflection.
* Yes, now and then,'I answered.
^And so do I. Fve dreamt in my life dreams that
have stayed with me ever after and changed my ideas :
theyVe gone through and through me like wine through
water, and altered the colour of my mind. And this one ;
I'm going to tell it — ^but take care not to smile at any part
of it.'
Kelly Dean tries to avoid the dream, but Oatherine
persists : —
'I dreamt once that I was in heaven.'
'I tell you I won't hearken to your dreams. Miss Cath-
erine ! I'll go to bed,'I interrupted again.
She laughed, and held me down ; for I made a motion
to leave my chair.
'This is nothing,'cried she :'I was only going to say
that heaven did not seem to be my home ; and I broke
my heart with weeping to come back to earth ; and the
angels were so angry that they flung me out into the mid-
dle of the heath on the top of Wnthering Heights ; where
I woke sobbing for joy ! That will do to explain my secret,
as well as the other. I've no more business to marry Ed-
gar Linton than I have to be in heaven ; and if the wicked
man in there had not brought Heathcliff so low, I shouldn't
have thought of it. It would degrade me to marry Heath-
cliff now ; so he shall never know how I love him : and
that, not because he's handsome, Nelly, but because he's
more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of.
INTRODUCTION xxxiii
his and mine are the same ; and Linton's is as different as
a moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'
^Tbe angels flung me out into the middle of the
heath — where I woke sobbing for joy'— the wild words
have in them the very essence and life-blood not only
of Catherine but of her creator 1
The inferior central scenes of the book, after Cathe-
rine's marriage, for all their teasing faults, have pas-
sages of extraordinary poetry. Take the detail of
Catherine's fevered dream after she shuts herself into
her room, at the close of the frightful scene between
her husband and Heathcliff, or the weird realism of her
half-delirious talk with Nelly Dean. In her'feverish
bewilderment'she tears her pillow, and then finds
childish diversion in pulling the feathers from the rents
she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet accord-
ing to their different species: her mind had strayed to
other associations.
'That's a turkey's/ she murmured to herself;'and
this is a wild duck's ; and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they
put pigeons'feathers in the pillows — no wonder I couldn't
die I Let me take care to throw it on the floor when I lie
down. And here is a moor-cock's; and this — I should
know it among a thousand — ^it's a lapwing's. Bonny bird ;
wheeling over our heads in the middle of the moor. It
wanted to get to its nest, for the clouds had touched the
swells, and it felt rain coming. This feather was picked
up from the heath, the bird was not shot : we saw its nest
in the winter, full of little skeletons. Heathcliff set a trap
over it, and the old ones dared not come. I made him
promise he'd never shoot a lapwing after that, and he
didn't. Yes, here are more ! Did he shoot my lapwings,
Nelly ? Are they red, any of them ? Let me look.'
zxxiT WUTHER1N6 HEIGHTS
* Give over with that baby^work V I interra pted, d ragging
the pillow away, and tnming the holes towards the mat-
tress, for she was removing its contents by handf uls.'Lie
down, and shut your eyes : yonVe wandering. There's a
mess ! The down is flying aboat like snow/
I went here and there collecting it.
^I see in yoa, Nelly/ she continued, dreamily,'an aged
woman: yon have grey hair and bent shoulders. This
bed is the fairy cave under Penistone Crags, and you are
gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers; pretending, while
I am near, that they are only locks of wool. That's what
you'll come to fifty years hence : I know you are not so
now. I'm not wandering : you're mistaken, or else I should
believe you really were that withered hag, and I should
think I was under Penistone Crags ; and I'm conscious
it's night, and there are two candles on the table making
the black press shine like jet.'
To these may be added the charming and tender
passage describing Catherine's early convalescence, and
her yearnings — so true to such a child of nature and
feeling — for the first flowers and first mild breathings of
the spring ; and the later picture of her, the wrecked
and doomed Catherine, sitting in'dreamy and melan-
choly softness'by the open window, listening for the
sounds of the moorland, before the approach of Heath-
cliff and death : —
»
Oimmerton chapel bells were still ringing ; and the full
mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothingly on
the ear. It was a sweet substitute for the yet absent mur-
mur of the summer foliage, which drowned that music
about the Orange when the trees were in leaf. At Wuther-
ing Heights it always sounded on quiet days following a
great thaw or a season of steady rain.
INTRODUCTION
Lines which, for their'sharp and eager observation/
may surely be matched with these of Coleridge, her
master in poetic magic, her inferior in all that concerns
the passionate and dramatic sense of life : —
All is stilU
A balmy night I and thongh the stars be dim,
Tet let us think upon the vernal showers
That gladden the green earth, and we shall find
A pleasure in the dimness of the stars.
Of what we may call the third and last act of
'Wutbering Heights,'which extends from the child-
hood of the younger Catherine to the death of Heath-
chff, much might be said. It is no less masterly than
the first section of the book and much more complex
in plan. The key to it lies in two earlier passages — in
HeathcliflTs boyish vow of vengence on Hindley Earn*
shaw, and in his fierce appeal to his lost love to haunt
him, rather than leave him'in this abyss where I
cannot find her.'The conduct of the whole'act'is
intricate and difficult; the initial awkwardness implied
in Nelly Dean's function as narrator is felt now and
then ; but as a whole, the strength of the intention is no
less clear than the deliberate and triumphant power
with which the artist achieves it. These chapters are
not always easy to read, but they repay the closest at-
tention. Not an incident, not a fragment of conversa-
tion is thrown away, and in the end the effect is com-
WUTHKRING HEIGHTS
plete. It is gained by that fusion of terror and beauty,
of ugliness and a flying magic—'settling unawares'—
which is the characteristic note of the Brontes, and of
ail that is best in Romantic literature. Never for a
moment do you lose hold upon the Yorkshire landscape
and the Yorkshire folk — look at the picture of Isabella's
wasteful porridge - making and of Joseph's grumbling
rage, amid her gruesome experience as a bride ; never
are you allowed to forget a single sordid element in
HeathclifTs ruffianism ; and yet through it all the in-
evitable end developes, the double end which only a
master could have conceived. lafe and love rebel and
reassert themselves in the wild slight love - story of
S[areton and Cathy, which break the final darkness
like a gleam of dawn upon the moors; and death
tames and silences for ever all that remains of Heath-
cliff's futile cruelties and wasted fury.
But what a death 1 Heathcliff has tormented and
oppressed Catherine's daughter; and it is Catherine's
shadow that lures him to his doom, through every stage
and degree of haunting feverish ecstasy, of reunion
promised and delayed, of joy for ever offered and for
ever withdrawn. And yet how simple the method,
how true the * vision'to the end ! Around Heathcliff's
last hours the farm -life flows on as usual. There is
no hurry in the sentences ; no blurring of the scene.
Catherine's haunting presence closes upon the man
who murdered her happiness and youth, interposes
between him and all bodily needs, deprives him of
food and drink and sleep, till the madman is dead of
his ^strange happiness,'straining after the phantom
that slays him, dying of the love whereby alone he
INTRODUCTION xxxvii
remains haman, through which fate strikes at last —
and strikes home.
'Is he a ghoul or vampire ?'I mused. ^ I had read
of such hideous incarnate demons.'So says Nelly
Dean just before HeathclifiTs death. The remark is
not hers in truth, but Emily Bronte's, and where it
stands it is of great significance. It points to the
world of German horror and romance, to which we
know that she had access. That world was congenial
to her, as it was congenial to Southey, Scott, and Cole-
ridge ; and it has left some ugly and disfiguring traces
upon the detail of'Wuthering Heights.'But essen-
tially her imagination escaped from it and mastered it.
As the haunting of Heathcliff is to the coarser horrors
of Tieck and Hoffmann, so is her place to theirs. For
all her crudity and inexperience, she is in the end with
Goethe, rather than with Hoffmann,'and thereby with
all that is sane, strong, and living in literature. ^ A
great work requires many-sidediiess, and on this rock
the young author splits,'said Goethe to Eckermann,
1 For any one who has waded through Hoffmann's Serapion-brOdtr
— which has become for our generation all but unreadable, — in spite
of the partial explanation which the phyricod tiolerice of these tales
may perhaps offer of some of the minor detail of Wttthering HeighU,
there is only one passage wliich memory will in the end connect with
Emily Bronte. The leading Idea of the stories which make up the
Senipion - collection — if they can be said to have a leading idea — [a
tltat all which the imagination really sees — man or goblin, monster or
reality — it may lawfully report. *Let each of us try and examine
himself well, as whether he has really seen what he is going to de-
scribe, before he sets to work to put it in words/ The vividness of
the Romantics, — as compared with the measure of the Classicalists ;
there is here a typical expression of it, and it is one which may weU
have lingered in Emily Bronte's mind. «
xxxviii WUTHER1N6 HEIGHTS
praising at the same time the art which starts from
the simplest realities and the subject nearest at hand,
to reach at last by a natural expansion the loftiest
heights of poetry. But this was the art of Emily
Bronte. It started from her own heart and life; it
was nourished by the sights and sounds of a lonely
yet sheltering nature; it was responsive to the art of
others, yet always independent ; and in the rich and
tangled truth of'Wuthering Heights'it showed prom-
ise at least of a many-sidedness to which only the great-
est attain.
VI
But death oame, swift and unforeseen. The artist
sank —
Baffled, unknown, self -consumed, —
and her place has but slowly defined itself among us.
To its final determination we have to bring of course
not only * Wuthering Heights,'but the poems which
were printed in the volume of 1846, as well as those
which Charlotte selected and published after Emily's
death. In the volume of 1846 there are twenty-two
poems by Ellis Bell, and in the later selections seven-
teen. Of these it is now recognised that at least six
or seven belong — in spite of some technical blemishes —
to what is noblest and most vital in JEnglish verse.
Like Coleridge, she wrote much that is of no account ;
and if nothing that she did can claim a place beside the
* Ancient Mariner'and'Christabel,'she strikes at her
highest a note of concentrated passion of which Cole-
s
INTRODUCTION xxtix
ridge was not capable. The poem written in her six*
teenth year in the school-room at Roehead has already
the mastery which distinguishes her verse from her
sister's, which marks out ^ Wuthering Heights'from the
^ Professor,'and remains with any discriminating reader
as the dominant impression of her work : —
Still as I mused, the naked room.
The alien firelight died away;
And from the midst of cheerless gloom
I passed to bright, anclouded day.
A little and a lone green lane
That opened on a common wide ;
A distant, dreamy, dim bine chain
Of mountains circling every side :
A heaven so clear, an earth so calm.
So sweet, so soft, so hushed an air ;
And, deepening still the dream-like charm^
Wild moor-sheep feeding everywhere.
Is there a word to add, or a word to take away?
For any lover and child of the North in particular, is
not every verse steeped in suggestion, which produces
that'frisson jusqu'i la moelle des os,'which, as M.
Soberer tells us, a Frenchman gets from the mere sound
of Racine ?
The tender, unequal lines called'A Wanderer from
the Fold'are less well known, but no one who is
acquainted with the history of Bran well Bronte and
of Emily's sorrow for him can read them without emo-
tion, so true they are to one of the commonest and
deepest griefs of the human spirit. There is an echo
x\ WUTHERING HEIGHTS
of Byron in them — the Bjron of the poems toThyrza:
but it is their personal truth, their root in reality, what
Goethe would call their ^occasional'quality, that pre-
serves them. In the two noble poems ^Kemembranoe'
and'Death,'we have her gift at its greatest — im-
passioned feeling speaking through adequate and im-
passioned form; while in'The Visionary'one might
almost dream that one had Emily*s last word to that
guardian power of poetry, to which she and her sisters
owed all the joy of their frail lives.
Bnrn^ then, little lamp ; glimmer straight and clear.
Hush ! a rustling wing stirs^ methinks, the air.
He for whom I wait thus ever comes to me ;
Strange power I I trust thy might ; trust thou my
constancy I
Yet not the last word of her hidden, her profoundest
self I That is contained in the wonderful poem —
Whose too bold dying song
Shook, like a clarion-blast^ my soul —
in the verses now called ^ Last Lines,'which Charlotte
discovered in the writer's desk after her death. Emily's
religious faith was a mVstery in life, but in dying she
gave it voice, and it is the voice of her century — a cry
in which is summed up, as it were, the sound of many
waters, and the last but sufficient consolation of in«
numerable souls.
Mast A. Wabd.
CONTENTS
PA»B
BIOGRAPHICAL KOTIGE OF ELLIS AND AOTOK BELL,
BY CUBBEB BELL zliii
CURBEB BELL'S PBEFACE TO * WUTHEBINa HEIGHTS'liii
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS, BT ELLIS BELL .... 1
AGNES GRET, BY AOTON BELL 861
CHAPtKB
I. Thb Pabsonagb 865
n. FiBST Lbssons in thb Abt of Inbtbuotion • . 808
m. A FEW MOBB Lbssons 876
IV. Thb Gbandkamma 888
y. Thb Unglb 898
YI. Thb Pabsonagb again 405
VIL HOBTON LODOB 411
Vm. Thb'GoioNa Out > 427
IX. Thb Ball 480
X. Thb Ohitboh » . . 485
XI. Thb Cottagbbs 441
XII. Thb Showbb 466
viii CONTENTS
AGNES OiBEY—^onimusd.
CHAFim TAQM
Xin. Thb Pbimbosbs 461
XIV. The Bhctob 469
XY. Thi Walk 488
XVI. Thb Substitution 491
XYII. CONFBSSIONB . . . ^ ... 495
XYIII. MlBTH AND MOUBNINO 606
XIX. Thb Lbttbb 616
XX. Thb Fabbwbll 520
XXI. Thb School 536
XXn. Thb Visif 582
XXTTT. The Pabk 541
XXIY. Thb Sands 545
XXy. Conclusion .••••••• 652
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE
OF
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL
It hae been thonght that all the works published under the
names of Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell were, in reality, the
production of one person. This mistake I endeavoured to
rectify by a few words of disclaimer prefixed to the third
edition of'Jane Eyre/ These, too, it appears, failed to gain
general credence, and now, on the occasion of a reprint of
'Wuthering Heights'and'Agnes Grey,'I am advised dis-
tinctly to state how the case really stands.
Indeed, I feel myself that it is time the obscurity attend-
ing those two names — Ellis and Acton — ^was done away.
The little mystery, which formerly yielded some harmless
pleasure, has lost its interest ; circumstances are changed.
It becomes, then, my duty to explain briefly the origin and
authorship of the books written by Gurrer, Ellis, and Acton
BelL
About five years ago, my two sisters and myself, after a
somewhat prolonged period of separation, found ourselves
reunited, and at home. Besident in a remote district, where
education had made little progress, and where, consequently,
tbere was no inducement to seek social intercourse beyond
xliv BIOGBAPHICAL NOTICE OP
our own domestio oirole, we were wholly dependent on
ourselyes and each other, on books and study, for the enjoy-
ments and occupations of life. The highest stimulus, as
weU as the liveliest pleasure we had known from childhood
upwards, lay in attempts at literary composition ; formerly
we used to show each other what we wrote, but of late years
this habit of communication and consultation had been dis-
continued ; hence it ensued, that we were mutually ignorant
of the progress we might respectively have made.
One day, in the autumn of 1846, 1 accidentally lighted on
a MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily's handwriting.
Of course, I was not surprised, knowing that she could and
did write verse : I looked it over, and something more than
surprise seized me — ^a deep conviction that these were not
common effusions, nor at all like the poetry women generally
write. I thought them condensed and terse, vigorous and
genuine. To my ear they had also a peculiar music — wild,
melancholy, and elevating.
My sister Emily was not a person of demonstrative
character, nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings
even those nearest and dearest to her could, with impunity,
intrude unlicensed ; it took hours to reconcile her to the
discovery I had made, and days to persuade her that such
poems merited publication. I knew, however, that a mind
like hers could not be without some latent spark of honour-
able ambition, and refused to be discouraged in my attempts
to fan that spark to flame.
Meantime, my younger sister quietly produced some of
her own compositions, intimating that, since Emily's had
given me pleasure, I might like to look at hers. I could not
but be a partial judge, yet I thought that these verses, too,
had a sweet, sincere pathos of their owzl
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL xlv
We had very early cherished the dream of one day be-
ooming anthors. This dream, never relinquished even when
distance divided and absorbing tasks occupied us, now
suddenly acquired strength and consistency: it took the
character of a resolve. We agreed to arrange a small selec-
tion of our poems, and, if possible, to get them printed.
Averse to personal publicity, we veiled our own names under
those of Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell ; the ambiguous choice
being dictated by a sort of conscientious scruple at assuming
Christian names positively masculine, while we did not like
to declare ourselves women, because — without at that time
suspecting that our mode of writing and thinking was not
what is called'feminine'— ^we had a vague impression that
authoresses are liable to be looked on with prejudice ; we
had noticed how critics sometimes use for their chastisement
the weapon of personality, and for their reward, a flattery,
which is not true praise.
The bringing out of our little book was hard work. As
was to be expected, neither we nor our poems were at all
wanted ; but for this we had been prepared at the outset ;
though inexperienced ourselves, we had read the experience
of others. The great puzzle lay in the difficulty of getting
answers of any kind from the publishers to whom we
applied. Being greatly harassed by this obstacle, I ven-
tured to apply to the Messrs. Chambers, of Edinburgh, for a
word of advice ; they may have forgotten the circumstance,
but I have not, for from them I received a brief and busi-
ness-like, but civil and sensible reply, on which we acted,
and at last made a way.
The book was printed : it is scarcely known, and all of
it that merits to be known are the poems of Ellis Bell.
The fixed conviction I held, and hold, of the worth of these
zlTi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF
poems has not indeed reoeiyed the confirmation of mnoh
favourable oritiGism ; bat I must retain it notwithstanding.
ni-sucoess failed to crash as : the mere e£E6rt to succeed
had given a wonderful zest to existence ; it must be pur-
sued. We each set to work on a prose tale : Ellis Bell pro-
duced'Wuthering Heights/ Acton Bell'Agnes Grey/ and
Currer Bell also wrote a narrative in one volume. These
MSS. were perseveringly obtruded upon various pub-
lishers for the space of a year and a half ; usually, their fate
was an ignominious and abrupt dismissal.
At last'Wuthering Heights'and'Agnes Grey'were
accepted on terms somewhat impoverishing to the two
authors ; Currer Bell's book found acceptance nowhere, nor
any acknowledgment of merit, so that something like the
chill of despair began to invade her heart. As a forlorn hope,
she tried one publishing house more — Messrs. Smith, Elder
and Co. Ere long, in a much shorter space than that on
which experience had taught her to calculate — there came a
letter, which she opened in the dreary expectation of finding
two hard, hopeless lines, intimating that Messrs. Smith,
Elder and Co.'were not disposed to publish the MS.,'and,
instead, she took out of the envelope a letter of two pages.-
She read it trembling. It declined, indeed, to publish that
tale, for business reasons, but it discussed its merits and de-
merits so courteously, so considerately, in a spirit so rational,
with a discrimination so enlightened, that this very refusal
cheered the author better than a vulgarly expressed accept-
ance would have done. It was added, that a work in three
volumes would meet with careful attention.
I was then just completing'Jane Eyre,'at which I had
been working while the one-volume tale was plodding its
weary round in London: in three weeks I sent it o£F;
BLUB AND ACTON BELL xlvii
friendly and akilful hands took it in. This was in the
oommencement of September, 1847 ; it came out before the
dose of October following, while'Wuthering Heights'and
'Agnes Grey/ my sisters'works, which had already been in
the press for months, still lingered under a di£Eiarent manage-
ment.
They appeared at last. Critics failed to do them justice.
The immature but very real powers revealed in'Wuthering
Heights'were scarcely recognised ; its import and nature
were misunderstood ; the identity of its author was misre-
presented ; it was said that this was an earlier and ruder
attempt of the same pen which had produced'Jane Eyre.'
Unjust and grievous error ! We laughed at it at first, but I
deeply lament it now. Hence, I fear, arose a prejudice
against the book. That writer who could attempt to palm
off an inferior and immature production under cover of one
successful effort, must indeed be unduly eager after the
secondary and sordid result of authorship, and pitiably in-
different to its true and honourable meed. If reviewers and
the public truly believed this, no wonder that they looked
darkly on the cheat.
Yet I must not be understood to make these things sub-
ject for reproach or complaint ; I dare not do so ; respect for
my sister's memory forbids me. By her any such querulous
manifestation would have been regarded as an unworthy and
offensive weakness.
It is my duty, as well as my pleasure, to acknowledge
one exception to the general rule of criticism. One writer,^
endowed with the keen vision and fine sympathies of genius,
has discerned the real nature of'Wuthering Heights,'and
has, with equal accuracy, noted its beauties and touched on
> See the PaUadMm for September 1860.
xlviii BIOGBAPHIGAL NOTICE OP
its faults. Too often do reviewers remind us of the mob of
Astrologers, CSialdeans, and Soothsayers gathered before the
* writing on the wall/ and unable to read the characters or
make known the interpretation. We have a right to rejoioe
when a true seer comes at last, some man in whom is an ex-
cellent spirit, to whom have been given light, wisdom, and
understanding ; who can accurately read the'Mene, Mene,
Tekel, XJpharsin'of an original mind (however unripe, how-
ever inefficiently cultured and partially expanded that mind
may be) ; and who can say with confidence,'This is the in-
terpretation thereof. .
Yet even the writer to whom I allude shares the mistake
about the authorship, and does me the injustice to suppose
that there was equivoque in my former rejection of this
honour (as an honour I regard it). May I assure him that I
would scorn in this and in every other case to deal in
equivoque; I believe language to have been given us to
make our meaning clear, and not to wrap it in dishonest
doubt?
'The Tenant of Wildfell Hall,'by Acton Bell, had like-
wise an unfavourable reception. At this I cannot wonder.
The choice of subject was an entire mistake. Nothing less
congruous with the writer's nature could be conceived. The
motives which dictated this choice were pure, but, I think,
slightly morbid. She had, in the course of her life, been
called on to contemplate, near at hand, and for a long time, the
terrible effects of talents misused and faculties abused : hers
was naturally a sensitive, reserved, and dejected nature ; what
she saw sank very deeply into her mind ; it did her harm.
She brooded over it till she believed it to be a duty to repro-
duce every detail (of course with fictitious characters, incidents,
and situations), as a warning to others. She hated her work,
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL
bat would pursue it. When reasoned with on the subject,
she regarded suoh reasonings as a temptation to self -indul-
gence. She must be honest ; she must not varnish, soften,
nor oonceaL This weU-meant resolution brought on her
misconstruction, and some abuse, which she bore, as it was
her custom to bear whatever was unpleasant, with mild,
steady patience. She was a very sincere and practical
Christian, but the tinge of religious melancholy communi-
cated a sad shade to her brief, blameless life.
Neither Ellis nor Acton allowed herself for one moment
to sinkunder want of encouragement ; energy nerved the one,
and endurance upheld the other. They were both prepared
to try again ; I would fain think that hope and the sense of
power were yet strong within them. But a great change
approached ; afiSiction came in that shape which to anticipate
is dread; to look back on, grief. In the very heat and
burden of the day, the labourers failed over their work.
My sister Emily jGirst declined. The details of her illness
are deep-branded in my memory, but to dwell on them,
either in thought or narrative, is not in my power. Never
in all her life had she lingered over any task that lay before
her, and she did not linger now. She sank rapidly. She
made haste to leave us. Yet, while physically she perished,
mentally she grew stronger than we had yet known her.
Day by day, when I saw with what a front she met sufifering,
I looked on her with an anguish of wonder and love. I have
seen nothing like it; but, indeed, I have never seen her
parallel in anything. Stronger than a man, simpler than a
child, her nature stood alone. The awful point was, that
while full of ruth for others, on herself she had no pity;
the spirit was inexorable to the flesh ; from the trembling
hand, the tmnerved limbs, the faded eyes, the same service
I BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF
was exacted as they had rendered in health. To stand by
and witness this, and not dare to remonstrate, was a pain no
words can render.
Two cruel months of hope and fear passed painfully by,
and the day came at last when the terrors and pains of death
were to be undergone by this treasure, which had grown
dearer and dearer to our hearts as it wasted before our eyes.
Towards the decline of that day, we had nothing of Emily
but her mortal remains as consumption left them. She died
December 19, 1848.
We thought this enough : but we were utterly and pre-
sumptuously wrong. She was not buried ere Anne fell ill.
She had not been committed to the grave a fortnight, before
we received distinct intimation that it was necessary to
prepare our minds to see the younger sister go after the elder.
Accordingly, she followed in the same path with slower step,
and with a patience that equalled the other's fortitude. I
have said that she was religious, and it was by leaning on
those Christian doctrines in which she firmly believed,
that she found support through her most painful journey. I
witnessed their efficacy in her latest hour and greatest trial,
and must bear my testimony to the calm triumph with which
they brought her through. She died May 28, 1849.
What more shall I say about them ? I cannot and need
not say much more. In externals, they were two unobtrusive
women ; a perfectly secluded life gave them retiring manners
and habits. In Emily's nature the extremes of vigour and
simplicity seemed to meet. Under an unsophisticated
culture, inartificial tastes, and an unpretending outside, lay
a secret power and fire that might have informed the brain
and kindled the veins of a hero ; but she had no worldly
wisdom ; her powers wore unadapted to the practical business
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL H
of life ; she would fail to defend her most manifeBt rights,
to consult her most legitimate advantage. An interpreter
ought always to have stood between her and the world. Her
will was not very flexible, and it generally opposed her
interest. Her temper was magnanimous, but warm and
sudden ; her spirit altogether unbending.
Anne's character was milder and more subdued; she
wanted the power, the Are, the originality of her sister, but
was well endowed with quiet virtues of her own. Long-
sufiFering, self-denying, reflective, and intelligent, a constitu-
tional reserve and taciturnity placed and kept her in the
shade, and covered her mind, and especially her feelings,
with a sort of nun-like veil, which was rarely lifted. Neither
Emily nor Anne was learned ; they had no thought of filling
their pitchers at the well-spring of other minds ; they always
wrote from the impulse of nature, the dictates of intuition,
and from such stores of observation as their limited expe-
rience had enabled them to amass. I may sum up all by
saying, that for strangers they were nothing, for superficial
observers less than nothing ; but for those who had known
them all their lives in the intimacy of dose relationship, they
were genuinely good and truly great.
This notice has been written because I felt it a sacred
duty to wipe the dust off their gravestones, and leave their
dear names free from soil.
GUBBEB BELL.
September 19, 1860.
EDITOR'S PREFACE
TO THE NEW EDITION OF
'WUTHERING HEIGHTS'
I HAVB just read over'Wuthering Heights/ and, for the first
time, have obtained a clear glimpse of what are termed (and,
perhaps, really are) its faults ; have gained a definite notion
of how it appears to other people — to strangers who knew
nothing of the author ; who are unacquainted with the locality
where the scenes of the story are laid ; to whom the inhabi-
tants, the customs, the natural characteristics of the outlying
hills and hamlets in the West Biding of Yorkshire are things
alien and unfamiliar.
To all such'Wuthering Heights'must appear a rude
and strange production. The wild moors of the North of
England can for them have no interest : the language, the
manners, the very dwellings and household customs of the
scattered inhabitants of those districts must be to such
readers in a great measure unintelligible, and — where
intelligible — ^repulsive. Men and women who, perhaps,
naturally very calm, and with feelings moderate in degree,
and little marked in kind, have been trained from their
cradle to observe the utmost evenness of manner and
goardedness of language, will hardly know what to make
liv PEBPACB TO'WUTHERING HEIGHTS'
of the rough, storong utteranoe, the harshly manifested pas-
sions, the unbridled aversions, and headlong partialities of
unlettered moorland hinds and rugged moorland squires,
who have grown up untaught and unchecked, except by
Mentors as harsh as themselves. A large class of readers,
likewise, will sufiEer greatly from the introduction into the
pages of this work of words printed with all their letters,
which it has become the custom to represent by the initial
and final letter only — a blank line filling the interval. I
may as well say at once that, for this circumstance, it is out
of my power to apologise; deeming it, myself, a rational
plan to write words at full length. The practice of hinting
by single letters those expletives with which profane and
violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse, strikes
me as a proceeding which, however weU meant, is weak and
futile. I cannot teU what good it does — what feeling it
spares — what horror it conceals.
With regard to the rusticity of * Wuthering Heights,'I
admit the charge, for I feel the quality. It is rustic all
through. It is moorish, and wild, and knotty as a root of
heath. Nor was it natural that it should be otherwise ; the
author being herself a native and nursling of the moors.
Doubtless, had her lot been cast in a town, her writings, if
she had written at all, would have possessed another
character. Even had chance or taste led her to choose
a similar subject, she would have treated it otherwise.
Had Ellis Bell been a lady or a gentleman accustomed to
what is caUed'the world,'her view of a remote and unre-
claimed region, as well as of the dweUers therein, would have
differed greatly from that actually taken by the home-bred
country girl. Doubtless it would have been wider — ^more
comprehensive : whether it would have been more original
PBBFACB TO'WUTHEBING HEIGHTS'Iv
or more truthful is not so certain. As far as the scenery and
locality are concerned, it could scarcely have been so
sympathetic : Ellis BeU did not describe as one whose eye
and taste alone found pleasure in the prospect ; her native
hills were far more to her than a spectacle ; they were what
she lived in, and by, as much as the wild birds, their tenants,
or as the heather, their produce. Her descriptions, then, of
natural scenery are what they should be, and all they
should be.
Where delineation of human character is concerned, the
case is difierent. I am bound to avow that she had scarcely
more practical knowledge of the peasantry amongst whom
she lived, than a nun has of the country people who some-
times pass her convent gates. My sister's disposition was
not naturally gregarious ; circumstances favoured and fos-
tered her tendency to seclusion ; except to go to church or
take a walk on the hills, she rarely crossed the threshold
of home. Though her feeling for the people round was
benevolent, intercourse with them she never sought; nor,
with very few exceptions, ever experienced. And yet she
knew them : knew their ways, their language, their family
histories ; she could hear of them with interest, and talk of
them with detail, minute, graphic, and accurate ; but with
them, she rarely exchanged a word. Hence it ensued that
what her mind had gathered of the real concerning them,
was too exclusively confined to those tragic and terrible
traits of which, in listening to the secret annals of every rude
vicinage, the memory is sometimes compelled to receive the
impress. Her imagination, which was a spirit more sombre
than sunny, mofe powerful than sportive, found in such
traits material whence it wrought creations like Heathcliff,
like Eamshaw, like Catherine. Having formed these
Ivi PBEPACB TO'WUTHBEING HEIGHTS'
she did not know what she had done. If the auditor of her
work, when read in manoscript, shuddered under the grind-
ing influence of natures bo relentless and implacable, of spirits
so lost and fallen ; if it was complained that the mere
hearing of certain vivid and fearful scenes banished sleep by
night, and disturbed mental peace by day, Ellis Bell would
wonder what was meant, and suspect the complainant of
affectation. Had she but lived, her mind would of itself
have grown like a strong tree, loftier, straighter, wider-
spreading, and its matured fruits would have attained a
mellower ripeness and sunnier bloom ; but on that mind
time and experience alone could work : to the influence of
other intellects it was not amenable.
Having avowed that over much of'Wuthering Heights'
there broods'a horror of great darkness'; that, in its storm-
heated and electrical atmosphere, we seem at times to breathe
lightning : let me point to those spots where clouded day-
light and the eclipsed sun still attest their existence. For a
specimen of true benevolence and homely fidelity, look at the
character of Nelly Dean ; for an example of constancy and
tenderness, remark that of Edgar Linton. (Some people will
think these qualities do not shine so well incarnate in a man
as they would do in a woman, but Ellis Bell could never be
brought to comprehend this notion : nothing moved her more
than any insinuation that the faithfulness and clemency, the
long-suffering and loving-kindness which are esteemed virtues
in the daughters of Eve, become foibles in the sons of Adam.
She held that mercy and forgiveness are the divinest
attributes of the Great Being who made both man and
woman, and that what clothes the Godhead in glory, can
disgrace no form of feeble humanity.) There is a dry
latomine humour in the delineation of old Joseph, and somt
/
PBEFACB TO'WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS'Ivii
glimpses of graoe and gaiety animate the younger Oatherine.
Nor is even the first heroine of the name destitate of a certain
strange beauty in her fieroeness, or of honesty in the midst
of perverted passion and passionate perversity.
Heatholiff, indeed, stands unredeemed; never once
swerving in his arrow-straight course to perdition, from the
time when'the little black-haired swarthy thing, as dark
as if it came from the Devil,'was first imroUed out of
the bundle and set on its feet in the farmhouse kitchen, to
the hour when Nelly Dean found the grim, stalwart corpse
laid on its back in the panel-enclosed bed, with wide*gazing
eyes that seemed'to sneer at her attempt to dose them, and
parted lips and sharp white teeth that sneered too/
Heathcliff betrays one solitary human feeling, and that
is not his love for Catherine ; which is a sentiment fierce
and inhuman : a passion such as might boil and glow in the
bad essence of some evil genius ; a fire that might form the
tormented centre — the ever-sufifering soul of a magnate of
the infernal world: and by its quenchless and ceaseless
ravage effect the execution of the decree which dooms him
to carry Hell with him wherever he wanders. No; the
single link that connects Heathcliff with humanity is his
rudely-confessed regard for Hareton Eamshaw — the young
man whom he has ruined ; and then his half -implied esteem
for Nelly Dean. These solitary traits omitted, we should
say he was child neither of Lascar nor gipsy, but a man's
shape animated by demon life — ^a Ghotd — an Afreet.
Whether it is right or advisable to create beings like
Heathcliff, I do not know : I scarcely think it is. But this
I know: the writer who possesses the creative gift owns
something of which he is not always master — something that,
at times, strangely wills and works for itself. He may lay
Iriii PBBPACB TO'WUTHEBING HEIGHTS'
down roles and devise principles, and to roles and principles
it will perhaps for years lie in subjection ; and then, haply
without any warning of revolt, there comes a time when it
will no longer consent to'harrow the valleys, or be bound
with a band in the furrow'— when it'laughs at the mul-
titude of the city, and regards not the crying of the driver'
— when, refusing absolutely to make ropes out of sea-sand
any longer, it sets to work on statue-hewing, and you have
a Pluto or a Jove, a Tisiphone or a Psyche, a Mermaid or a
Madonna, as Fate or Inspiration direct. Be the work grim
or glorious, dread or divine, you have little choice left but
quiescent adoption. As for you — the nominal artist — ^your
share in it has been to work passively under dictates you
neither delivered nor could question — that would not be
uttered at your prayer, nor suppressed nor changed at your
caprice. If the result be attractive, the World will praise you,
who little deserve praise ; if it be repulsive, the same World
will blame you, who almost as little deserve blame.
'Wuthering Heights'was hewn in a wild workshop, with
simple tools, out of homely materials. The statuary found
a granite block on a solitary moor ; gazing thereon, he saw
how from the crag might be elicited a head, savage, swart,
sinister ; a form moulded with at least one element of gran-
deur — ^power. He wrought with a rude chisel, and from no
model but the vision of his meditations. With time and
labour, the crag took human shape; and there it stands
colossal, dark, and frowning, half statue, half rock : in the
former sense, terrible and goblin-like ; in the latter, almost
beautiful, for its colouring is of mellow grey, and moorland
moss clothes it; and heath, with its blooming bells and
balmy fragrance, grows faithfully close to the giant's foot.
GUBBEB BELL.
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
ELLIS BELL
K
I
1
i
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
OHAPTEB I
1801. 1 have just returned from a visit to my landlord —
the solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled with. This is
certainly a beautiful country! In all England, I do not
believe that I could have fixed on a situation so completely
removed from the stir of society. A perfect misanthropist's
heaven : and Mr. Heathdiff and I are such a suitable pair to
divide the desolation between us. A capital fellow! He
little imagined how my heart warmed towards him when I
beheld his black eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their
brows, as I rode up, and when his fingers sh^tered them-
selves, with a jealous resolution, still further in his waistcoat,
as I announced my name.
'Mr. Heathdiff?'I said.
A nod was the answer.
'Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir. I do myself the
honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to
express the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my
perseverance in solidting the occupation of Thrushcross
Grange : I heard yesterday you had had some thoughts'
'Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir,'he interrupted,
wincing. * I should not allow any one to inconvenience me,
if I could hinder it — ^walk in !'
The'walk in'was uttered with dosed teeth, and ex-
pressed the sentiment,'Go to the Deuce :'even the gate
2 WUTHBEING HEIGHTS
oyer which he leant manifested no sympathising movement
to the words ; and I think that cironmstance determined me
to accept the invitation : I felt interested in a man who
seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.
When he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the barrier,
he did put out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly
preceded me up the causeway, calling, as we entered the
court, —'Joseph, take Mr. Lockwood's horse ; and bring up
some wine.'
'Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I
suppose,'was the reflection suggested by this compound
order.'No wonder the grass grows up between the flags,
and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.'
Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man: very old,
perhaps, though hale and sinewy.'The Lord help us !'he
soliloquised in an undertone of peevish displeasure, while
relieving me of my horse : looking, meantime, in my face so
sourly that I charitably conjectured he must have need of
divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had
no reference to my unexpected advent.
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. HeathdifiTs
dwelling.'Wuthering'being a significant provincial
adjective, descriptive of the atmospheric tumult to which its
station is exposed in stormy weather. Pure, bracing
ventilation they must have up tiiere at all times, indeed : one
may guess the power of the north wind blowing over the
edge, by the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end
of the house ; and by a range of gaunt thorns all stretohing
their Umbs one way, as if craving alms of the sun. Happily,
the architect had foresight to build it strong : the narrow
windows are deeply set in the wall, and the comers defended
with large jutting stones.
Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a
quantity of grotesque carving lavished over the front, and
especially about the principal door ; above which, among a
wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless little boys,
I detected the date'1500,'and the name'Hareton Eamshaw/
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS S
I wonld have made a few oomments, and requested a diori
history of the place from the surly owner ; but his attitude at
the door appeared to demand my speedy entranoe, or
complete departure, and I had no desire to aggravate his
impatience previous to inspecting the penetralium.
One step brought us into the family sitting-room, without
any introductory lobby or passage: they call it here'the
house'pre-eminently. It includes kitchen and parlour,
generally ; but I believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen is
forced to retreat altogether into another quarter : at least I
distinguished a chatter of tongues, and a clatter of culinary
utensils, deep within ; and I observed no signs of roasting,
boiling, or baking, about the huge fireplace ; nor any gHtter
of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on the walls. One
end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat from
ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver
jugs and tankards, towering row after row, on a vast oak
dresser, to the very roof. The latter had never been under-
drawn : its entire anatomy lay bare to an inquiring eye, except
where a frame of wood laden with oatcal^s and clusters of
legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it. Above the
chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a couple of
horse-pistols : and, by way of ornament, three gaudily-
painted canisters disposed sdong its ledge. The floor was of
smooth, white stone; the chairs, high-backed, primitive
structures, painted green : one or two heavy black ones
lurking in the shade. In an arch under the dresser reposed
a huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm
of squealing puppies ; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing
extraordinary as belonging to a homely, northern farmer,
with a stubborn countenance, and stalwart limbs set out to
advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters. Such an individual
seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the
round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five
or six miles among these hills, if you go at the right time
after dinner. But Mr. Heathcliff forms a singular contrast
4 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
to his abode and style of living. He is a dark-skinned gipsy
in aspect, in dress and manners a gentleman : that is, as
mnoh a gentleman as many a country squire : rather slovenly,
perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence, because
he has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
Possibly, some people might suspect him of a degree of
under-bred pride ; I have a sympathetic chord within that
tells me it is nothing of the sort : I know, by instinct, his
reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays of
feeling — to manifestations of mutual kindliness. He'll love
and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of
impertinence to be loved or hated again. No, I'm running
on too fast : I bestow my own attributes over-liberally on
him. Mr. Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons
for keeping his hand out of the way when he meets a would-
be acquaintance, to those which actuate me. Let me hope
my constitution is almost peculiar : my dear mother used to
say I should never have a comfortable home ; and only last
summer I proved myself perfectly unworthy of one.
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast,
I was thrown into the company of a most fascinating
creature : a real goddess in my eyes, as long as she took no
notice of me. I'never told my love'vocally ; still, if looks
have language, the merest idiot might have guessed I was
over head and ears : she understood me at last, and looked a
return — the sweetest of all imaginable looks. And what did
I do ? I confess it with shame — shrunk icily into myself,
like a snail ; at every glance retired colder and farther ; till
finally the poor innocent was led to doubt her own senses,
and, overwhelmed with confusion at her supposed mistake,
persuaded her mamma to decamp. By this curious turn of
disposition I have gained the reputation of dehberate heart-
lessness ; how undeserved, I alone can appreciate.
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that
towards which my landlord advanced, and filled up an
interval of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother,
who had left her nursery, and was sneaking wolfishly to the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 6
baok of my legs, her lip curled up, and her white teeiih
watering for a snatoh. My caress provoked a long, gattand
gnarl.
'You'd better let the dog alone,'growled Mr. Heathcliff
in unison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his
foot.'She's not accustomed to be spoiled — not kept for a
pet.'Then, striding to a side door, he shouted again,
'Joseph !'
Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar,
but gave no intimation of ascending; so his master dived
down to him, leaving me vis-d'Vis the ruffianly bitch and a
pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs, who shared with her a
jealous guardianship over all my movements. Not anxious
to come in contact with their fangs, I sat still ; but, imagining
they would scarcely understand tacit insults, I unfortunately
indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some
turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam, that she
suddenly broke into a fury and leapt on my knees. I flung
her back, and hastened to interpose the table between us.
This proceeding aroused the whole hive : half-a-dozen four-
footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden
dens to the common centre. I felt my heels and coat-laps
peculiar subjects of assault ; and parrying off the larger
combatants as effectually as I could with the poker, I was
constrained to demand, aloud, assistance from some of the
household in re-establishing peace.
Mr. Heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with
vexatious phlegm: I don't think they moved one second
faster than usual, though the hearth was an absolute tempest
of worrying and yelping. Happily, an inhabitant of the
kitchen made more despatch : a lusty dame, with tucked-up
gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
midst of us flourishing a frying-pan : and used that weapon,
and her tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided
magically, and she only remained, heaving like a sea after a
high wind, when her master entered on the scene.
'What the devil is the matter ?'he asked, eyeing me in a
6 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
manner that I could ill endure after this inhospitable
treatment.
'What the devil, indeed I'I muttered.'The herd of
possessed swine could have had no worse spirits in them
than those ^ ^pimalq of yours, sir. You might as well leave a
stranger with a brood of tigers 1'
'They won't meddle with persons who touch nothing/ he
remarked, putting the bottle before me, and restoring the
displaced table.'The dogs do right to be vigilant. Take a
glass of wine ?'
'No, thank you.'
'Not bitten, are you ?'
'If I had been, I would have set my signet on the biter.*
HeathclifTs countenance relaxed into a grin.
'Come, come,'he said,'you are flurried, Mr. Lockwood.
Here, take a little wine. Guests are so exceedingly rare in
this house that I and my dogs, I am willing to own, hardly
know how to receive them. Your health, sir ?'
I bowed and returned the pledge ; beginning to perceive
that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of
a pack of curs ; besides, I felt loth to yield the fellow further
amusement at my expense ; since his humour took that turn.
He — ^probably swayed by prudential consideration of the
folly of offending a good tenant — ^relaxed a little in the
laconic style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs,
and introduced what he supposed would be a subject of
interest to me, — a discourse on the advantages and dis-
advantages of my present place of retirement. I found him
very intelligent on the topics we touched ; and before I went
home, I was encouraged so far as to volunteer another visit
to-morrow. He evidently wished no repetition of my in-
trusion. I shall go, notwithstanding. It is astonishing how
sociable I feel myself compared with him.
CHAPTBB 11
YfiBTERDAY aftemoon set in misty and cold. 1 had half a
mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through
heath and mud to Wuthering Heights. On coming up from
dinner, however, (N.B. — I dine between twelve and one
o'clock ; the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken as a fixture
along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend
my request that I might be served at five) — on mounting the
stairs with this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, I
saw a servant-girl on her knees surrounded by brushes and
coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as she extinguished
the flames with heaps of cinders. This spectacle drove me
back immediately ; I took my hat, and, after a four-miles'
walk, arrived at HeathclifiTs garden-gate just in time to
escape the first feathery flakes of a snow-shower.
On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black
frost, and the air made me shiver through every limb.
Bdng unable to remove the chain, I jumped over, and,
running up the flagged causeway bordered with straggling
gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my
knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.
'Wretched inmates t'I ejaculated, mentally,'you deserve
perpetual isolation from your species for your churlish inhos-
pitality. At least, I would not keep my doors barred in the
day-time. I don't care — I will get in T So resolved, I
grasped the latch and shook it vehemently. Vinegar-faced
Joseph projected his head from a roimd window of the
bam.
* What are ye for ?'he shouted,'T* maister's down i'V
8 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
f owld. Oo round by th'end o't'laith, if ye went to spake to
him.'
'Is there nobody inside to open the door?'I hallooed,
responsively.
'There's nobbut t'missis ; and shoo'll not oppen't an ye
mak'yer flaysome dins till neeght.'
'Why ? Cannot you tell her whom I am, eh, Joseph ?'
'Nor-ne me ! I'll hae no hend wi't,'muttered the head,
vanishing.
The snow began to drive thickly. I seized the handle to
essay another trial ; when a young man without coat, and
shouldering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind. He
hailed me to follow him, and, after marching through a wash-
house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed, pump, and
pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
apartment where I was formerly received. It glowed
delightfully in the radiance of an immense fire, compounded
of coal, peat, and wood ; and near the table, laid for a plenti-
ful evening meal, I was pleased to observe the'missis,'an
individual whose existence I had never previously suspected.
I bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
She looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained
motionless and mute.
'Bough weather !'I remarked.'I'm afraid, Mrs.
Heathcli£f, the door must bear the consequence of your
servants'leisure attendance : I had hard work to make them
hear me.'
She never opened her mouth. I stared — she stared
also: at any rate, she kept her eyes on me in a cool, re-
gardless manner, exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable.
'Sit down/ said the young man, gruffly.'He'll be in
soon.'
I obeyed ; and hemmed, and called the villain Jimo, who
deigned, at this second interview, to move the extreme tip of
her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance.
'A beautiful animal 1'I commenced again.'Do yon
intend parting with the little ones, madam ?'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 9
'They are not mine/ said the amiable hostess, more
tapellingly than Heatholiff himself oould have replied.
'Ah, yonr favourites are among these?'I oontinned,
taming to an obscure cushion full of something like cats.
'A strange choice of favourites !'she observed scornfully.
Unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits. I hemmed
once more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating my
eomment on the wildness of the evening.
'You should not have come out,'she said, rising and
reaching from the chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.
Her position before was sheltered from the light ; now,
I had a distinct view of her whole figure and countenance.
She was slender, and apparently scarcely past girlhood : an
admirable form, and the most exquisite little face that I have
ever had the pleasure of beholding ; small features, very fair ;
flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging loose on her
delicate neck ; and eyes, had they been agreeable in expres-
sion, that would have been irresistible : fortunately for my
susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered
between scorn and a kind of desperation, singularly un-
natural to be detected there. The canisters were almost out
of her reach ; I made a motion to aid her ; she turned upon
me as a miser might turn if any one attempted to assist him
in counting his gold.
'I don't want your help,'she snapped ;'I can get them
for myself.'
'I beg your pardon !'I hastened to reply.
'Were you asked to tea ?'she demanded, tying an apron
over her neat black frock, and standing with a spoonful of the
leaf poised over the pot.
'I shall be glad to have a cup,'I answered.
'Were you asked?'she repeated.
'No,'I said, half smiling.'You are the proper person to
ask me.'
She flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her
chair in a pet ; her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip
pushed out, like a child's ready to cry.
10 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Meanwhile, the yonng man had slang on to his person a
decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting himself before
the blaze, looked down on me from the comer of his eyes, for
all the world as if there were some mortal feud unavenged
between us. I began to doubt whether he were a servant or
not : his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
the superiority observable in Mr. and Mrs. Heathdiff ; his
thick brown curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers
encroached bearishly over his cheeks, and his hands were
embrowned like those of a common labourer: still his
bearing was free, almost haughty, and he showed none of a
domestic's assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
In the absence of clear proofs of his condition, I deemed it
best to abstain from noticing his curious conduct ; and, five
minutes afterwards, the entrance of Heathdiff relieved me, in
some measure, from my uncomfortable state.
'You see, sir, I am come, according to promise I'I
exclaimed, assuming the cheerful;'and I fear I shall be
weather-boimd for half an hour, if you can afford me shelter
during that space.'
'Half an hour?'he said, shaking the white flakes from
his clothes ;'I wonder you should select the thick of a
snow-storm to ramble about in. Do you know that you run
a risk of being lost in the marshes ? People familiar with
these moors often miss their road on such evenings ; and I
can teU you there is no chance of a change at present.'
'Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, and he
might stay at the Grange till morning — could you spare me
one?'
'No, I could not.'
'Oh, indeed I Well, then, I must trust to my own
sagacity.'
'Umph!'
'Are you going to mak'the tea ?'demanded he of the
shabby coat, shifting his ferocious gaze from me to the young
lady.
'Isheio have any ?'she asked, appealing to Heathdiff.
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 11
^Get it ready, will yon?'was the answer, uttered so
savagely that I started. The tone in which the words were
said revealed a genuine bad nature. I no longer felt inclined
to call HeathdifF a capital fellow. When the preparations
were finished, he invited me with —'Now, sir, bring forward
your chair.'And we all, including the rustic youth, drew
round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we
discussed our meal.
I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty to
make an effort to dispel it. They could not every day sit so
grim and taciturn ; and it was impossible, however ill-
tempered they might be, that the universal scowl they wore
was their every-day countenance.
'It is strange/ I began, in the interval of swallowing one
cup of tea and receiving another —'it is strange how custom
can mould our tastes and ideas : many could not imagine the
existence of happiness in a Hfe of such complete exile from
the world as you spend, Mr. Heathcliff; yet, I'll venture
to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with your
amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and
heart'
'My amiable lady I'he interrupted, with an almost
diabolical sneer on his face.'Where is she — my amiable
lady?'
'Mrs. Heathcliff, your wife, I mean.'
'Well, yes — oh, you would intimate that her spirit has
taken the post of ministering angel, and guards the fortunes
of Wuthering Heights, even when her body is gone. Is
that it?'
Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct it.
I might have seen there was too great a disparity between
the ages of the parties to make it likely that they were man
and wife. One was about forty : a period of mental vigour
at which men seldom cherish the delusion of being married
for love by girls : that dream is reserved for the solace of our
declining years. The other did not look seventeen.
Then it flashed upon me —'The clown at my elbow, who
12 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
is drinking his tea oat of a basin and eating his bread with
unwashed hands, may be her husband : Heatholiff junior, of
course. Here is the consequence of being buried aJive : she
has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance
that better individuals existed ! A sad pity — I must beware
how I cause her to regret her choice.'The last reflection
may seem conceited ; it was not. My neighboui^ struck me
as bordering on repulsive ; I knew, through experience, that
I was tolerably attractive.
'Mrs. Heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,'said Heathcliff,
corroborating my surmise. He turned, as he spoke, a
peculiar look in her direction : a look of hatred ; unless he
has a most perverse set of facial muscles that will not, like
those of other people, interpret the language of his soul.
* Ah, certainly — I see now : you are the favoured pos-
sessor of the beneficent fairy,'I remarked, turning to my
neighbour.
This was worse than before: the youth grew crimson,
and clenched his fist, with every appearance of a meditated
assault. But he seemed to recollect himself presently, and
smothered the storm in a brutal curse, muttered on my
behalf : which, however, I took care not to notice.
'Unhappy in your conjectures, sir,'observed my host ;
*we neither of us have the privilege of owning your good
fairy ; her mate is dead. I said she was my daughter-in-law :
therefore, she must have married my son.'
* And this young man is'
'Not my son, assuredly.'
Heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a
jest to attribute the paternity of that bear to him.
'My name is Hareton Eamshaw,'growled the other;
* and I'd counsel you to respect it I'
* I've shown no disrespect,'was my reply, laughing inter-
nally at the dignity with which he announced himself.
He fixed his eye on me longer than I cared to return the
stare, for fear I might be tempted either to box his ears or
render my hilarity audible. I began to feel unmistakably
WXJTHBBING HEIGHTS 18
oat of place in that pleasant family circle. The dismal
spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than neutralised,
the glowing physical comforts round me; and I resolved
to be oautiouB how I ventured under those rafters a third
time.
The business of eating being concluded, and no one utter-
ing a word of sociable conversation, I approached a window
to examine the weather. A sorrowful sight I saw: dark
night coming down prematurely, and sky and hills mingled
in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.
'I don't think it possible for me to get home now without
a guide,'I could not help exclaiming.'The roads will be
buried already ; and, if they were bare, I could scarcely distin-
guish a foot in advance.'
'Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the bam porch.
They'll be covered if left in the fold all night : and put a
plank before them,'said Heathcliff.
'How must I do ?'I continued, with rising irritation.
There was no reply to my question ; and on looking
round I saw only Joseph bringing in a pail of porridge for
the dogs, and Mrs. Heathcliff leaning over the fire, diverting
herself with burning a bundle of matches which had fallen
from the chimney-piece as she restored the tea-canister to its
place. The former, when he had deposited his burden, took
a critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated
out —'Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i'
idleness un war, when all on'ems goan out ! Bud yah're
a nowt, and it's no use talking — yah'U niver mend o'yer ill
ways, but goa raight to t'divil, like yer mother afore ye I'
I imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence
was addressed to me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped
towards the aged rascal with an intention of kicking him out
of the door. Mrs. Heathcliff, however, checked me by her
answer.
'You scandalous old hypocrite !'she replied.'Are you
not afraid of being carried away bodily, whenever you
mention the devil's name? I warn you to refrain from
14 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
ptOYoking me, or I'll ask your abdnotion as a spedal favour I
Stop ! look here, Joseph/ she oonidnued, taking a long, dark
book from a shelf ;'I'll show you how far I'ye progressed
in the Blaok Art : I shall soon be competent to make a clear
house of it. The red oow didn't die by chance ; and your
rheumatism can hardly be reckoned among providential
visitations !'
'Oh, wicked, wicked I'gasped the elder ;'may the
Lord deliver us from evil !'
'No, reprobate I you are a castaway — be off, or 1*11 hurt
you seriously ! I'll have you all modelled in wax and day I
and the first who passes the limits I fix shall — I'll not say
what he shall be done to — but, you'll see ! Go, I'm looking
at you I'
The little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful
eyes, and Joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out,
praying, and ejaculating'wicked'as he went. I thought her
conduct must be prompted by a species of dreary fun ; and,
now that we were alone, I endeavoured to interest her in my
distress.
'Mrs. Heathcliff,'I said earnestly,'you must excuse
me for troubling you. I presume, because, with that face, I'm
sure you cannot help being good-hearted. Do point out some
landmarks by which I may know my way home : I have no
more idea how to get there than you would have how to get
to London !'
'Take the road you came,'she answered, ensconcing
herself in a chair, wi^ a candle, and the long book open
before her.'It is brief advice, but as sound as I can
give.'
'Then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog
or a pit full of snow, your conscience won't whisper that it
is partly your fault ?'
'How so? I cannot escort you. They wouldn't let me
go to the end of the garden wall.'
'You ! I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold,
for my convenience, on such a night,'I cried.'I want you
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 16
to tell md my way, not to show it : or else to persuade Mr.
Heatholiff to give me a guide.'
'Who ? There is himself, Eamshaw, Zillah, Joseph and
I. Which would you have ? *
'Are there no boys at the farm ?'
'No ; those are all.'
* Then, it follows that I am compelled to stay.'
'That you may settle with your host. I have nothing to
do with it/
'I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash
journeys on these hills,'cried HeatholifTs stem voice from
the kitchen entrance. ^As to staying here, I don't keep
accommodations for visitors: you must share a bed with
Hareton or Joseph, if you do.'
'I can sleep on a dicdr in this room,'I replied.
'No, no ! A stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor : it
will not suit me to permit any one the range of the place
while I am off guard !'said the unmannerly wretch.
With this insult my patience was at an end. I uttered
an expression of disgust, and pushed past him into the yard,
running against Earnshaw in my haste. It was so dark
that I could not see the means of exit ; and, as I wandered
round, I heard another specimen of their dvil behaviour
amongst each other. At first the young man appeared about
to befriend me.
'I'll go with him as far as the park,'he said.
'You'll go with him to hell !'exclaimed his master, or
whatever relation he bore.'And who is to look after the
horses, eh ?'
'A man's life is of more consequence than one evening's
neglect of the horses : somebody must go,'murmured Mrs.
Heathdiff, more kindly than I expected.
'Not at your command !'retorted Hareton.'If you set
store on him, you'd better be quiet.'
'Then I hope his ghost will haxmt you ; and I hope Mr.
Heathdiff will never get another tenant till the Orange is a
min,'she answered, sharply.
16 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
'Hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on'em 1'mattered
Joseph, towards whom I had been steering.
He sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a
lantern, which I seized unceremoniously, and, calling out
that I would send it back on the morrow, rushed to the
nearest postern.
'Maister, maister, he's stsJing t'lanthem I'shouted
the ancient, pursuing my retreat.'Hey, Gnasherf Hey,
dog ! Hey Wolf, holld him, hoUd him !'
On opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my
throat, bearing me down, and extinguishing the light ; while
a mingled gu£faw from Heathclifif and Hareton put the
oopestone on my rage and humiliation. Fortunately, the
beasts seemed more bent on stretching their paws, and
yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me
alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and I was
forced to lie till their malignant masters pleased to deliver
me : then, hatless and trembling with wrath, I ordered the tnis-
oreants to let me out — on their penl to keep me one minute
longer — ^with several incoherent threats of retaliation that,
in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of King Lear.
The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious
bleeding at the nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and stiU I
scolded. I don't know what would have concluded the scene,
had there not been one person at hand rather more rational
than myself, and more benevolent than my entertainer.
This was Zillah, the stout housewife ; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar. She thought
that some of them had been laying violent hands on me ;
and, not daring to attack her master, she turned her vocal
artillery against the younger scoundrel.
'Well, Mr. Eamshaw,'she cried,'I wonder what you'll
have agait next ? Are we going to murder folk on our very
door-stones ? I see this house will never do for me — ^look
at t'poor lad, he's fair choking! Wisht, wisht; you
mun'n't go on so. Gome in, and I'll cure that : there now,
hold ye still.'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 17
With these words she suddenly splashed a pint of ioy
water down my neck, and pulled me into the kitohen. Mr.
Heathcliff followed, his accidental merriment expiring
quickly in his habitual moroseness.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint ; and thut
compelled perforce to accept lodgings under his roof. He
told Zillah to give me a glass of brandy, and then passed on
to the inner room ; while she condoled with me on my
sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders, whereby I
waB somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.
C3HAPTBE m
Whilb leading the way upstairs, she recommended that I
should hide the candle, and not make a noise; for her
master had an odd notion about the chamber she would put
me in, and never let anybody lodge there willingly. I
asked the reason. She did not know, she answered : she had
only lived there a year or two ; and they had so many queer
goings on, she could not begin to be curious.
Too stupefied to be curious myself, I fastened my door
and glanced roimd for the bed. The whole furniture con-
sisted of a chair, a clothes-press, and a large oak case, with
squares cut out near the top resembling coach windows.
Having approached this structure, I looked inside, and
perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch, very
conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every
member of the family having a room to himself. In fact, it
formed a Uttle closet, and the ledge of a window, which it
enclosed, served as a table. I slid back the panelled sides,
got in with my light, pulled them together again, and felt
secure against the vigilance of HeathclifiT, and every one
else.
The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed
books piled up in one comer; and it was covered with
writing scratched on the paint. This writing, however, was
nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of characters, large
and small — Catherine Eamshaw, here and there varied to
Oatherine Heathcliff, and then again to Catherine Linton.
In vapid listlessness I leant my head againt the window,
and continued spelling over Catherine Eamshaw — ^Heathdiff
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 19
— ^Linton, till my eyes olosed ; but they had not rested five
minates when a glare of white letters started from the dark,
as vivid as spectres — the air swarmed with Catherines ; and
rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my
oandle-wi(d[ reclining on one of the antique volumes, and
perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin. I
snufied it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of
cold and lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the
injured tome on my knee. It was a Testament, in lean type,
and smelling dreadfully musty: a fly-leaf bore the inscrip-
tion —'Catherine Eamshaw, her book,* and a date some
quarter of a century back. I shut it, and took up another
and another, till I had examined all. Catherine's library
was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it to have been
weU used, though not altogether for a legitimate purpose :
scarcely one chapter had escaped, a pen-and-ink commentary
— ^at least the appearance of one — covering every morsel of
blank that the printer had left. Some were detached
sentences; other parte took the form of a regular diary,
scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. At the top of an
extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when first lighted on)
I was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of
my friend Joseph, — crudely, yet powerfully sketched. An
immediate interest kindled within me for the unknown
Catherine, and I began forthwith to decipher her faded
hieroglyphics.
'An awful Sunday,'commenced the paragraph beneath.
'I wish my father were back again. Hindley is a detestable
8ubstitute--his conduct to Heatheliff is atrocious — H.
and I are going to rebel — ^we took our initiatory step this
evening.
'All day had been flooding with rain ; we could not go
to church, so Joseph must needs get up a congregation in the
garret ; and, while Hindley and his wife basked downstairs
before a comfortable fire — doing anything but reading their
Bibles, I'll answer for it — Heatheliff, myself, and the
unhappy ploughboy were commanded to ti^ our prayer-
20 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
books, and meant : we were ranged in a row, on a sack of
oom, groaning and shivering, and hoping that Joseph would
shiver too, so that he might give as a short homily for his
own sake. A vain idea 1 The service lasted precisely three
hoars ; and yet my brother had the face to exclaim, when he
saw as descending, " What, done abready ? *'On Sanday
evenings we ased to be permitted to play, if we did not make
much noise ; now a mere titter is safficient to send us into
comers.
'" Yoa forget yoa have a master here,*'says the tyrank
** I'll demolish the first who pats me oat of temper I I insist
on perfect sobriety and silence. Oh, boy! was that yoa?
Frances darling, paU his hair as yoa go by : I heard him
snap his fingers. " Frances palled his hair heartily, and then
went and seated herself on her hasband's knee, and there
they were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by
the hoar — foolish palaver that we shoald be ashamed of.
We made oarselves as snag as oar means allowed in the arch
of the dresser. I had jast fastened oar pinafores together,
and hang them ap for a cartain, when in comes Joseph, on
an errand from the stables. He tears down my handiwork,
boxes my ears, and croaks :
'** T* maister nobbat jast baried, and Sabbath not o'ered,
imd t'soand o't'gospel still i'yer lags, and ye darr be
laikingl Shame on yet sit ye down, ill childerl there's
good books eneagh if ye'U read'em : sit ye down, and think
o'yer sowls I "
* Saying this, he compelled us so to sqaare oar positions
that we might receive from the far-off fire a dall ray to show
as the text of the lamber he thrast upon as. I coald not
bear the employment. I took my dingy volume by the
scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing I hated a
good book. Heathcliff kicked his to the same place. Then
there was a hubbub 1
'** Maister Hindley I " shouted our chaplain.''Maister,
ooom hither ! Miss Oathy's riven th'back off'Th'Helmet
o'Salvation/ on'Heathcliff's pawsed his fit into t'first part
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 21
o''T'Brooad Way to Destraotion 1'It's fair flaysome
that ye let'em go on this gait. £oh ! th'owd man wad ha'
laoed'em properly — but he's goan ! "
'Hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and
seizing one of us by the ooUar, and the other by the arm,
hurled both into the back-kitohen ; where, Joseph asseverated,
** owd Nick would f etoh us as sure as we were Uving : and,
so oomforted, we each sought a separate nook to await his
advent. I reached this book, and a pot of ink from a shelf,
and pushed the house-door ajar to give me lights and I have
got tiie time on with writing for twenty minutes ; but my
H > mpanion is impatient, and proposes that we should appro-
priate the dairywoman's doak, and have a scamper on the
moors, under its shelter. A pleasant suggestion — and then,
if the surly old man come in, he may believe his prophecy
verified — ^we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than
we are here.'
« « « « «
I suppose Catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sen-
tence took up another subjegt : she waxed lachrymose.
* How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make
me cry so 1'she wrote.'My head aches, till I cannot keep
it on the pillow ; and still I can't give over. Poor Heath-
diff ! Hindley calls him a vagabond, and won't let him sit
with us, nor eat with us any more ; and, he says, he and I
must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the
house if we break his orders. He has been blaming our
father (how dared he ?) for treating H. too liberally ; and
swears he will reduce him to his right place —'
« « « « «
I began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye
wandered from manuscript to print. I saw a red ornamented
title —'Seventy Times Seven, and the First of the Seventy-
FixBi.'A Pious Discourse delivered by the Beverend Jabez
Branderham, in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough.'And
while I was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess
what Jabez Branderham would make of his subject, I sank
S3 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS
back in bed, and fell asleep. Alas, for the efbcts of bad tea
and bad temper I What else could it be that made me pass
sach a terrible night ? I don't remember another that I can
at all compare with it since I was capable of suffering.
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible
of my locality. I thought it was morning ; and I had set
out on my way home, with Joseph for a guide. The snow
lay yards deep in our road ; and, as we floundered on, my
companion wearied me with constant reproaches that I had
not brought a pilgrim's staff : telling me that I could never
get into the house without one, and boastfully flourishing a
heavy-headed cudgel, which I understood to be so denomi-
nated. For a moment I considered it absurd that I should
need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence-
Then a new idea flashed across me. I was not going
there : we were journeying to hear the famous Jabez Bran-
derham preach, from the text — * Seventy Times Seven ;'and
either Joseph, the preacher, or I had committed the'I^rst of
the Seventy-First,'and were to be publicly exposed and
excommunicated.
We came to the chapel. I have passed it really in my
walks, twice or thrice ; it lies in a hollow, between two hills :
an elevated hollow, near a swamj), whose peaty moisture is
said to answer all the purposes of embalming on the few
corpses deposited there. The roof has been kept whole
hitherto; but as the clergyman's stipend is only twenty
pounds per annum, and a house with two rooms, threatening
speedily to determine into one, no clergyman will undertake
the duties of pastor : especially as it is currently reported that
his flock would rather let him starve than increase the living
by one penny from their own pockets. However, in my
dream, Jabez had a full and attentive congregation ; and he
preached — good God ! what a sermon ; divided into four
hundred and ninety parts, each fully equal to an ordinary
address from the pulpit, and each discussing a separate sin !
Where he searched for them, I cannot tell. He had his
private manner of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 28
neoessary the hroiher Bhoold sin different sins on every
oooasion. They were of the most cmious oharaoter: odd
transgressionB ttiat I never imagined previously.
Oh, how weary I grew. How I writhed, and yawned,
and nodded, and revived! How I pinched and pricked
myself, and rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sat down
again, and nudged Joseph to inform me if he would ever have
done. I was condemned to hear all out : finally, he reached
the'First of the Seventy-First.* At that crisis, a sudden
inspiration descended on me; I was moved to rise and
denounce Jabez Branderham as the sinner of the sin that
no Christian need pardon.
'Sir,'I exclaimed,'sitting here within these four walls,
at one stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred
and ninety heads of your discourse. Seventy times seven
times have I plucked up my hat and been about to depart —
Seventy times seven times have you preposterously forced
me to resume my seat. The four hundred and ninety-first
is too much. Fellow-martyrs, have at him ! Drag him down,
and crush him to atoms, that the place which knows him
may know him no more !'
'Thou art the Man /'cried Jabez, after a solemn pause,
leanmg over his cushion.'Seventy times seven times didst
thou gapingly contort thy visage — seventy times seven did I
take counsel with my soul — Lo, this is human weakness :
this also may be absolved I The First of the Seventy-First is
come. Brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
Such honour have all His saints !'
With that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting
their pilgrim's staves, rushed round me in a body ; and I,
having no weapon to raise m self-defence, commenced grapp-
ling with Joseph, my nearest and most ferocious assailant,
for his. In the confluence of the multitude, several clubs
crossed ; blows, aimed at me, feU on other sconces. Pre-
sently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter
rappings : every man's hand was against his neighbour ; and
Branderham, unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his iseal
H WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
in a Bhower of loud taps on the boards of the pulpit, which
responded so smartly that, at last, to my mispeakable relief,
they woke me. And what was it that had suggested the
tremendous tumult? What had played Jabez's part in the
row? Merely the branch of a fir-tree that touched my
lattice as the blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against
the panes 1 I listened doubtingly an instant ; detected the
disturber, then turned and dozed, and dreamt again: if
possible, still more disagreeably than before.
This time, I remembered I was lying in the oak closet,
and I heard distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the
snow ; T heard, also, the fir bough repeat its teasing sound,
and ascribed it to the right cause : but it annoyed me so
much, that I resolved to silence it, if possible; and, I
thought, I rose and endeavoured to unhasp the casement.
The hook was soldered into the staple : a circumstance
observed by me when awake, but forgotten.'I must stop
it, nevertheless !'I muttered, knocking my knuckles through
the glass, and stretching an arm out to seize the importunate
branch ; instead of which, my fingers closed on the fingers of
a little, ice-cold hand 1 The intense horror of nightmare came
over me : I tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung
to it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed, * Let me in — let
me inl''Who are you?'I asked, struggling, meanwhile,
to disengage myself.'Catherine linton,'it replied, shiver-
ingly (why did I think of Linton ? I had read Ea/mshaw
twenty times for Linton) —'I'm come home: I'd lost my
way on the moor !'As it spoke, I discerned, obscurely, a
child's face looking through the window. Terror made me
cruel ; and, finding it useless to attempt shaking the creature
of^ I pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and rubbed it to
and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes : still
it wailed,'Let me in 1'and maintained its tenacious gripe,
almost maddening me with fear. *■ How can 1 1'I said at
length.'Let me go, if you want me to let you in t'The
fingers relaxed, I snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly
pled the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped my
WUTUEBING HEIQHTS 36
ears to exclude the lamentable prayer. I seemed to keep
them closed above a quarter of an hour ; yet, the instant I
listened again, there was the doleful ory moaning onl
* Begone !'I shouted.'I'll never let you in, not if you beg
for twenty years.''It is twenty years,'mourned the voioe :
'twenty years. I've been a waif for twenty years 1'Thereat
began a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
as if thrust forward. I tried to jump up ; but could not stir
a Umb ; and so yelled aloud, in a frenzy of fright. To my
confusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal : hasty foot-
steps approached my chamber door ; somebody pushed it
open, with a vigorous hand, and a light glimmered through
the squares at the top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet, and
wiping the perspiration from my forehead : the intruder
appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself. At last, he
said, in a half •whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,'Is
any one here ?'I considered it best to confess my presence ;
for I knew HeathcUfiTs accents, and feared he might search
further, if I kept quiet. With this intention, I turned and
opened the panels. I shall not soon forget the effect my
action produced.
Heathdiff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and
trousers ; with a candle dripping over his fingers, and his
face as white as the wall behind him. The first creak of the
oak startled him like an electric shock : the light leaped from
his hold to a distance of some feet, and his agitation was so
extreme, that he could hardly pick it up.
'It is only your guest, sir,'I called out, desirous to spare
him the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. * I
had the misfortune to scream in my sleep, owing to a fright-
ful nightmare. I'm sorry I disturbed you.'
'Oh, Ood confound you, Mr. Lockwood! I wish you
were at the'commenced my host, setting the candle on
a chair, because he found it impossible to hold it steady.
* And who showed you up into this room ?'he continued,
orushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth
to subdue the maxillary convulsions.'Who was it ?
1
96 WUTHEBING HEIOHTS
I've ft good mind to turn them out of the house this
moment?'
'It wftB your servant Zillah/ I replied, flinging myself
on to the floor, and rapidly resuming my garments.'I
should not oare if you did, Mr. Heathdiff ; she richly deserves
it. I suppose that she wanted to get another proof that the
place was haunted, at my expense. Well, it is — swarming
with ghosts and goblins ! You have reason in shutting it up,
I assure you. No one will thank you for a doze in such a
denl'
'What do you mean ?'asked HeathcliCF,'and what are
you doing? lie down and finish out the night, since you
are here ; but, for heaven's sake ! don't repeat that horrid
noise : nothing could excuse it, unless you were having your
throat cut 1'
* If the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably
would have strangled me !'I returned.'I'm not going to
endure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors again.
Was not the Beverend Jabez Branderham akin to you on the
mother's side ? And that minx, Catherine Linton, or Earn-
shaw, or however she was called — she must have been a
changeling — wicked little soul I She told me she had been
walking the earth these twenty years : a just punishment for
her mortal transgressions, I've po doubt 1'
Scarcely were these words uttered when I recollected the
association of HeathdifTs with Catherine's name in the book,
which had completely slipped from my memory, till thus
awakened. I blushed at my inconsideration : but, without
showing further consciousness of the ofiTence, I hastened to
add — * The truth is, sir, I passed the first part of the night
in —'Here I stopped afresh — I was about to say'perusing
those old volumes,'then it would have revealed my know-
ledge of their written, as well as their printed, contents ; sq,
correcting myself, I went on —'in spelling over the name
scratched on that window-ledge. A monotonous occupation,
calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or'
'What com you mean by talking in this way to ?»« t'thun-
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS JT
dered HeathdifF with savage vehemence.'How — ^how dar€
yoa, under my roof ? — Gk > d 1 he's mad to speak so I'And
he stnick his forehead with rage.
I did not know whether to resent this language or porsne
my explanation ; bat he seemed so powerfully aflEected that
I took pity and proceeded with my dreams ; affirming I had
never heard the appellation of'Catherine Linton'before,
but reading it often over produced an impression which per*
sonified itself when I had no longer my imagination nnder
control. Heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter ol
the bed, as I spoke ; finally sitting down almost concealed
behind it. I guessed, however, by his irregular and inter-
cepted breathing, that he struggled to vanquish an excess of
violent emotion. Not liking to show him that I had heard
the conflict, I continued my toilette rather noisily, looked at
my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the night :'Not
three o'clock yet I I could have taken oath it had been six.
Time stagnates here : we must surely have retired to rest at
eight I'
'Always at nine in winter, and rise at four,'said my host,
suppressing a groan : and, as I fancied, by the motion of his
arm's shadow, dashing a tear from his eyes.'Mr. Lockwood,'
he added,'you may go into my room : you'll only be in the
way, coming down-stairs so early : and your childish outcry
has sent sleep to the devil for me.'
'And for me, too,'I replied.'I'll walk in the yard till
daylight, and then I'U be off; and you need not dread a re-
petition of my intrusion. I'm now quite cured of seeking
pleasure in society, be it country or town. A sensible man
ought to find sufficient company in himself.'
'Delightful company !'muttered Heathcliff.'Take the
candle, and go where you please. I shaU join you directly.
Keep out of the yard, though, the dogs are unchained ; and
the house — Juno mounts sentinel there, and — nay, you can
only ramble about the steps and passages. But, away with
you 1 I'll come in two minutes 1'
I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber ; when, ignorant
38 WXTTHBBING HEIGHTS
where the narrow lobbies led, I stood still, and was witness^
involuntarily, to a piece of superstition on the part of my
landlord which belied, oddly, his apparent sense. He got
on to the bed, and wrenched open the lattice, bursting, as he
pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion of tears.'Come
in 1 oome in I'he sobbed. * Cathy, do come. Oh, do—onoe
more I Oh ! my heart's darling 1 hear me tJm time,
Catherine, at last 1'The spectre showed a spectre's ordinary
caprice : it gave no sign of being ; but the snow and wind
whirled wildly through, even reaching my station, and blowing
out the light.
There was such anguish in the gush of grief that acoom-
panied this raving, that my compassion made me overlook
its folly, and I drew ofE^ haJf angry to have listened at all,
and vexed at having related my ridiculous nightmare, since
it produced that agony ; though why was beyond my com-
prehension. I descended cautiously to the lower regions, and
landed in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked
compactly together, enabled me to rekindle my candle.
Nothing was stirring except a brindled, grey cat, which crept
from the ashes, and saluted me with a querulous mew.
Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly en-
closed the hearth ; on one of these I stretched myself, and
OrimaUdn mounted the other. We were both of us nodding
ere any one invaded our retreat, and then it was Joseph,
shufiUng down a wooden ladder that vanished in the roof,
through a trap: the ascent to his garret, I suppose. He
cast a sinister look at the little flame which I had enticed to
play between the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and
bestowing himself in the vacancy, commenced the operation
of stuffing a three-inch pipe wiiJi tobacco. My presence in
his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence
too shameful for remark : he silently applied the tube to his
lips, folded his arms, and puffed away. I let him enjoy the
luxury unannoyed ; and after sucking out his last wreath,
and heaving a prof oxmd sigh, he got up, and departed aA
solemnly as he came.
WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS 29
A more elaatio footstep entered next ; and now I opened
my month for a'good-morning/ but closed it again, the
salutation unachieved; for Hareton Eamshaw was per-
forming his orison sotto voce, in a series of curses directed
against every object he touched, while he rummaged a comer
for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts. He glanced
over the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought
as little of exchanging civilities with me as with my com-
panion the cat. I guessed, by his preparations, that egress
was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch, made a movement
to follow him. He noticed this, and thrust at an inner door
with the end of his spade, intimating by an inartictdate
sound that there was the place where I must go, if I changed
my locality.
It opened into the house, where the females were already
astir ; Zillah urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a
colossal bellows; and Mrs. HeathcUff, kneeling on the
hearth, reading a book by the aid of the blaze. She held
her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her eyes,
and seemed absorbed in her occupation ; desisting from it
only to chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to
push away a dog, now and then, that snoozled its nose over-
forwardly into her face. I was surprised to see Heathcliff
there also. He stood by the fire, his back towards me, just
finishing a stormy scene with poor Zillah ; who ever and
anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the comer of her
apron, and heave an indignant groan.
'And you, you worthless —'he broke out as I entered,
turning to his daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as
harmless as duck, or sheep, but generally represented by a
dash .'There you are, at your idle tricks again I The
rest of them do earn their bread — ^you Uve on my charity 1
Put your trash away, and find something to do. You shall
pay me for the plague of having you eternally in my sight —
do you hear, damnable jade ?'
'I'll put my trash away, because you can make me if I
refuse,'answered the young lady, closing her book, and
80 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
throwing it on a ohair. * But I'll not do anything, though
you should swear your tongue out, except what I please 1'
Heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to a
safer distance, obviously acquainted with its weight. Having
no desire to be entertained by a cat-and-dog combat, I
stepped forward briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of
the hearth, and innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted
dispute. Each had enough decorum to suspend further
hostilities : Heathcliff placed his fists, out of temptation, in
his pockets ; Mrs. Heathcliff curled her lip, and walked to a
seat far off, where she kept her word by playing the part of a
statue during the remainder of my stay. That was not long.
I declined joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of
dawn, took an opportunity of escaping into the free air, now
dear, and still, and cold as impalpable ice.
My landlord halloed for me to stop ere I reached the
bottom of the garden, and offered to accompany me across
the moor. It was well he did, for the whole hill-back was
one billowy, white ooean ; the sweUs and falls not indicat-
ing corresponding rises and depressions in the ground :
many pits, at least, were filled to a level ; and entire ranges
of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart
which my yesterday's walk left pictured in my mind. I had
remarked on one side of the road, at intervals of six or seven
yards, a line of upright stones, continued through the whole
length of the barren : these were erected and daubed with
lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark, and also
when a fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps
on either hand with the firmer path : but, excepting a dirty
dot pointing up here and there, all traces of their existence
had vanished: and my companion found it necessary to
warn me frequently to steer to the right or left, when I
imagined I was following, correctly, the windings of the
road.
We exchanged little conversation, and he halted at the
entrance of Thrushcross Park, saying, I could make no
error there. Our adieux were limited to a hasty bow, and
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 31
ibon I poBhed forward, trosting to my own resoarces ; for
the porter's lodge is untenanted as yet. The distance from
the gate to the Grange is two miles ; I helieve I managed to
make it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and
sinking up to the neck in snow : a predicament which only
those who have experienced it can appreciate. At any rate,
whatever were my wanderings, the clock chimed twelve
as I entered the house ; and that gave exactly an hour
for every mile of the usual way from Wuthenng Heights.
My human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome
me; exclaiming, tumultuously, they had completely given
me up : everybody conjectured that I perished last night ;
and they were wondering how they must set about the
search for my remains. I bid them be quiet, now that they
saw me returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, I dragged
np-stairs ; whence, after putting on diy clothes, and pacing
to and fro thirty or forty minutes, to restore the animal heat,
I adjourned to my study, feeble as a kitten : almost too
much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smoking coffee which
the servant had prepared for my refreshment.
(3HAPTER IV
What yain weaiher-oocks we are 1 I, who had determined
to hold myself independent of all sooial intercourse, and
thanked my stars that, at length, I had lighted on a spot
where it was next to impracticable — I, weak wretch, after
maintaining till dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude,
was finally compelled to strike my colours ; and under pre-
tence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my
establishment, I desired Mrs. Dean, when she brought in
supper, to sit down while I ate it; hoping sincerely she
would prove a regular gossip, and either rouse me to anima-
tion or lull me to sleep by her talk.
'You have lived here a considerable time,'I commenced ;
'did you not say sixteen years ?'
'Eighteen, sir : I came when the mistress was married,
to wait on her; after she died, the master retained me for his
housekeeper.'
'Indeed.'
There ensued a pause. She was not a gossip, I feared ;
unless about her own affairs, and those could hardly interest
me. However, having studied for an interval, with a fist on
either knee, and a cloud of meditation over her ruddy
countenance, she ejaculated —'Ah, times are greatly
changed since then 1'
'Yes,'I remarked,'you've seen a good many alterations,
I suppose ?'
'I have : and troubles too,'she said.
< 0h, I'll turn the talk on my landlord's family 1'I
thought to myself.'A good subject to start! And that
pretty girl-widow, I should like to know her history:
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS 33
whether she be a native of the ootintry, or, as is more pro-
bable, an exotio that the surly indigent will not reoognise
for kin/ With this intention I asked Mrs. Dean why
HeatheUfF let Thrashcross Grange, and preferred living in a
situation and residenoe so much inferior.'Is he not rich
enough to keep the estate in good order ?'I inquired.
'Rich, sir t'she returned.'He has nobody knows what
money, and every year it increases. Yes, yes, he's rich
enough to live in a finer house than this : but he's very near
— dose-handed; and, if he had meant to flit to Thrush-
cross Grange, as soon as he heard of a good tenant he could
not have borne to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds
more. It is strange people should be so greedy, when they
are alone in the world !'
'He had a son, it seems ?'
'Yes, he had one — he is dead.'
'And that young lady, Mrs. HeatheUfF, is his widow?'
xes.
'Where did she come from originally?'
'Why, sir, she is my late master's daughter : Catherine
Linton was her maiden name. I nursed her, poor thing !
I did wish Mr. Heathdiff would remove here, and then we
might have been together again.'
'What! Catherine Linton ?'I exclaimed, astonished.
But a minute's reflecticm convinced me it was not my
ghostly Catherine.'Then,'I continued,'my predecessor*s
name was Linton ?'
'It was.'
*And who is that Eamshaw: Hareton Eamshaw,
who lives with Mr. Heathcliff? Are they relations?
'No ; he is the late Mrs. Linton's nephew.'
'The young lady's cousin, then ?'
'Yes ; and her husband was her cousin also : one on the
mother's, the other on the father's side : HeatheUfF married
Mr. Linton's sister.'
'I see the house at Wuthering Heights has " Eamshaw "
carved over the front door. Are they an old family ?'
S4 WtJTHEBING HEIGHTS
'Very old, sir ; and Hareton is the last of them, as oar
Miss Cathy is of us — I mean, of the Lintons. Have yoa
been to Wuthering Heights ? I beg pardon for asking ; but
I should like to hear how she is !'
'Mrs. Heathcliff ? she looked very well, and very hand-
some ; yet, I think, not very happy.'
'Oh dear, I don't wonder ! And how did you like the
master?'
'A rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean. Is not that his
character ?'
'Bough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone ! The less
you meddle with him the better.'
'He must have had some ups and downs in life to make
him such a churl. Do you know anything of his history ?'
'It's a cuckoo's, sir — I know all about it : except where
he was bom, and who were his parents, and how he got
his money at first. And Hareton has been cast out like
an unfledged dunnock I The unfortunate lad is the only one
in all this parish that does not guess how he has been
cheated.'
'Well, Mrs. Dean, it vnll be a charitable deed to tell me
something of my neighbours : I feel I shall not rest if I go
to bed ; so be good enough to sit and chat an hour.'
'Oh, certainly, sir ! I'll just fetch a little sevnng, and
then I'll sit as long as you please. But you've caught cold :
I saw you shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive
it out.'
The worthy woman bustled off, and I crouched nearer
the fire ; my head felt hot, and the rest of me chill : more-
over, I was excited, almost to a pitch of foolishness, through
my nerves and brain. This caused me to feel, not uncom-
fortable, but rather fearful (as I am still) of serious effects
from the incidents of to-day and yesterday. She returned
presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work ;
and, having placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat^
evidently pleased to find me so companionable.
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 36
Before I came to live here, she commenoed — waiting no
fiurther invitation to her story — I was ahnost always at
Wuthering Heights ; because my mother had nursed Mr.
Hindley Eamshaw, that was Hareton's father, and I got
used to playing with the children : I ran errands too, and
helped to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for any-
thing that anybody would set me to. One fine summer
morning — ^it was the beginning of harvest, I remember —
Mr. Eamshaw, the old master, came down-stairs, dressed for
a journey ; and, after he had told Joseph what was to be
done during the day, he turned to Hindley, and Cathy, and
me — for I sat eating my porridge with them — and he said,
speaking to his son,'Now, my bonny man, I'm going to
Liverpool to-day, what shall I bring you ? You may choose
what you like : only let it be little, for I shall walk there
and back : sixty miles each way, that is a long spell I'
Hindley named a fiddle, and then he asked Miss Cathy ; she
was hardly six years old, but she could ride any horse in the
stable, and she chose a whip. He did not forget me ; for he
had a kind heart, though he was rather severe sometimes.
He promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and
pears, and then he kissed his children, said good-bye, and
set ofif.
It seemed a long while to us all — the three days of his
absence — and often did little Cathy ask when he would be
home. Mrs. Eamshaw expected him by supper-time on the
third evening, and she put the meal off hour after hour;
there were no signs of his coming, however, and at last the
children got tired of running down to the gate to look. Then
it grew dark; she would have had them to bed, but they
begged sadly to be allowed to stay up ; and, just about
eleven o'clock, the door-latch was raised quietly, and in
stepped the master. He threw himself into a chair, laughing
and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for he was nearly
killed — he would not have such another walk for the three
kingdoms.
'And at the end of it to be flighted to death !'he said.
86 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
opening his great-ooat, which he held bundled up in his
arms.'See here, wife ! I was never so beaten with anything
m my life : but you must e'en take it as agift of Gk)d ; ttioogh
it's as dark almost as if it came from the devil.'
We crowded round, and over Miss Cathy's head I had a
peep at a dirty, ragged, black-haired child ; big enough both
to walk and talk: indeed, its face looked older than
Catherine's ; yet when it was set on its feet, it only stared
rotmd, and repeated over and over again some gibberish that
nobody could understand. I was frightened, and Mrs.
Eamshaw was ready to fling it out of doors : she did fly up,
asking how he could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the
house, when they had their own bairns to feed and fend for ?
What he meant to do with it, and whether he were mad ?
The master tried to explain the matter ; but he was really
haU dead with fatigue, and all that I could make out,
amongst her scolding, was a tale of his seeing it starving,
and houseless, and as good as dumb, in the streets of
Liverpool, where he picked it up and inquired for its owner.
Not a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said ; and his
money and time being both limited, he thought it better to
take it home with him at once, than run into vain expenses
there : because he was determined he would not leave it as
he found it. Well, the conclusion was, that my mistress
grumbled herself calm ; and Mr. Eamshaw told me to wash
it, and give it dean things, and let it sleep with the children.
Hindley and Cathy contented themselves with looking
and listening till peace was restored: then, both began
searching their father's pockets for the presents he had
promised them. The former was a boy of fourteen, but when
he drew out what had been a fiddle, crushed to morsels in
the great-coat, he blubbered aloud; and Cathy, when she
learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the
stranger, showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the
stupid little thing ; earning for her pains a sound blow from
her father, to teach her cleaner manners. They entirely
refused to have it in bed with them, or even in their room ;
WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS 37
and I had no more sense, so I put it on the landing of the
stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. By ohanoe,
or else attracted by hearing his voioe, it crept to Mr.
Eamshaw's door, and there he found it on quitting his
chamber. Inquiries were made as to how it got there ; I was
obliged to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and
inhumanity was sent out of the house.
This was HeathclifiTs first introduction to the family.
On coming back a few days afterwards (for I did not consider
my banishment perpetual), I found they had christened him
'Heathcliff': it was the name of a son who died in child-
hood, and it has served him ever since, both for Christian
and surname. Miss Cathy and he were now very thick ; but
Hindley hated him : and to say the truth I did the same ;
and we plagued and went on with him shamefully: for I
wasn't reasonable enough to feel my injustice, and the
mistress never put in a word on his behalf when she saw him
wronged.
He seemed a stdlen, patient child ; hardened, perhaps, to
ill-treatment: he would stand Hindley's blows without
winking or shedding a tear, and my pinches moved him only
to draw in a breath and open his eyes, as if he had hurt
himself by accident, and nobody was to blame. This endur-
ance made old Eamshaw furious, when he discovered his
son persecuting the poor fatherless child, as he called him.
He took to Heathcliff strangely, believing all he said (for
that matter, he said precious little, ajid generally the truth),
and petting him up far above Cathy, who was too mischievous
and wayward for a favourite.
So, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the
house; and at Mrs. Eamshaw's death, which happened in
less than two years after, the young master had learned to
regard his father as an oppressor rather than a friend, and
Heathcliff as a usurper of his parent's affections and his
privileges; and he grew bitter with brooding over these
injuries. I sympathised a while ; but when the children fell
ill of the measles, and I had to tend them, ajid take on me
I
88 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
the ooreB of a woman at once, I changed my idea. HeatholifF
was dangerously sick; and while he lay at the worst he
would have me constantly by his pillow : I suppose he felt
I did a good deal for him, and he hadn't wit to guess that I
was compelled to do it. However, I wiU. say this, he was
the quietest child that ever nurse watched over. The
difiference between him and the others forced me to be less
partial. Cathy and her brother harassed me terribly : he was
as uncomplaining as a lamb ; though hardness, not gentleness,
made him give little trouble.
He got through, and the doctor aflSrmed it was in a great
measure owing to me, and praised me for my care. I was
vain of his commendations, and softened towards the being
by whose means I earned them, and thus Hindley lost his
last ally : still I couldn't dote on Heathcliff, and I wondered
often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen
boy ; who never, to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by
any sign of gratitude. He was not insolent to his benefactor,
he was simply insensible ; though knowing perfectly the hold
he had on his heart, and conscious he had only to speak and
all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes. As an
instance, I remember Mr. Eamshaw once bought a couple of
oolts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and
when he discovered it, he said to Hindley —
'You must exchange horses with me : I don't like mine ;
and if you won't I shall tell your father of the three
thrashings you've given me this week, and show him my
arm, which is black to the shoulder.'Hindley put out his
tongue, and cuffed him over the ears.'You'd better do it at
once,'he persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the
stable) :'you will have to : and if I speak of these blows,
you'll get them again with interest.''Off, dog I'cried
Hindley, threatening him with an iron weight used for
weighing potatoes and hay.'Throw it,'he replied, standizig
still, * and then I'll tell how you boasted that you would turn
me out of doors as soon as Le died, and see whether he will
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 89
not turn yon out directly/ Hindley threw it, hitting him on
the breast, and down he fell, but staggered up immediately,
breathless and white ; and, had not I prevented it, he would
have gone just so to the master, and got full revenge by
letting his condition plead for him, intimating who had
caused it.'Take my colt, Gipsy, then!'said young
Eamshaw.'And I pray that he may break your neck : take
him, and be damned, you beggarly interloper ! and wheedle
my father out of all he has : only afterwards show him what
you are, imp of Satan. — ^And take that, I hope he'll kick out
your brains 1'
Heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his
own stall ; he was passing behind it, when Hindley finished
his speech by knocking him under its feet, and without
stopping to examine whether his hopes were fulfilled, ran away
as fast as he could. I was surprised to witness how coolly the
child gathered himself up, and went on with his intention ;
exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a
bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow
occasioned, before he entered the house. I persuaded him
easily to let me lay the blame of his bruises on the horse : he
minded little what tale was told since he had what he
wanted. He complained so seldom, indeed, of such stirs as
these, that I really thought him not vindictive : I was
deceived completely, as you will hear.
CHAPTEB V
In the course of time Mr. Eamshaw began to f aiL He nad
been active and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly ;
and when he was confined to the chimney-comer he grew
grievously irritable. A nothing vexed him ; and suspected
slights of his authority nearly threw him into fits. This was
especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose
upon, or domineer over, his favourite: he was painfully
jealous lest a word should be spoken amiss to him ; seeming
to have got into his head the notion that, because he liked
HeathclifF, all hated, and longed to do him an ill-turn. It
was a disadvantage to the lad ; for the kinder among us did
not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his partiality ;
and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child's
pride and black tempers. StiU it became in a manner
necessary ; twice, or thrice, Hindley's manifestation of scorn,
while his father was near, roused the old man to a fury : he
seized his stick to strike him, and shook with rage that he
could not do it.
At last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the
living answer by teaching the little Lintons and Eamshaws,
and farming his bit of land himself) advised that the young
man should be sent to college ; and Mr. Eamshaw agreed,
though with a heavy spirit, for'he said —'Hindley was
nought, and would never thrive as where he wandered.'
I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt me
to think the master should be made uncomfortable by his
own good deed. I fancied the discontent of age and disease
arose from his family disagreements ; as he would have it
I
WUTHBEINQ HEIGHTS 41
that it did : really, yon know, sir, it was in his sinking frame.
We might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for
two people — Miss Cathy, and Joseph, the servant : you saw
him, I daresay, up yonder. He was, and is yet most likely,
the wearisomest self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked
a Bible to rake the promises to himself and fling the curses
to his neighbours. By his knack of sermonising and pious
discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on
Mr. Eamshaw ; and the more feeble the master became, the
more influence he gained. He was relentless in worrying
him about his soul's concerns, and about ruling his children
rigidly. He encouraged him to regard Hindley as a repro-
bate; and, night after night, he regularly grumbled out a
long string of tales against Heathdiff and Catherine : always
minding to flatter Eamshaw's weakness by heaping the
heaviest blame on the latter.
Certainly she had ways with her such as I never saw a
child take up before ; and she put all of us past our patience
fifty times and oftener in a day: from the hour she came
down-stairs till the hour she went to bed, we had not a
minute's security that she wouldn't be in mischief. Her
spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always
going — singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who
would not do the same. A wild, wicked slip she was — but
she had the bonniest eye, the sweetest smile, and lightest
foot in the parish : and, after all, I believe she meant no
harm ; for when once she made you cry in good earnest, it
seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and
oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. She wm
much too fond of HeathcUff. The greatest punishment we
could invent for her was to keep her separate from him : yet
she got chided more than any of us on his account. In play,
she liked exceedingly to act the little mistress; using her
hands freely, and commanding her companions : she did so
to me, but I would not4)ear slapping and ordering ; and so I
let her know.
Now, Mr. Eamshaw did not understand jokes from his
42 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
children : he had always been strict and grave with them ;
and Catherine, on her part, had no idea why her father
should be crosser and less patient in his aiUng condition
than he was in his prime. His peevish reproofs wakened in
her a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so
happy as when we were all scolding her at once, and she
defying us with her bold, saucy look, and her ready words ;
turning Joseph's religious curses into ridicule, baiting me,
and doing just what her father hated most — showing how
her pretended insolence, which he thought real, had more
power over Heathdiff than his kindness : how the boy would
do her bidding in anything, and his only when it suited his
own inclination. Aft^ behaving as badly as possible all day,
she sometimes came fondling to make it up at night.'Nay,
Cathy,'the old man would say,'I cannot love thee, thou'rt
worse than thy brother. Go, say thy prayers, child, and
ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue that
we ever reared thee !'That made her cry, at first ; and then
being repulsed continually hardened her, and she laughed if
I told her to say she was sorry for her faults, and beg to be
forgiven.
But the hour came, at last, that ended Mr. Eamshaw's
troubles on earth. He died quietly in his chair one October
evening, seated by the fire-side. A high wind blustered
round the house, and roared in the chimney: it sounded
wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were all
together — ^I, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my
knitting, and Joseph reading his Bible near the table (for the
servants generally sat in the house then, after their work
was done). Miss Cathy had been sick, and that made her
still ; she leant against her father's knee, and Heathcliff was
lying on the floor with his head in her lap. I remember the
master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair —
it pleased him rarely to see her gentle — and saying,'Why
canst thou not always be a good lass, Cathy?'And she
turned her face up to his, and laughed, and answered,'Why
cannot you always be a good man, father ?'But as soon as
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 48
she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said she
would sing him to sleep. She began Ringin g yery low, till
his fingers dropped from hers, and his head sai^ on his
breast. Then I told her to hush, and not stir, for fear she
should wake him. We aU kept as mute m mice a full half-
hour, and should have done so longer, only Joseph, having
finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse the
master for prayers and bed. He stepped forward, and
called him by name, and touched his shoulder; but he
would not move : so he took the candle and looked at him.
I thought there was something wrong as he set down the
light ; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered
them to'frame up-stairs, and make little din — they might
pray alone that evening — ^he had summut to do.'
'I shall bid father good-night first,'said Catherine,
putting her arms round his neck, before we could hinder her.
The poor thing discovered her loss directly — she screamed
out —'Oh, he's dead, Heathdifif! he's dead I'And they
both set up a heart-breaking cry^
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter ; but Joseph
asked what we could be thinking of to roar in that way over
a saint in heaven. He told me to put on my cloak and run
to Gimmerton for the doctor and the parson. I could not
guess the use that either would be of, then. However, I
went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor,
back with me ; the other said he would come in the morning.
Leaving Joseph to explain matters, I ran to the children's
room : their door was ajar, I saw they had never lain down,
though it was past midnight ; but they were calmer, and did
not need me to console them. The little souls were comfort-
ing each other with better thoughts than I could have hit
on : no parson in the world ever pictured heaven so
beautifully as they did, in their innocent talk; and, while
I sobbed and listened, I could not help wishing we were all
there safe together.
CHAPTBB VI
Mb. Hindlbt came home to the faneral ; and — a thmg that
amazed ns, and set the neighbours gossiping right and left —
he brought a wife with him. What she was, aad where she
was bom, he never informed us : probably, she had neither
money nor name to recommend her, or he would scarcely
have kept the union from his father.
She was not one that would have disturbed the house
much on her own account. Every object she saw, the
moment she crossed the threshold, appeared to delight her;
and every circumstance that took place about her : except
the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the mourners.
I thought she was half silly, from her behaviour while that
went on : she ran into her chamber, and made me come with
her, though I should have been dressing the children : and
there she sat shivering and clasping her hands, and asking
repeatedly —'Are they gone yet ? * Then she began describ-
ing with hysterical emotion the efifect it produced on her to
see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell
a-weeping — and when I asked what was the matter, answered,
she didn't know ; but she felt so afraid of dying I I imagined
her as little likely to die as myself. She was rather thin,
but young, and firesh-complexioned, and her eyes sparkled
as bright as diamonds. I did remark, to be sure, that
mounting the stairs made her breathe very quick ; that the
least sudden noise set her all in a quiver, and that she
coughed troublesomely sometimes: but I knew nothing of
what these symptoms portended, and had no impulse to
sympathise with her. We don't in general take to foreigners
here, Mr. Lockwood, unless they take to us first.
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 46
Young Eamshaw was altered oonsiderably in the three
years of his abaenoe. He had grown sparer, and lost his
colour, and spoke and dressed quite di£ferently ; and, on the
very day of his return, he told Joseph and me we must
thenoefcnrth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen, and leave
the house for him. Indeed, he would have carpeted and
papered a small spare room for a parlour; but his wife
expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing
fireplace, at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel,
and the wide space there was to move about in where they
usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her oomfort,
and so dropped the intention.
She expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her
new acquaintance ; and she prattled to Catherine, and kissed
her, and ran about with her, and gave her quantities of
presents, at the beginning. Her affection tired very sooui
however, and when she grew peevish, Hindley became
tyrannical. A few words from her, evincing a dislike to
Heathdiff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of
the boy. He drove him from their company to the servants,
deprived him of the instructions of the curate, and insisted
that he should labour out of doors instead ; compelling him
to do so as hard as any other lad on the farm.
Heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first,
because Cathy taught him what she learnt, and worked or
played with him in the fields. They both promised fair to
grow up as rude as savages ; the young master being entirely
negligent how they behaved, and what they did, so they
kept clear of him. He would not even have seen after their
going to church on Sundays, only Joseph and the curate
reprimanded his carelessness when they absented themselves ;
and that reminded him to order Heathcliff a flogging, and
Catherine a fast from dinner or supper. But it was one of
their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the
morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment
grew a mere thing to laugh at. The curate might set as
many chapters as he pleased for Catherine to get by heart,
46 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
and Joseph might thrash Heathdiff till his arm aohed ; they
forgot everything the minute they were together again : at
least the minute they had contrived some naughty plan of
revenge; and many a time I've cried to myself to watoh
them growing more reckless daily, and I not daring to speak
a syllable, for fear of losing the small power I still retained
over the unfriended creatures. One Sunday evening, it
chanced that they were banished from the sitting-room, for
making a noise, or a light offence of the kind ; and when I
went to call them to supper, I could discover them nowhere.
We searched the house, above and below, and the yard and
stables; they were invisible: and, at last, Hindley in a
passion told us to bolt the doors, and swore nobody should
let them in that night. The household went to bed ; and I,
too, anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put my head
out to hearken, though it rained : determined to admit them
in spite of the prohibition, should they return. In a while,
I distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of a
lantern glinmiered through the gate. I threw a shawl over
my head and ran to prevent them from waking Mr. Eamshaw
by knocking. There was Heathcliff, by himself : it gave me
a start to see him alone.
'Where is Miss Catherine?'I cried hurriedly.'No
accident, I hope ?''At Thrushcross Grange,'he answered ;
'and I would have been there too, but they had not the
manners to ask me to stay.''Well, you will catch it T I
said:'you'll never be content till you're sent about your
business. What in the world led you wandering to Thrush-
cross Grange ?''Let me get off my wet clothes, and I'll tell
you all about it, Nelly,'he replied. I bid him beware of
rousing the master, and while he undressed and I waited to
put out the candle, he continued —'Cathy and I escaped
from the wash-house to have a ramble at liberty, and getting
a glimpse of the Grange lights, we thought we would just go
and see whether the lintons passed their Sunday evenings
standing shivering in comers, while their father and mother
sat eating and drinking, and singing and laughing, aud
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 47
burning their eyes out before the fire. Do yoa think they do?
Or reading sermons, and being catechised by their man-
servant, and set to learn a column of Scripture names, if
they don't answer properly?''Probably not,'I responded.
'They are good children, no doubt, and don't deserve the
treatment you receive, for your bad conduct.''Don't cant,
Nelly,'he said :'nonsense ! We ran from the top of the
Heights to the park, without stopping — Catherine completely
beaten in the race, because she was barefoot. You'll have
to seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. We crept
through a broken hedge, groped our way up the path, and
planted ourselves on a flower-plot under the drawing-room
window. The light came from thence ; they had not put up
the shutters, and the curtains were only half closed. Both
of us were able to look in by standing on the basement, and
clinging to the ledge, and we saw — ah I it was beautiful — a
splendid place carpeted vnth crimson, and crimson-covered
chairs and tables, and a pure white ceiling bordered by gold,
a shower of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the
centre, and shimmering with little soft tapers. Old Mr. and
Mrs. Linton were not there ; Edgar and his sisters had it
entirely to themselves. Shouldn't they have been happy?
We should have thought ourselves in heaven I And now,
guess what your good children were doing? Isabella — I
believe she is eleven, a year younger than Cathy — ^lay
screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as if
witches were running red-hot needles into her. Edgar stood
on the hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the
table sat a little dog, shaking its paw and yelping ; which,
from their mutual accusations, we understood they had
nearly pulled in two between them. The idiots ! That was
their pleasure ! to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm
hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to
get it, refused to take it. We laughed outright at the petted
things ; we did despise them ! When would you catch me
wishing to have what Catherine wanted? or find us by
ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and sobbing,
48 WUTHBEING HEIGHTS
and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room ? Td
not exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for
Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grange — not if I might have
the privilege of flinging Joseph off the highest gable, and
painting the house-front with Hindley's blood !'
'Hush, hush !'I interrupted.'Still you have not told
me, Heatholiff, how Catherine is left behind ?'
'I told you we laughed,* he answered.'The Lintons
heard us, and with one accord they shot like arrows to the
door ; there was silence, and then a cry, " Oh, mamma,
mamma I Oh, papa ! Oh, mamma, come here. Oh, papa,
oh ! " They really did howl out something in that way.
We made frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then
we dropped off the ledge, because somebody was drawing
the bars, and we felt we had better flee. I had Cathy by
the hand, and was urging her on, when all at once she fell
down. " Bun, Heathcliff, run I " she whispered.'* They
have let the buU-dog loose, and he holds me 1 " The devil
had seized her ankle, Nelly: I heard his abominable
snorting. She did not yell out — no ! she would have scorned
to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a mad cow.
I did, though : I vociferated curses enough to annihilate any
fiend in Christendom ; and I got a stone and thrust it
between his jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it«
down his throat. A beast of a servant came up with a
lantern, at last, shouting — " Keep fast, Skulker, keep fast t "
He changed his note, however, when he saw Skulker's game.
The dog was throttled off; his huge, purple tongue hanging
half a foot out of his mouth, and his pendent lips streaming
with bloody slaver. The man took Cathy up ; she was sick :
not from fear, I'm certain, but from pain. He carried her
in; I followed, grumbling execrations and vengeance.
" What prey, Robert ? " hallooed Ldnton from the entrance.
'* Skulker has caught a little girl, sir, " he replied ; " and there's
a lad here,*'he added, making a clutch at me, " who looks an
out-and-outer ! Very like the robbers were for putting them
through the window to open the doors to the gang after all
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 49
were asleep, that they might mnrder ns at their ease. Hold
your tongue, you foul-mouthed thief, you 1 you shall go to
the gallows for this. Mr. Linton, sir, don't lay by your gun. "
" No, no, Bobert, " said the old fool. " The rascals knew that
yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me
oleverly. Gome in; I'll furnish them a reception. There,
John, fasten the chain. Give Skulker some water, Jenny.
To beard a magistrate in his stronghold, and on the Sabbath,
too 1 Where will their insolence stop ? Oh, my dear Mary,
look here ! Don't be afraid, it is but a boy — yet the villain
scowls so plainly in his face ; would it not be a kindness to
the country to hang him at once, before he shows his nature
in acts as well as features? " He pulled me under the
chandelier, and Mrs. Linton placed her spectacles on her
nose and raised her hands in horror. The cowardly children
crept nearer also, Isabella lisping — " Frightful thing ! Put
him in the cellar, papa. He's exactly like the son of the
fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. Isn't he, Edgar? "
'\yhile they examined me, Gathy came round ; she
heard the last speech, and laughed. Edgar Linton, after an
inquisitive stare, collected sufficient wit to recognise her.
They see us at church, you know, though we seldom meet
them elsewhere. " That's Miss Eamshaw? " he whispered to
his mother, " and look how Skulker has bitten her — ^how her
foot bleeds ! "
'" Miss Eamshaw? Nonsense ! " cried the dame ; " Miss
Eamshaw scouring the country with a gipsy t And yet, my
dear, the child is in mourning — surely it is — and she may be
lamed for life 1 "
'" What culpable carelessness in her brother t " exclaimed
Mr. Linton, turning from me to Catherine. " I've understood
from Shielders "'(that was the curate, sir)'*'that he lets
her grow up in absolute heathenism. But who is this?
Where did she pick up this companion ? Oho I I declare he
is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his
journey to Liverpool — a litUe Lascar, or an American or
Spaniflh castaway. "
60 WDTHEBING HEIGHTS
'" A wioked boy, at all eventB, " remarked the old lady,
< < and quite unfit for a decent house I Did you notioe his
language, Linton ? I'm ehooked that my ohildren should have
heard it "
'I reoonmienced cursing — don't be angry, Nelly — and so
Bobert was ordered to take me off. I refused to go without
Cathy ; he dragged me into the garden, pushed the lantern
into my hand, assured me that Mr. Eamshaw should be in-
formed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly,
secured the door again. The curtains were still looped up at
one comer, and I resumed my station as spy ; because, if
Catherine had wished to return, I intended shattering their
great glass panes to a million of fragments, xmless they let
her out. She sat on the sofa quietly. Mrs. Linton took off
the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we had borrowed for
our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with her,
I suppose : she was a young lady, and they made a distinc-
tion between h^ treatment and mine. Then the woman-
servant brought a basin of warm water, and washed her
feet ; and Mr. Linton mixed a tumbler of negus, and Isabella
emptied a plateful of cakes into her lap, and Edgar stood
gaping at a distance. Afterwards, they dried and combed
her beautiful hair, and gave her a pair of enormous slippers,
and wheeled her to the fire ; and I left her, as merry as she
could be, dividing her food between the little dog and
Skulker, whose nose she pinched as he ate ; and kindling a
spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the lintons — a
dim reflection from her own enchanting face. I saw they
were full of stupid admiration; she is so immeasurably
superior to them — to everybody on earth, is she not, Nelly?'
'There will more come of this business than you reckon
on,'I answered, covering him up and extinguishing the
light.'You are incurable, Heathcliff; and Mr. Hindley
will have to proceed to extremities, see if he won't.'My
words came truer than I desired. The luckless adventure
made Eamshaw furious. And then Mr. Linton, to mend
matters, paid us a visit himself on the morrow, and read
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 61
the young master such a leotuie on the road he goided his
family, that he was stirred to look about him, in earnest.
Heathdiff received no flogging, but he was told that the
first word he spoke to Miss Catherine should ensure a dis-
missal ; and Mrs. Eamshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-
law in due restoraint when she returned home; employing
art, not force: with force she would have found it impos-
sible.
CHAPTBB VII
Catht stayed at Thrashoroes Grange five weeks: till
Christmas. By that time her ankle was thoroughly cured,
and her manners much improved. The mistress visited her
often in the interval, and commenced her plan of reform by
trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and flattery,
which she took readily ; so that, instead of a wild, hatless
little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze
us all breathless, there'lighted from a handsome black pony
a very dignified person, with brown ringlets falling from the
cover of a feathered beaver, and a long cloth habit, which
she was obliged to hold up with both hands that she might
sail in. Hindley lifted her from her horse, exclaiming
delightedly,'Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty ! I should
scarcely have Imown you: you look like a lady now.
Isabella Linton is not to be compared with her, is she,
Frances?''Isabella has not her natural advantages,'
replied his wife :'but she must mind and not grow wild
again here. Ellen, help Miss Catherine off with her things
— Stay, dear, you will disarrange your curls — let me untie
your hat.'
I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a
grand plaid silk frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes ;
and, whiie her eyes sparkled joyfully when the dogs came
bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly touch them
lest ihey should fawn upon her splendid garments. She
kissed me gently : I was all flour making the Christmas cake,
and it would not have done to give me a hug ; and then she
looked round for Heatholiff. Mr. and Mrs. Eamshaw watched
anxiously their meeting ; thinking it would enable them to
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 63
judge, in some measure, what groimds they had for hoping
to suooeed in separating the two friends.
Heatholiff was hard to discover, at first. If he were
careless, and imcared for, before Catherine's absence, he had
been ten times more so since. Nobody but I even did him
the kindness to call him a dirty boy, and bid him wash
himself, once a week ; and children of his age seldom have
a natural pleasure in soap and water. Therefore, not to
mention his clothes, which had seen three months'service in
mire and dust, and his thick uncombed hair, the surface of
his face and hands was dismally beclouded. He might well
skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a bright, graceful
damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed counter-
part of himself, as he expected.'Is Heathcliff not here ?'she
demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers won-
derfully whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.
'Heathcliff, you may come forward,'cried Mr. Hindley,
enjoying his discomfiture, and gratified to see what a for-
bidding young blackguard he would be compelled to present
himself.'You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome,
like the other servants.'
Cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his conceal-
ment, flew to embrace him ; she bestowed seven or eight
kisses on his cheek within the second, and then stopped, and
drawing back, burst into a laugh, exclaiming,'Why, how
very black and cross you look ! and how — ^how funny and
grim ! But that's because I'm used to Edgar and Isabella
Linton. Well, Heathcliff, have you forgotten me ?'
She had some reason to put the question, for shame and
pride threw double gloom ovtf his countenance, and kept
him immovable.
'Shake hands, Heathcliff,'said Mr. Eamshaw, con-
descendingly ;'once in a way, that is permitted.'
'I shall not,'replied the boy, finding his tongue at last ;
'I shall not stand to be laughed at. I shall not bear it !'
t And he would have broken from the circle, but Miss
Ciithy seized him again.
M WTJTHEEING HEIGHTS
'I did not mean to laugh at you/ she said ;'I could not
hinder myself : Heathcliff, shake hands at least ! What are
you sulky for? It was only that you looked odd. If you
wash your faoe and brush your hair, it will be all right : but
you are so dirty I'
She gazed oonoemedly at the dusky fingers she held in
her own, and also at her dress ; which she feared had gained
no embellishment from its contact with his.
'You needn't have touched me I'he answered, following
her eye and snatching away his hand.'I shall be as dirty
as I please : and I like to be dirty, and I will be dirty/
With that he dashed headforemost out of the room, amid
the merriment of the master and mistress, and to the serious
disturbance of Catherine ; who could not comprehend how
her remarks should have produced such an exhibition of bad
temper.
After playing lady's-maid to the new-oomer, and putting
my cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen
cheerful with great fires, befitting Christmas-eve, I prepared
to sit down and amuse myself by singing carols, all alone ;
regardless of Joseph's affirmations that he considered the
merry tunes I chose as next door to songs. He had retired
to private prayer in his chamber, and Mr. and Mrs. Eam-
shaw were engaging Missy's attention by sundry gay trifles
bought for her to present to the little lintons, as an acknow-
ledgment of their kindness. They had invited them to spend
the morrow at Wuthering Heights, and the invitation had
been accepted, on one condition : Mrs. Linton begged that
her darlings might be kept carefully apart from that'naughty
swearing boy.'
Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I smelt
the rich scent of the heating spices ; and admired the shining
kitchen utensils, the polished clock, decked in holly, the
silver mugs ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled
ale for supper; and above all, the speckless purity of my psr-
ticular care — the scoured and well-swept floor. I gave due
inward applause to every object, and then I remembered
I
WUTHBRINQ HEIGHTS 66
how old Eomshaw used to oome in when all was tidied,
and call me a cant lass, and slip a shilling into my hand ae
a Christmas-box ; and from that I went on to think of his
fondness for HeathcHfF, and his dread lest he should suffer
neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally
led me to consider the poor lad's situation now, and from
singing I changed my mind to crying. It struck me soon,
however, there would be more sense in endeavouring to
repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them : I
got up and walked into the court to seek him. He was not
far ; I foimd him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony
in the stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.
'Make haste, HeathcliffT I said,'the kitchen is so
comfortable ; and Joseph is up-stairs : make haste, and let
me dress you smart before Miss Cathy comes out, and then
you can sit together, with the whole hearth to yourselves,
and have a long chatter till bedtime.'
He proceeded with his task, and nevtf turned his head
towards me.
'Gome — ^are you coming ?'I continued. * There's a little
cake for each of you, nearly enough ; and you'll need half-an-
hour's donning.'
I waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.
Catherine supped with her brother and sister-in-law : Joseph
and I joined at an unsociable meaJ, seasoned with reproofs on
one side and sauciness on the other. His cake and cheese
remained on the table all night for the fairies. He
managed to continue work till nine o'clock, and then
marched dumb and dour to his chamber. Cathy sat up
late, having a world of things to order for the recep-
tion of her new friends : she came into the kitchen once to
speak to her old one ; but he was gone, and she only stayed
to ask what was the matter with him, and then went back.
In the morning he rose early ; and, as it was a holiday, carried
his ill-humour on to the moors ; not re-appearing till the
family were departed for church. Fasting and reflection
teemed to have brought him to a better spirit. He hung
56 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
about me for a while, and having screwed up his oonrage,
exclaimed abruptly — * Nelly, msbke me decent, I'm going to
be good.'
'High time, Heathcliff,'I said ;'you have grieved
Catherine : she's sorry s & e ever came home, I daresay ! It
looks as if you envied her, because she is more thought of than
you.'
The notion of efwying Catherine was incomprehensible
to him, but the notion of grieving her he understood clearly
enough.
* Did she say she was grieved ?'he inquired, looking very
serious.
'She cried when I told her you were off again this
morning.'
'Well, I cried last night,'he returned,'and I had more
reason to cry than she.'
'Yes : you had the reason of going 1x > bed with a proud
heart and an empty stomach,'said I. * Proud people breed
sad sorrows for themselves. But, if you be ashamed of your
touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind, when she comes in.
You must go up and offer to kiss her, and say — you know
best what to say ; only do it heartily, and not as if you
thought her converted into a stranger by her grand dress.
And now, though I have dinner to get ready, I'll steal time
to arrange you so that Edgar Linton shall look quite a doll
beside you : and that he does. You are younger, and yet,
I'll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad across the
shoulders ; you could knock him down in a twinkling ; don't
you feel that you could ?'
Heathcliffs face brightened a moment ; then it was over-
cast afresh, and he sighed.
'But, Nelly, if I knocked him down twenty times, that
wouldn't make him less handsome or me more so. I wish I
had light hair and a fair skin, and was dressed and behaved
as well, and had a chance of being as rich as he will be !'
'And cried for mamma at every turn,'I added,'and
trembled if a country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 67
at home all day for a shower of rain. Oh, Heatholiff, yon
are showing a poor spirit ! Come to the glass, and 1*11 let
yon see what you should wish. Do you mark those two
lines between your eyes; and those thick brovrs, that,
instead of rising arched, sink in the middle ; and that couple
of black fiends, so deeply buried, who never open their
windows boldly, but lurk glinting under them, like devil's
spies ? Wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkles,
to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to confident,
innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and
always seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. Don't
get the expression of a vicious cur that appears to know the
kicks it gets are its desert, and yet hates all the world, as well
as the kicker, for what it suffers.'
* In other words, I must wish for Edgar Linton's great
blue eyes and even forehead,'he repUed.'I do — ^and that
won't help me to them.'
'A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad/ I
continued, * if you were a regular black ; and a bad one will
turn the bonniest into something worse than ugly. And now
that we've done washing, and combing, and sulking — tell me
whether you don't think yourself rather handsome? I'll
tell you, I do. You're fit for a prince in disguise. Who
knows but your father was Emperor of China, and your
mother an Indian queen, each of them able to buy up, with
one week's income, Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross
Grange together? And you were kidnapped by wicked
sailors and brought to England. Were I in your place, I
would frame high notions of my birth ; and the thoughts of
what I was should give me courage and dignity to support
the oppressions of a httle farmer !'
So I chattered on ; and Heathcliff gradually lost his
frown and began to look quite pleasant, when all at once
our contersation was interrupted by a rumbling sound
moving up the road and entering the court. He ran to the
window and I to the door, just in time to behold the two
Lintons descend from the family carriage, smothered in
88 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
oloaks and fors, and the Eamahaws dismount from their
horses : they often rode to church in winter. Catherine
took a hand of each of the children, and brought them into
the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put
colour into their white faces.
I urged my companion to hasten now and show his
amiable humour, and he willingly obeyed ; but ill luck
would have it that, as he opened the door leading from the
kitchen on one side, Hindley opened it on the other. They
met, and the master, irritated at seeing him dean and cheer-
ful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to Mrs. Linton,
shoved him back with a sudden thrust, and angrily bade
Joseph'keep the fellow out of the room — send him into the
garret till dinner is over. He'll be cramming his fingers
in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone with them a
minute.'
'Nay, sir,'I could nol^ avoid answering,'he'll touch
nothing, not he : and I suppose he must have his share of
the dainties as well as we.'
'He shall have his share of my hand, if I catch him
downstairs till dark,'cried Hindley.'Begone, you vaga-
bond! What! you are attempting the coxcomb, are you?
Wait till I get hold of those elegant locks — see if I won't
pull them a bit longer !'
'They are long enough already,'observed Master Linton,
peeping from the doorway ;'I wonder they don't make his
head ache. It's like a colt's mane over his eyes !'
He ventured this remark without any intention to insult ;
but HeathdifTs violent nature was not prepared to endure
the appearance of impertinence from one whom he seemed to
hate, even then, as a rival. He seized a tureen of hot apple
sauce (the first thing that came under his gripe) and dashed
it full against the speaker's face and neck ; who instantly
commenced a lament that brought Isabella and Catherine
hurrying to the place. Mr. Eamshaw snatched up the
oolprit directly and conveyed him to his chamber ; wherey
doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool the fit of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 69
paBsion, for he appeared red and breathless. I got the dish-
cloth, and rather spitefully sonibbed Edgar's nose and month,
affirming it served him right for meddling. His sister began
weeping to go home, and Cathy stood by confounded, blush-
ing for all.
'You should not have spoken to him I'she expostulated
with Master Linton.'He was in a bad temper, and now
you've spoilt your visit ; and he'll be flogged : I hate him to
be flogged 1 I can't eat my dinner. Why did you speak to
him, Edgar?'
'I didn't,'sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and
finishing the remainder of the purification with his cconbric
pocket-handkerchief.'I promised mamma that I wouldn't
say one word to him, and I didn't.'
'Well, don't cry,'replied Catherine, contemptuously;
'you're not killed. Don't ms^ke more mischief ; my brother
is coming : be quiet ! Hush, Isabella ! Has anybody hurt
you V
'There, there, children — ^to your seats 1'cried Hindley,
bustling in.'That brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.
Next time. Master Edgar, take the law into your own fists-
it will give you an appetite I'
The little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the
fragrant feast. They were hungry after their ride, and easily
consoled, since no real harm had befallen them. Mr.
Eamshaw carved bountiful platefuls, and the mistress made
them merry with lively talk. I waited behind her chair, and
was pained to behold Catherine, vnth dry eyes and an
indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose
before her.'An unfeeling child,'I thought to myself;
'how lightly she dismisses her old playmate's troubles. I
could not have imagined her to be so selfish.'She lifted a
mouthful to her lips : then she set it down again : her
cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. She slipped
her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to
conceal her emotion. I did not call her unfeeling long ; for
I perceived she was in purgatory throughout the day, and
r
60 WUTHESING HEIGHTS
wearying to find an opportunity of getting by herself, or pay-
ing a visit to Heathdiff, who had been locked up by the
master : as I discovered, on endeavouring to introduce to
him a private mess of victuals. ^
In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that he
might be liberated then, as Isabella Linton had no partner :
her entreaties were vain, and I was appointed to supply the
deficiency. We got rid of all gloom in the excitement of
the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the
arrival of the Gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong :
a trumpet, a trombone, clarionets, bassoons, French horns,
and a bass viol, besides singers. They go the rounds of all
the respectable houses, and receive contributions every
Christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to hear them.
After the usual carols bad been sung, we set them to songs
and glees. Mrs. Eamshaw loved the music, and so they gave
us plenty.
Catherine loved it too : but she said it sounded sweetest
at the top of the steps, and she went up in the dark : I
followed. They shut the house door below, never noting our
absence, it was so full of people. She made no stay at the
stairs*-head, but mounted farther, to the garret where
Heathcliff was confined, and called him. He stubbornly
declined answering for a while : she persevered, and finally
persuaded him to hold communion with her through the
boards. I let the poor things converse unmolested, till I
supposed the songs were going to cease, and the singers to
get some refreshment : then I clambered up the ladder to
warn her. Instead of finding her outside, I heard her voice
within. The little monkey had crept by the skylight of one
garret, along the roof, into the skylight of the other, and it
was with the utmost difficulty I could coax her out again.
When she did come, Heathcliff came with her, and she in-
sisted that I should take him into the kitchen, as my fellow-
servant had gone to a neighbour's, to be removed from the
sound of our'devil's psalmody,'as it pleased him to call it.
I told them I intended by no means to encourage their
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 61
tricks : but as the prisoner had never broken his fast since
yesterday's dinner, I would wink at his cheating Mr.
Hindley that once. He went down: I set him a stool
by the fire, and offered him a quantity of good things : bat
he was sick and could eat little, and my attempts to
entertain him were thrown i^way. He leant his two elbows
on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and remained rapt
in dumb meditation. On my inquiring the subject of his
thoughts, he answered gravely —'I'm trying to settle how I
shall pay Hindley back. I don't care how long I wait, if I
can only do it at last. I hope he will not die before I do t'
'For shame, Heathcliff!'said I.'It is for Ood to
punish wicked people ; we should learn to forgive.'
* No, God won't have the satisfaction that I shall,'he re-
turned. * I only wish I knew the best way ! Let me alone,
and I'll plan it out : while I'm thinking of that I don't feel
pain.'
* But, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tales cannot divert
you. I'm annoyed how I should dream of chattering on at
such a rate ; and your gruel cold, and you nodding for bed t
I could have told Heathdiff's history, iJl that you need hear,
in half a dozen words.'
Thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and pro-
ceeded to lay aside her sewing; but I felt incapable of
moving from the hearth, and I was very far from nodding.
'Bit still, Mrs. Dean,'I cried ;'do sit still another half -hour.
You've done just right to tell the story leisurely. That is
the method I like ; and you must finish it in the same style.
I am interested in every character you have mentioned, more
or less.'
'The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.'
'No matter — I'm not accustomed to go to bed in the
long hours. One or two is early enough for a person who
lies till ten.'
'You shouldn't lie till ten. There's the very prime
of the morning gone long before that time. A person
6S WUTHBSING HEIGHTS
who has not done one-half his day's work by ten o'clock,
nms a chance of leaving the other half undone.'
'NererthelesB, Mrs. Dean, resume your chair ; because
to-morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon.
I prognosticate for myself an obstinate cold, at least.'
* I hope not, sir. Well, you must allow me to leap over
some three years ; during that space Mrs. Eamshaw'
'No, no, I'll allow nothing of the sort I Are you
acquainted with the mood of mind in which, if you were
seated alone, and the cat licking its kitten on the rug
before you, you would watch the operation so intently that
puss's neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of
temper?'
'A terribly lazy mood, I should say.'
'On the contrary, a tiresomely active one. It is mine, at
present ; and, therefore, continue minutely. I perceive that
people in these regions acquire over people in towns the
value that a spider in a dungeon does over a ^ider in a
cottage, to their various occupants ; and yet the deepened
attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the looker-
on. They do live more in earnest, more in themselves, and
less in surface, change, and frivolous external things. I
could fancy a love for life here almost possible ; and I was
a fixed unbeliever in any love of a year's standing. One
state resembles setting a hungry man down to a single dish,
on which he may concentrate his entire appetite and do it
justice ; the other, introducing him to a table laid out by
French cooks : he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment
from the whole ; but each part is a mere atom in his regard
and remembrance.'
'Oh ! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you
get to know us,'observed Mrs. Dean, somewhat puzzled at
my speech.
'Excuse me,'I responded ;'you, my good friend, are a
striking evidence against that assertion. Excepting a few
provincialisms of slight consequence, you have no marks of
the manners which I am habituated to consider as peculiar
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 63
to your class. I am sure you have thought a great deal
more than the generality of servants think. You have been
compelled to cultivate your refleotiye faculties for want
of occasions for frittering your life away in silly trifles.'
Mrs. Dean laughed.
'I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of
body/ she said ;'not exactly from living among the hills
and seeing one set of faces, and one series of actions, from
year's end to year's end; but I have undergone sharp
discipline, which has taught me wisdom ; and then, I have
read more than you would fancy, Mr. Lockwood. You
could not open a book in this library that I have not looked
into, and got something out of also : unless it be that range
of Greek and Latin, and that of French ; and those I know
one from another : it is as much as you can expect of a poor
man's daughter. However, if I am to follow my story in
true gossip's fashion, I had better go on ; and instead of
leaping three years, I will be content to pass to the next
summer — ^the summer of 1778, that is nearly twenty-three
years ago.'
CHAPTEB Vm
On the morning of a fine June day my first bonny little
nursling, and the last of the ancient Eamshaw stook,
was bom. We were bnsy with the hay in a far-away field,
when the girl that usually brought our breakfasts came run-
ning an hour too soon across the meadow and up the lone,
calling me as she ran.
'Oh, such a grand bairn !'she panted out.'The finest
lad that ever breathed ! But the doctor says missis must go :
he says she's been in a consumption these many months. I
heard him tell Mr. Hindley : and now she has nothing to
keep her, and she'll be dead before winter. You must come
home directly. You're to nurse it, Nelly : to feed it with
sugar and milk, and take care of it day and night. I wish
I were you, because it will be all yours when there is no
missis i'
'But is she very ill ?'I asked, flinging down my rake
and tying my bonnet.
'I guess she is ; yet she looks bravely,'replied the girl,
'and she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a
man. She's out of her head for joy, it's such a beauty ! If I
were her I'm certain I should not die : I should get better at
the bare sight of it, in spite of Kenneth. I was fairly mad
at him. Dame Archer brought the cherub down to master,
in the house, and his face just began to light up, when the
old croaker steps forward, and says he —'* Eamshaw, it's a
blessing your wife has been spared to leave you this son.
When she came, I felt convinced we shouldn't keep her long ;
and now, I must tell you, the winter will probably finish her.
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 66
Don't take on, and fret about it too muoh : it can't be helped.
And besides, you should have known better than to ohoose
such a rush of a lass ! "'
* And what did the master answer ?'I inquired.
'I think he swore : but I didn't mind him, I was straining
to see the bairn/ and she began again to describe it raptur-
ously. I, as zealous as herself, hurried eagerly home to
admire, on my part ; though I was very sad for Hindley's
sake. He had room in his heart only for two idols — ^his wife
and himself: he doted on both, and adored one, and I
couldn't conceive how he would bear the loss.
When we got to Wuthering Heights, there he stood at
the front door ; and, as I passed in, I asked,'how was the
baby?'
'Nearly ready to run about, Nell I'he replied, putting on
a cheerful smUe.
'And the mistress?'I ventured to inquire;'the doctor
says she's — 7'
* Damn the doctor !'he interrupted, reddening.'Frances
is quite right: she'll be perfectly well by this time next
week. Are you going up-stairs ? will you tell her that I'll
come, if she'll promise not to talk. I left her because she
would not hold her tongue ; and she must — ^tell her Mr.
Kenneth says she must be quiet.'
I delivered this message to Mrs. Eamshaw ; she seemed
in flighty spirits, and replied merrily,'I hardly spoke a
word, Ellen, and there he has gone out twice, crying. Well,
say I promise I won't speak : but that does not bind me not
to laugh at him !'
Poor soul I Till within a week of her death that gay
heart never failed her ; and her husband persisted doggedly,
nay, furiously, in affirming her health improved every day.
When Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless
at that stage of the malady, and he needn't put him to
further expense by attending her, he retorted,'I know you
need not — she's well — she does not want any more attendance
from you! She never was in a consumption. It was a
66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
fever ; and it is gone : her poise is as slow as mine now,
and her cheek as cool.'
He told his wife the same story, and she seemed to
believe him ; but one night, while leaning on his shoulder,
in the act of saying she thought she should be able to get up
to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her — a very slight one — ^he
raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about his
neck, her face changed, and she was dead.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly
into my hands. Mr. Eamshaw, provided he saw him healthy
and never heard him cry, was contented, as far as regarded
him. For himself, he grew desperate: his sorrow was of
that kind that will not lament. He neither wept nor prayed ;
he cursed and defied: execrated God and man, and gave
himself up to reckless dissipation. The servants could not
bear his tyrannical and evil conduct long : Joseph and I were
the only two that would stay. I had not the heart to leave
my charge ; and besides, you know, I had been his foster-
sister, and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger
would. Joseph remained to hector over tenants and
labourers ; and because it was his vocation to be where he
had plenty of wickedness to reprove.
The master's bad ways and bad companions formed a
pretty example for Catherine and Heathcliff. His treatment
of the latter was enough to make a fiend of a saint. And,
truly, it appeared as if the lad were possessed of something
diabolical at that period. He delighted to witness Hindley
degrading himself past redemption ; and became daily more
notable for savage suUenness and ferocity. I could not half
tell what an infernal house we had. The curate dropped
calling, and nobody decent came near us, at last; imless
Edgar Linton's visits to Miss Cathy might be an exception.
At fifteen she was the queen of the country-side ; she had
no peer; and she did turn out a haughty, headstrong
creature ! I own I did not like her, after infancy was past ;
and I vexed her frequently by trying to bring down her
arrogance : she never took an aversion to me, though. She
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 67
had a wondroas oonstancy to old attaohments : even Heath-
cliff kept his hold on her affections unalterably ; and young
Linton, with all his superiority, found it difficult to make an
equally deep impression. He was my late master : that is
his portrait over the fireplace. It used to hang on one side,
and his wife's on the other ; but hers has been removed, or
else you might see something of what she was. Can you
make that out?
Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a soft-
featured face, exceedingly resembling the young lady at the
Heights, but more pensive and amiable in expression. It
formed a sweet picture. The long light hair curled slightly
on the temples ; the eyes were large and serious ; the figure
almost too graceful. I did not marvel how Catherine
Eamshaw could forget her first friend for such an individual.
I marvelled much how he, with a mind to correspond with
his person, could fancy my idea of Catherine Eamshaw.
'A very agreeable portrait,'I observed to the house-
keeper.'Is it like ?'
'Yes,'she answered ;'but he looked better when he was
animated; that is his everyday countenance: he wanted
spirit in general.'
Catherine had kept mp her acquaintance with the lintons
since her five-weeks'residence among them ; and as she had
no temptation to show her rough side in their company, and
had the sense to be ashamed of being rude where she
experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed unwittingly
on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality ;
gained the admiration of Isabella, and the heart and soul of
her brother : acquisitions that flattered her horn the first —
for she was full of ambition — and led her to adopt a double
character without exactly intending to deceive any one. In
the place where she heard Heathcliff termed a'vulgar young
ruffian,'and * worse than a brute,'she took care not to act
like him ; but at home she had small inclination to practise
politeness that would only be laughed at, and restrain an un-
ruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.
68 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering
Heights openly. He had a terror of Eamshaw's reputation,
and shrunk horn encountering him ; and yet he was always
received with our best attempts at civility : the master himself
avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if he
could not be gracious, kept out of the way. I rather think
his appearance there was distasteful to Catherine ; she was
not artful, never played the coquette, and had evidently an
objection to her two friends meeting at all; for when
Heathcliff expressed contempt of Linton in his presence, she
could not half coincide, as she did in his absence ; and when
Linton evinced disgust and antipathy to Heathcliff, she
dared not treat his sentiments with indifference, as if
depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any con-
sequence to her. I've had many a laugh at her perplexities
and untold troubles, which she vainly strove to hide from
my mockery. That sounds ill-natured: but she was so
proud, it became really impossible to pity her distresses, till
she should be chastened into more humility. She did bring
herself, finally, to confess, and to confide in me : there was
not a soul else that she might fashion into an adviser.
Mr. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and
Heathcliff presumed to give himself a holiday on the strength
of it. He had reached the age of sixteen then, I think, and
without having bad features, or being deficient in intellect,
he contrived to convey an impression of inward and outward
repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
In the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his
early education: continual hard work, begun soon and
concluded late, had extinguished any curiosity he once
possessed in pursuit of knowledge, and any love for books or
learning. His childhood's sense of superiority, instilled into
him by the favours of old Mr. Eamshaw, was faded away.
He struggled long to keep up an equality with Catherine in
her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret :
but ho yielded completely; and there was no prevailing on him
to take a step in the way of moving upward, when he found
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 69
he most, necessarily, sink beneath his former level. Then
personal appearance sympathised with mental deterioration :
he acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look ; his naturally
reserved disposition was exaggerated into an ahnost idiotic
excess of unsociable moroseness ; and he took a grim pleasure,
apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem
of his few acquaintance.
Catherine and he were constant companions still at his
seasons of respite from labour ; but he had ceased to express
his fondness for her in words, and recoiled with angry
suspicion from her girlish caresses, as if conscious there
could.be no gratification in lavishing such marks of affection
on him. On the before-named occasion he came into the
house to announce his intention of doing nothing, while I
was assisting Miss Cathy to arrange her dress : she had not
reckoned on his taking it into his head to be idle; and
imagining she would have the whole place to herself, she
managed, by some means, to inform Mr. Edgar of her
brother's absence, and was then preparing to receive him.
'Cathy, are you busy this afternoon ?'asked Heathdiff.
* Are you going anywhere ?'
* No, it is raining,'she answered.
'Why have you that silk frock on, then?'he said.
* Nobody coming here, I hope ?'
'Not that I know of,'stammered Miss :'but you should
be in the field now, HeathcUff. It is an hour past dinner-
time : I thought you were gone.'
'Hindley does not often free us from his accursed
presence,'observed the boy.'I'll not work any more to-
day : I'll stay with you.'
'Oh, but Joseph will tell,'she suggested;'you'd better
gol'
'Joseph is loading lime on the further side of Peni-
stone Crags; it will take him till dark, and he'll never
know.*
So saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down.
Gaiheiine reflected an instant, with knitted brows — she
TO WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
found it needful to cunooth the way for an intrusion.
* Isabella and Edgar Linton talked of oalling this afternoon/
she said, at the conclusion of a minute's silenoe.'As it
rains, I hardly expect them ; but they may come, and if
they do, you run the risk of being scolded for no good/
'Order Ellen to say you are engaged, Cathy,'he per-
sisted ;'don't turn me out for those pitiful, silly friends of
yours 1 I'm on the point, sometimes, of complaining that
they— but I'll not'
'That they what ?'cried Catherine, gazing at him with
a troubled countenance.'Oh, Nelly !'she added petulantly,
jerking her head away from my hands,'you've combed my
hair quite out of curl! That's enough; let me alone.
What are you on the point of complaining about, Heath-
diflf?'
'Nothing — only look at the almanack on that wall ;'he
pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window, and
continued,'The crosses are for the evenings you have spent
with the lintons, the dots for those spent witii me. Do you
see ? I've marked every day.'
'Yes — ^very foolish : as if I took notice !'repUed
Catherine, in a peevish tone.'And where is the sense of
that?'
'To show that I do take notice/ said Heathcliff.
'And should I always be sitting with you?'she de-
manded, growing more irritated.'What good do I get?
What do you talk about ? You might be dumb, or a baby,
for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you do,
either!'
'You never told me before that I talked too little, or that
you disliked my company, Cathy !'exdauned Heathcliff, in
much agitation.
'It's no company at all, when people know nothing and
say nothing,'she muttered.
Her companion rose up, but he'hadn't time to express
his feelings further, for a horse's feet were heard on the
flags, and having knocked gently, young Linton entered, his
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 71
face brilliant with delight at the unexpected sommonBhe
had received. Doubtless Catherine marked the difference
between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
The contrast resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak,
hilly, coal country for a beautiful fertile valley; and his
voice and greeting were as opi)osite as his aspect. He had
a sweet, low manner of speaking, and pronounced his
words as you do : that's less gruff than we talk here, and
softer.
'I'm not come too soon, am I ?'he said, casting a look
at me : I had begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers
at the far end in the dresser.
'No,'answered Catherine. * What are you doing there,
NeUy?'
* My work, Miss,'I replied. (Mr. Hindley had given me
directions to make a third party in any private visits Linton
chose to pay.)
She stepped behind me and whispered crossly,'Take
yourself and your dusters off; when company are in the
house, servants don't commence scouring and cleaning in
the room where they are !'
'It's a good opportunity, now that master is away,'I
answered aloud;'he hates me to be fidgeting over these
things in his presence. I'm sure Mr. Edgar will excuse
me.'
'I hate you to be fidgeting in my presence,'exclaimed
the young lady imperiously, not allowing her guest time to
spesJs : she had failed to recover her equanimity since the
little dispute with Heathcliff.
'I'm sorry for it, Miss Catherine,'was my response ; and
I proceeded assiduously with my occupation.
She, supposing Edgar could not see her, snatched the
cloth from my hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged
wrench, very spitefully on the arm. I've said I did not
love her, and rather relished mortifying her vanity now and
then : besides, she hurt me extremely ; so I started up from
my knees, and screamed out,'Oh, Miss, that's a nasty
72 WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS
triok ! Ton have no right to nip me, and I'm not going to
bear it/
'I didn't touch you, you lying creature 1'cried she, her
fingers tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage.
She never had power to conceal her passion, it always set
her whole complexion in a blaze.
'What's that, then?'I retorted, showing a decided
purple witness to refute her.
She stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and then,
irresistibly impelled by the naughty spirit within her, slapped
me on the cheek : a stinging blow that filled both eyes with
water.
* Catherine, love 1 Catherine !'interposed Linton, greatly
shocked at the double fault of falsehood and violence which
his idol had committed.
'Leave the room, Ellen !'she repeated, trembling all
over.
Little Hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was
sitting near me on the floor, at seeing my tears conmienced
crying himself, and sobbed out complaints against * wicked
aunt Cathy,'which drew her fury on to his unlucky head :
she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor child
waxed livid, and Edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands
to deliver him. In an instant one was wrung free, and the
astonished young man felt it applied over his own ear in a
way that could not be mistaken for jest. He drew back in
consternation. I lifted Hareton in my arms, and walked off
to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of communication
open, for I was curious to watch how they would settle their
disagreement. The insulted visitor moved to the spot where
he had laid his hat, pale and with a quivering Up.
'That's right 1'I said to myself.'Take warning and
begone ! It's a kindness to let you have a glimpse of her
genuine disposition.'
'Where are you going ?'demanded Catherine, advancing
to the door.
He swerved aside, and attempted to pass.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 78
'You must not go 1'she exclaimed, energetically.
'I must and shall I'he replied in a subdued voice.
'No,'she persisted, grasping the handle ;'not yet, Bdgar
Ldnton : sit down ; you shall not leave me in that temper.
I should be miserable all night, and I won't be miserable
for you ! *
* Can I stay after you have struck me ?'asked linton.
Catherine was mute.
'You've made me afraid and ashamed of you,'he con-
tinued ;'I'll not come here again 1'
Her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.
'And you told a deliberate untruth !'he said.
'I didn't !'she cried, reooveiing her speech ;'I did
nothing deliberately. Well, go, if you please — ^get a^ayl
And now I'll cry — I'll cry myself sick !'
She dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set to
weeping in serious earnest. Edgar persevered in his resolu-
tion as far as the court ; there he lingered. I resolved to
encourage him.
'Miss is dreadfully wayward, sir/ I called out.'As bad
as any marred child : you'd better be riding home, or else
she will be sick, only to grieve us.'
The soft thing looked askance through the window : he
possessed the power to depart as much as a cat possesses the
power to leave a mouse half killed, or a bird half eaten. Ah,
I thought, there will be no saving him : he's doomed, and
flies to his fate ! And so it was : he turned abruptly,
hastened into the house again, shut the door behind him ;
and when I went in a while after to inform them that
Bamshaw had come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the
whole place about our ears (his ordinary frame of mind in
that condition), I saw the quarrel had merely efifected a
closer intimacy — had broken the outworks of youthful
timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friend-
ship, and confess themselves lovers.
Intelligence of Mr. Hindley's arrival drove Linton
speedily to his horse, and Catherine to her chamber. I went
74 WUTHBEINQ HEIGHTS
to hide little Horeton, and to take the shot oat of the
master's fowling-pieoe, which he was fond of playing with
in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the Uves of any
who provoked, or even attracted his notice too much ; and I
had hit upon the plan of removing it, that he might do less
mischief if he did go the length of firing the gun.
OHAFTEB IX
Hb entered, vooif erating oaths dreadful to hear ; and caught
me in the act of stowing his son away in the kitchen cap-
board. Hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror
of enoonntering either his wild beast's fondness or his mad-
man's rage ; for in one he ran a chance of being squeezed
and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung into the
fire, or dashed against the wall ; and the poor thing re-
mained perfectly quiet wherever I chose to put him.
'There, I've found it out at last 1'cried Hindley, pulling
me back by the skin of my neck, like a dog. * By heaven
and hell, you've sworn between you to murder that child !
I know how it is, now, that he is always out of my way.
But, with the help of Satan, I shall make you swallow the
carving-knife, Nelly 1 You needn't laugh ; for I've just
crammed Kenneth, head-downmost, in the Black-horse
marsh ; and two is the same as one — and I want to kill
some of you : I shall have no rest till I do 1'
'But I don't like the carving-knife, Mr. Hindley,'I
answered ;'it has been catting red herrings. I'd rath^ be
shot, if you plejEuie.'
'You'd rather be damned 1'he said ; * and so you shalL
No law in England can hinder a man from keying his
house decent, and mine's abominable i Open your mouth.'
He held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point
between my teeth : but, for my part, I was never much
afraid of his vagaries. I spat out, and aflOrmed it tasted
detestably — I would not take it on any account
'Oh t'said he, releasing me,'I see that hideous little
76 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Tillain is not Hareton : I beg your pardon, NelL If it be,
he deeerves flaying alive for not ronning to welcome me,
and for screaming as if I were a goblin. Unnatural cab,
come hither ! I'll teach thee to impose on a good-hearted,
deluded father. Now, don't you think the lad would be
handsomer cropped? It makes a dog fiercer, and I love
something fierce — get me a scissors — something fierce and
trim ! Besides, it's infernal affectation— devilish conceit it
is, to cherish our ears — we're asses enough without them.
Hush, child, hush 1 Well then, it is my darling ! wisht, dry
thy eyes — there's a joy ; kiss me. What I it won't ? Kiss
me, Hareton 1 Damn thee, kiss me 1 By God, as if I would
rear such a monster ! As sure as I'm living, I'll break
the brat's neck.'
Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father's
arms with all his might, and redoubled his yells when he
carried him up-stairs and lifted him over the banister. I
cried out that he would frighten the child into fits, and ran
to rescue him. As I reached them, Hindley leant forward
on the rails to listen to a noise below ; almost forgetting what
he had in his hands.'Who is that ?'he asked, hearing
some one approaching the stairs'-foot. I leant forward also,
for the purpose of signing to Heathdiff, whose step I recog-
nised, not to come further ; and, at the instant when my
eye quitted Hareton, he gave a sudden spring, delivered
himself from the careless grasp that held him, and fell.
There was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror
before we saw that the little wretch was safe. Heathdiff
arrived underneath just at the critical moment ; by a natural
impulse he arrested his descent, and setting him on his feet,
looked up to discover the author of the accident A miser
who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five shillings,
and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five thousand
pounds, could not show a blanker countenance than he did
on beholding the figure of Mr. Eamshaw above. It ex-
pressed, plainer than words could do, the intensest anguish at
having made himself the instrument of thwarting his own
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 77
revenge. Had it been dark, I daresay he would have tried
to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton's skull on the
steps ; but, we witnessed his salvation ; and I was presently
below with my precious charge pressed to my hearf. Hindley
descended more leisurely, sobered and abashed.
'It is your fault, Ellen,'he said ;'you should have kept
him out of sight : you should have taken him from me I Is
he injured anywhere ?'
'Injured 1'I cried angrily ;'if he is not killed, he'll be
an idiot 1 Oh ! I wonder his mother does not rise from
her grave to see how you use him. You're worse than a
heathen — treating your own flesh and blood in that manner !'
He attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself
with me, sobbed off his terror directly. At the first finger
his father laid on him, however, he shrieked again louder
than before, and struggled as if he would go into convulsions.
'You shall not meddle with him !'I continued.'He
hates you — ^they all hate you — that's the truth I A happy
family you have ; and a pretty state you're come to !'
'I shall come to a prettier, yet, Nelly,'laughed the mis-
guided man, recovering his hardness.'At present, convey
yourself and him away. And hark you, Heathcliff! clear
you too quite from my reach and hearing. I wouldn't
murder you to-night ; unless, perhaps, I set the house on
fire : but that's as my fancy goes.'
While sa3ring this he took a pint bottle of brandy from
the dresser, and poured some into a tumbler.
* Nay, don't !'I entreated. * Mr. Hindley, do take warn-
ing. Have mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you care.nothing
for yourself !'
'Any one wiU do better for him than I shall/ he
answered.
'Have mercy on your own soul !'I said, endeavouring to
snatch the glass from his hand.
'Not 1 1 On the contrary, I shall have great pleasure in
sending it to perdition to punish its Maker,'exclaimed the
blasphemer.'Here's to its hearty damnation 1'
78 WXITHBRING HEIGHTS
He drank the Bpirits and impatiently bade us go; ter-
minating his oommand with a sequel of horrid impreoations
too bad to repeat or remember.
'It's a ^pity he cannot kill himself with drink/ observed
Heathcliff, muttering an echo of curses back when the door
was shut.'He's doing his very utmost ; but his constitution
defies him. Mr. Kenneth says he would wager his mare
that hell outlive any man on this side Gimmerton, and go
to the grave a hoary sinner ; unless some happy chance out
of the common course befall him.'
I went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb
to sleep. HeathdifiF, as I thought, walked through to the
barn. It turned out afterwards that he only got as far as
the other side the settle, when he flung himself on a bench
by the wall, removed from the fire, and remained silent
I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and humming a song
that began, —
It was far in the night, and the bairnies grat.
The mither beneath the mooU heard that,
when Miss Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her
room, put her head in, and whispered, —'Are you alone,
NeUy?'
'Yes, Miss,'I replied.
She entered and approached the hearth. I, supposing
she was going to say something, looked up. The expression
of her face seemed disturbed and anxious. Her lips were
half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and she drew a
breath ;. but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence. I
resumed my song ; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.
'Where's Heathcliff ?'she said, interrupting me.
'About his work in the stable,'was my answer.
He did not contradict me ; perhaps he had fallen into a
doze. There followed another long pause, during which I
perceived a drop or two trickle from Catherine's cheek to
the flags. Is she sorry for her shameful conduct ? — ^I asked
myself. That will be a novelty : but she may oome to the
WTJTHERING HEIGHTS 79
point as she wiH — I sha'n't help her ! No, she felt small
trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.
'Oh, dear !'she cried at last.'I'm very unhappy !'
'A pity/ observed I.'You're hard to please ; so many
friends and so few cares, and can't make yourself content I'
'NeUy, will you keep a secret for me ?'she pursued,
kneeling down by me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my
face with that sort of look which turns off bad temper, even
when one has all the right in the world to indulge it.
'Is it worth keeping ?'I inquired, less sulkily.
'Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out ! I want
to know what I should do. To-day, Edgar Linton has
asked me to marry him, and I've given him an answer.
Now, before I tell you whether it was a consent or denial,
you tell me which it ought to have been.'
'Beally, Miss Catherine, how can I know?'I replied.
'To be sure, considering the exhibition you performed in his
presence this afternoon, I might say it would be wise to
refuse him : since he asked you after that, he must either be
hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool.'
'If you talk so, I won't teU you any more,'she returned,
peevishly rising to her feet.'I accepted him, Nelly. Be
quick, and say whether I was wrong !'
'You accepted him! Then what good is it discussing
the matter? You have pledged your word, and cannot
retract.'
'But say whether I should have done so— do !'she
exclaimed in an irritated tone ; chafing her hands together^
and frowning.
'There are many things to be considered before that
question can be answered properly,'I said, sententiously.
'I^rst and foremost, do you love Mn Edgar ?'
'Who can help it ? Of course I do/ she answered.
Then I put her through the following catechism : for a
girl of twenty-two it was not injudicious.
* Why do you love him. Miss Cathy ?'
'Nonsense, I do — that's sufScient.'
80 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
* By no means ; you must say why ?'
'Well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be
with/
'Bad 1'was my commentary.
'And because he is young and cheerful/
'Bad, still/
'And because he loves me/
'Indifferent, coming there/
'And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest
woman of the neighbourhood, and I shall be proud of having
such a husband/
* Worst of all. And now, say how you love him ?'
* As everybody loves — You're silly, Nelly.'
'Not at all — Answer/
'I love the ground under his feet, and the air over his
head, and everything he touches, and every word he says.
I love all his looks, and all his actions, and him entirely and
altogether. There now !'
'And why?'
'Nay ; you are making a jest of it : it is exceedingly ill-
natured t It's no jest to me 1'said the young lady, scowling,
and turning her face to the fire.
'I'm very far from jesting, Miss Catherine,'I replied.
'You love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and young,
and cheerful, and rich, and loves you. The last, however,
goes for nothing: you would love him without that, pro-
bably ; and with it you wouldn't, unless he possessed the
four former attractions/
'No, to be sure not : I should only pity him — ^hate him,
perhaps, if he were ugly, and a clown.'
* But there are several other handsome, rich young men
in the world: handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is.
What should hinder you from loving them ?'
'If there be any, they are out of my way : I've seen none
like Edgar.'
'You may see some ; and he won't always be handsome,
and young, and may not always be rich/
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 81
'He is now ; and I have only to do with the present. I
wish yon would speak rationally/
'Well, that settles it : if you have only to do with the
present, marry Mr. linton.'
'I don't want your permission for that — I shaM marry
him : and yet you have not told me whether I'm right/
'Perfectly right ; if people be right to marry only for the
present. And now, let us hear what you are unhappy about.
Your brother will be pleased ; the old lady and gentleman
¥rill not object, I think ; you will escape from a disorderly,
comfortless home into a wealthy, respectable one ; and you
love Edgar, and Edgar loves you. All seems smooth and
easy : where is the obstacle ?'
'Here I and here I'replied Catherine, striking one hand
en her forehead, and the other on her breast : * in whichever
place the soul lives. In my soul and in my heart, I'm con-
vinced I'm wrong 1'
'That's very strange t I cannot make it out.'
'It's my secret. But if you will not mock at me, I'll
explain it : I can't do it distinctly ; but I'll give you a feeling
of how I feel.'
She seated herself by me again : her countenance grew
sadder and graver, and her clasped hands trembled.
'Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams ?'she said,
suddenly, after some minutes'reflection.
'Yes, now and then,'I answered.
'And so do I. I've dreamt in my life dreams that have
stayed with me ever after, and changed my ideas : they've
gone through and through me, like wine through water, and
altered the colour of my mind. And this is one : I'm going
to tell it — but take care not to smile at any part of it.'
'Oh I don't, Miss Catherine I'I cried.'We're dismal
enough without conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex
OB. Gome, come, be merry and like yourself I Look at little
Haretonl he*8 dreaming nothing dreary. How sweetly he
gmiles in his sleep I'
'Yes ; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude t
82 WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS
You remember him, I daresay, when he waB jnsfc sach
another as that chubby thing : nearly as yoimg and
innocent. However, Nelly, I shall oblige you to listen : it's
not long ; and IVe no power to be merry to-night.'
'I won't hear it, I won't hear it !'I repeated, hastily.
I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still ; and
Catherine had an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made me
dread something from which I might shape a prophecy, and
foresee a fearful catastrophe. She was vexed, but she did
not proceed. Apparently taking up another subject, she
recommenced in a short time.
'If I were in heaven, Nelly, I should be extremely miser-
able.'
'Because you are not fit to go there,'I answered.'All
sinners would be miserable in heaven.'
'But it is not for that. I dreamt once that I was there.'
'I tell you I won't hearken to your dreams. Miss
Catherine ! I'll go to bed,'I interrupted again.
She laughed, and held me down ; for I made a motion to
leave my chair.
'This is nothing,'cried she :'I was only going to say
that heaven did not seem to be my home ; and I broke my
heart with weeping to come back to earth ; and the angels
were so angry that they flung me out into the middle of the
heath on the top of Wuthering Heights ; where I woke
sobbing for joy. That will do to explain my secret, as well
as the other. I've no more business to marry Edgar Linton
than I have to be in heaven ; and if the wicked man in
there had not brought Heathclifif so low, I shouldn't have
thought of it. It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff
now ; so he shall never know how I love him : and that,
not because he's handsome, Nelly, but because he's more
myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his
and mine are the same; and Linton's is as different as a
moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'
Ere this speech ended I became sensible of HeathcliS's
presence. Having noticed a slight movement, I turned my
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 83
head, and saw him rise from the bench, and steal oat noise-
lessly. He had listened till he heard Catherine say it wonld
degrade her to marry him, and then he stayed to hear no
further. My companion, sitting on the ground, was pre-
vented by the back of the settle from remarking his presence
or departure ; but I started, and bade her hush I
'Why ?'she asked, gazing nervously round.
'Joseph is here,'I answered, catching opportunely the
roll of his cartwheels up the road ;'and Heathdiff will come
in with him. I'm not sure whether he were not at the door
this moment.'
* Oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door t'said she.
'Oive me Hareton, while you get the supper, and when it is
ready ask me to sup with you. I want to cheat my
uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that HeathdifiF
has no notion of these things. He has not, has he ? He
does not know what being in love is I'
'I see no reason that he should not know, as well as you/
I returned;'and if you are his choice, he'll be the most
unfortunate creature that ever was bom ! As soon as you
become Mrs. Linton, he loses friend, and love, and all!
Have you considered how you'll bear the separation, and
how he'll bear to be quite deserted in the world ? Because,
Miss Catherine *
'He quite deserted I we separated t'she exclaimed, with
an accent of indignation.'Who is to separate us, pray?
They'll meet the fate of Milo ! Not as long as I live, Ellen :
for no mortal creature. Every Linton on the face of the
earth might melt into nothing before I could consent to for-
sake Heathdiff. Oh, that's not what I intend — that's not
what I mean 1 I shouldn't be Mrs. Linton were such a price
demanded 1 He'll be as much to me as he has been all his
lifetime. Edgar must shake off his antipathy, and tolerate
him, at least. He will, when he learns my true feelings
towards him. Nelly, I see now you think me a selfish
wretch ; but did it never strike you that if Heathdiff and I
married, we should be beggars? whereas, if I marry Linton
84 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
I oan aid HeathdifiF to rise, and place him out of my
brother's power/
'With your husband's money, Miss Catherine ?'I aeked.
'You'll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon : and,
though I'm hardly a judge, I think that's the worst motive
you've given yet for being the vnfe of young Linton.'
'It is not/ retorted she;'it is the best I The otheiB
were the satisfaction of my whims : and for Edgar's saka^
too, to satisfy him. This is for the sake of one who com-
prehends in his person my feelings to Edgar and myself. I
cannot express it ; but surely you and everybody have a
notion that there is or should be an existence of yours
beyond you. What were the use of my creation, if I were
entirely contained here? My great miseries in this world
have been HeatholifTs miseries, and I watched and felt each
from the beginning : my great thought in living is himself.
If all else perished, and he remained, / should still continue
to be ; and if all else remained, and he were annihilated, the
universe would turn to a mighty stranger: I should not
seem a part of it. My love for Linton is like the foliage in the
woods : time v^ill change it, I'm well aware, as winter
changes the trees. My love for Heathdiff resembles the
eternal rocks beneath : a source of little visible delight, but
necessary. Nelly, I am Heathcliff! He's always, always
in my mind : not as a pleasure, any more than I am always
a pleasure to myself, but as my own being. So don't taJk
of our separation again : it is impracticable ; and'
She paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown ;
but I jerked it forcibly away. I was out of patience with
her folly I
'If I can make any sense of your nonsense. Miss,'I said,
'it only goes to convince me that you are ignorant of the
duties you undertake in marrying ; or else that you are a
wicked, unprincipled girl. But trouble me with no more
secrete : I'll not promise to keep them.'
'You'll keep that ?'she asked, eagerly.
'No, I'll not promise,'I repeated.
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 86
She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph
finished our oonversation ; and Catherine removed her seat
to a oomer, and nursed Hareton, while I made the supper.
After it was cooked, my fellow-servant and I began to
quarrel who should carry some to Mr. Hindley; and we
didn't settle it till all was nearly cold. Then we came to the
agreement that we would let him ask, if he wanted any ; for
we feared particularly to go into his presence when he had
been some time alone.
'And how isn't that nowt comed in fro'th'field, be this
time ? What is he about? girt idle seeght I'demanded the
old man, looking round for Heathcliff.
'I'll call him,'I replied.'He's in the bam, I've no
doubt.'
I went and called, but got no answer. On returning, I
whispered to Catherine that he had heard a good part of
what she said, I was sure ; and told how I saw him qtdt the
kitchen just as she complained of her brother's conduct
regarding him. She jumped up in a fine fright, flung Hare-
ton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself ;
not taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or
how her talk would have affected him. She was absent such
a while that Joseph proposed we should wait no longer. He
cunningly conjectured they were staying away in order to avoid
hearing his protracted blessing. They were'ill eneugh for
ony fahl manners,'he affirmed. And on their behalf he
added that night a special prayer to the usual quarter-of-an-
hour's suppUcation before meat, and would have tacked
another to the end of the grace, had not his young mistress
broken in upon him with a hurried command that he must
run down the road, and, wherever Heathdiff had rambled,
find and make him re-enter directly t
'I want to speak to him, and I nvustt before I go up-
stairs,'she said.'And the gate is open : he is somewhere
out of hearing ; for he would not reply, though I shouted at
the top of the fold as loud as I could.'
Joseph objected at first ; she was too much in earnest,
86 WXITHBBING HEIGHTS
however, to suffer oontradiction ; and at last he placed his
hat on his head, and walked grumbling forth. Meantime,
Catherine paced up and down the floor, exclaiming —'I
wonder where he is — I wonder where he can be I What
did I say, Nelly? I've forgotten. Was he vexed at my
bad humour this afternoon ? Dear I tell me what I've
said to grieve him ? I do wish he'd come. I do wish he
would I'
'What a noise for nothing !'I cried, though rather
uneasy myself.'What a trifle scares you I It's surely no
great cause of alarm that HeathcUff should take a moonlight
saunter on the moors, or even lie too sulky to speak to us in
the hay-loft. I'll engage he's lurking there. See if I don't
ferret him out !'
I departed to renew my search ; its result was disappoint-
ment, and Joseph's quest ended in the same.
'Yon lad gets war und war !'observed he on re-entering.
'He's left th'gate at t'full swing, and Miss's pony has
trodden dahn two rigs o'com, and plottered through, raight
o'er into t'meadow 1 Hahsomdiver, t'maister'ull play t'
devil to-mom, and he'll do weel. He's patience itsseln wi'
sioh careless, ofiald craters — patience itsseln he isl Bud
he'll not be soa alius — yah's see, all on ye 1 Yah mun'n't
drive him out of his heead for nowt !'
'Have you found Heathcliff, you ass ?'interrupted
Catherine. * Have you been looking for him, as I ordered ?'
* I sud more Ukker look for th'horse,'he replied. * It'ud
be to more sense. Bud I can look for norther horse nur man
of a neeght loike this — as black as t'chimbley ! und Heath-
olifiPs noan t'chap to coom at my whistle — ^happen he'll be
less hard o'hearing wi'ye I'
It was a very dark evening for summer: the clouds
appeared inclined to thimder, and I said we had better all sit
down ; the approaching rain would be certain to bring him
home without further trouble. However, Catherine would
not be persuaded into tranquillity. She kept wandering to
and fro, from the gate to the door, in a state of agitation
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 87
which permitted no repose ; and at length took up a perma-
nent situation on one side of the wall, near the road : where,
heedless of my expostulations and the growling thunder, and
the great drops that began to plash aroimd her, she remained,
calling at intervals, and then listening, and then crying
outright. She beat Hareton, or any child, at a good passion-
ate fit of crying.
About midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came
rattling over the Heights in full fury. There was a violent
wind, as well as thunder, and either one or the other split a
tree off at the comer of the building: a huge bough fell
across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the east
chinmey-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the
kitchen-fire. We thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of
us ; and Joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the Lord
to remember the patriarchs Noah and Lot, and, as in former
times, spare the righteous, though he smote the ungodly. I
felt some sentiment that it must be a judgment on us also.
The Jonah, in my mind, was Mr. Eamshaw ; and I shook
the handle of his den that I might ascertain if he were yet
living. He replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made
my companion vociferate, more clamorously than before, that
a wide distinction might be drawn between saints like him-
self and sinners like his master. But the uproar passed
away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed ; excepting
Cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in
refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawl-
less to catch as much water as she could with her hair and
clothes. She came in and lay down on the settle, all soaked
as she was, turning her face to the back, and putting her
hands before it.
* Well, Miss 1'I exclaimed, touching her shoulder ; * you
are not bent on getting your death, are you ? Do you know
what o'clock it is ? Half -past twelve. Gome, come to bed 1
there's no use waiting any longer on that foolish boy : he'll
be gone to Gimmerton, and he'll stay there now. He
guesses we shouldn't wait for him till this late hour: at
88 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
least, he gaesses that only Mr. Hindley wotdd be up ; and
he'd rather avoid having the door opened by the master.'
'Nay, nay, he's noan at Gimmerton,'said Joseph.'I's
niver wonder but he's at t'bothom of a bog-hoile. This
visitation wom't for nowt, and I wod hev'ye to look out,
Miss— yah muh be t'next. Thank Hivin for all I All
warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked
out fro'th'rubbidgei Yah knaw whet t'Soripture ses.'
And he began quoting several texts, referring us to chapters
and verses where we might find them.
I, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove
her wet things, left him preaching and her shivering, and
betook myself to bed with little Hareton, who slept as fast as
if everyone had been sleeping round him. I heard Joseph
read on a while afterwards ; then I distinguished his slow
step on the ladder, and then I dropped asleep.
Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by the
sunbeams piercing the chinks of the shutters, Miss Catherine
still seated near the fireplace. The house-door was ajar, too ;
light entered from its unclosed windows; Hindley had
come out, and stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard and
drowsy.
'What ails you, Cathy ?'he was saying when I entered :
'you look as dismal as a drowned whelp. Why are you so
damp and pale, child ?'
'I've been wet,'she answered reluctantly,'and I'm cold,
that's aU.'
'Oh, she is naughty !'I cried, perceiving the master to be
tolerably sober.'She got steeped in the shower of yesterday
evening, and there she has sat the night through, and I
couldn't prevail on her to stir.'
Mr. Eamshaw stared at us in surprise.'The night
through,'he repeated.'What kept her up ? not fear of the
thunder, surely ? That was over hours since.'
Neither of us wished to mention HeathclifiTs absence, as
long as we could conceal it ; so I replied, I didn't know how
she took it into her head to sit up ; and she said nol
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 89
The morning was fresh and cool ; I threw baok the lattice,
and presently the room filled with sweet scents from the
garden ; but Catherine called peevishly to me,'Ellen, shut
the window. I'm starving I'And her teeth chattered as
she shrank doser to the almost extingoished embers.
'She's ill,'said Hindley, taking her wrist ;'I suppose
that's the reason she would not go to bed. Damn it t I
don't want to be troubled with more sickness here. What
took you into the rain ?'
'Bimning after t'lads, as usuald t'croaked Joseph,
catching an opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his
evil tongue.'If I war yah, maister, I'd just slam t'boards
i'their faces all on'em, gentle and simple 1 Never a day
ut yah're off, but yon cat o'Linton comes sneaking hither ;
and Miss Nelly, shoo's a fine lass I shoo sits watching for
ye i't'kitchen ; and as yah're in at one door, he's ouji at
t'other; and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her
side I It's bonny behaviour, lurking amang t'fields, after
twelve o't'night, wi'that fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy,
HeathcHff ! They think Fm blind ; but I'm noan : nowt ut
t'soart 1 — I seed young Linton boath coming and going, and
I seed yah'(directing his discourse to me),'yah gooid fur
nowt, slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th'house, t'
mmute yah heard t'maister's horse-fit clatter up t'road.'
'Silence, eavesdropper !'cried Catherine ;'none of your
insolence before me! Edgar Linton came yesterday by
chance, Hindley; and it was I who told him to be off:
because I knew you would not like to have met him as you
were.'
'You lie, Cathy, no doubt,'answered her brother,'and
you are a confoimded simpleton ! But never mind Linton
at present : tell me, were you not with Heathcliff last night ?
Speak the truth, now. You need not be afraid of harming
him : though I hate him as much as ever, he did me a good
turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender
of breaking his neck. To prevent it, I shall send him about
his business this very morning; and after he's gone, I'd
90 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
advise you all to look sharp : I shall only have the more
humour for you.'
'I never saw Heathcliff last night/ answered Catherine,
beginning to sob bitterly :'and if you do turn him out of
doors, I'll go with him. But, perhaps, you'll never have an
opportunity: perhaps, he's gone.'Here she burst into
uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her words were
inarticulate.
Hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and
bade her get to her room immediately, or she shouldn't cry
for nothing t I obliged her to obey ; and I shall never
forget what a scene she acted when we reached her chamber :
it terrified me. I thought she was going mad, and I begged
Joseph to run for the doctor. It proved the commence-
ment of delirium: Mr. Kenneth, as soon as he saw her,
pronounced her dangerously ill ; she had a fever. He bled
her, and he told me to let her live on whey and water-gruel,
and take care she did not throw herself downstairs or out of
the window ; and then he left : for he had enough to do in
the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary distance
between cottage and cottage.
Though I cannot say I ma.de a gentle nurse, and Joseph
and the master were no better, and though our patient was
as wearisome and headstrong as a patient could be, she
weathered it through. Old Mrs. Linton paid us several
visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded and
ordered us all ; and when Catherine was convalescent, she
insisted on conveying her to Thrushcross Orange : for
which deliverance we were very grateful. But the poor
dame had reason to repent of her kindness: she and her
husband both took the fever, and died within a few days of
each other.
Our yotmg lady returned to us saucier and more pas-
sionate, and haughtier than ever. Heathcliff ha.d never been
heard of since the evening of the thunder-storm ; and, one
day, I had the misfortune, when she had provoked me
exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance on her:
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 91
where indeed it belonged, as she well knew. From ihal
period, for several months, she ceased to hold any ooommni-
cation with me, save in the relation of a mere servant Joseph
fell under a ban also : he wotdd speak his mind, and lecture
her all the same as if she were a Httle girl ; and she esteemed
herself a woman, and onr mistress, and thought that her
recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with oonsidera-
ation. Then the doctor had said that she would not bear
crossing much ; she ought to have her own way ; and it was
nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one to presume
to stand up and contradict her. From Mr. Eamshaw and
his companions she kept aloof; and tutored by Kenneth,
and serious threats of a fit that often attended her rages, her
brother allowed her whatever she pleased to demand, and
generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper. He was
rather too indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from
affection, but from pride: he wished earnestly to see her
bring honour to the family by an alliance with the lintons,
and as long as she let him alone she might trample on us
like slaves, for aught he cared I Edgar Linton, as multitudes
have been before and will be after him, was infatuated : and
believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he led her
to Gimmerton Chapel, three years subsequent to his father's
death.
Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to leave
Wuthering Heights and accompany her here. Little Hare-
ton was nearly five years old, and I had just begun to teach
him his letters. We made a sad parting; but Catherine's
tears were more powerful than ours. When I refused to go,
and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she
went lamenting to her husband and brother. The former
offered me munificent wages ; the latter ordered me to pack
up : he wanted no women in the house, he said, now that
there was no mistress ; and as to Hareton, the curate should
take him in hand, by-and-by. And so I had but one choice
left : to do as I was ordered. I told the master he got rid
of all decent people only to run to ruin a little faster; I
92 WUTHEBINO HEI0HT8
kissed Hareton, said good-by ; and sinoe then he has been a
stranger : and it's very queer to think it, but I'ye no doubt he
has completely forgotten all about Ellen Dean, and that he
was ever more than all the world to her and she to him I
At this point of the housekeeper's story she chanoed
to glance towards the time-piece over the chimney ; and was
in amazement on seeing the minute-hand measure half-past
one. She would not hear of staying a second longer: in
truth, I felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of her
narrative myself. And now that she is vanished to her rest,
and I have meditated for another hour or two, I shall
simimon courage to go also, in spiie of aching laziness of
head and limbs.
CHAPTBB X
A OHABMiNa introdnotion to a hermit's life 1 Four weeks'
torture, tossing, and sickness ! Oh, these bleak winds and
bitter northern skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory
country surgeons 1 And oh, this dearth of the human
physiognomy 1 and, worse than all, the terrible intimation of
Kenneth that I need not expect to be out of doors till
spring 1
Mr. Heatholiff has just honoured me with a call. About
seven days ago he sent me a brace of grouse — the last of the
season. Scoundrel ! He is not altogether guiltless in this
illness of mine ; and that I had a great mind to tell him.
But, alasl how could I offend a man who was charitable
enough to sit at my bedside a good hour, and talk on some
other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches?
This is quite an easy interval. I am too weak to read ; yet
I feel as if I could enjoy something interesting. Why not
have up Mrs. Dean to finish her tale ? I can recollect its
chief incidents, as far as she had gone. Yes : I remember
her hero had run off, and never been heard of for three
years ; and the heroine was married. I'll ring : she'll be
delighted to find me capable of talking cheerfully. Mrs.
Dean came.
'It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,'she
commenced.
'Away, away with it I'I replied ;'I desire to have *
* The doctor says you must drop the powders.'
'With all my heart! Don't interrupt me. Come and
take your seat here. Keep your fingers from that bitter
94 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
phalanx of vials. Draw your knittiDg out of your pocket —
that will do — now continue the history of Mr. Heathdifl^
from where -you left off, to the present day. Did he finish his
education on the Continent, and come back a gentleman?
or did he get a sizar's place at college, or escape to America,
and earn honours by drawing blood from his foster-country ?
or make a fortune more promptly on the English highways ? *
'He may have done a little in all these vocations, Mr.
Lockwood ; but J couldn't give my word for any. I stated
before that I didn't know how he gained his money ; neither
am I aware of the means he took to raise his mind from the
savage ignorance into which it was sunk : but, with your
leave, I'll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will
amuse and not weary you. Are you feeling better this
morning ?'
'Much.*
'That's good news.'
I got Miss Catherine and myself to Thrushcross Grange ;
and, to my agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely
better than I dared to expect. She seemed almost over-fond
of Mr. Linton ; and even to his sister she showed plenty of
affection. They were both very attentive to her comfort,
certainly. It was not the tho n bending to the honeysuckles,
but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. There were no
mutual concessions : one stood erect, and the others yielded :
and who can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they en-
coxmter neither opposition nor indifference? I observed
that Mr. Edgar had a deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour.
He concealed it from her ; but if ever he heard me answer
sharply, or saw any other servant grow cloudy at some
imperious order of hers, he would show his trouble by a
frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account.
He many a time spoke sternly to me about my pertness ;
and averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict a worse
pang than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed. Not to
grieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy ; and, for
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 96
ihe space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as harmless as
sand, because no fire came near to explode it. Catherine
had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they
were respected with sympathising silence by her husband, who
ascribed them to an alteration in her constitution, produced
by her perilous illness; as she was never subject to
depression of spirits before. The return of sunshine was
welcomed by answering sunshine from him. I believe I may
assert that ^ey were really in possession of deep and growing
happiness.
It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the long
run ; the mild and generous are only more justly selfish than
the domineering ; and it ended when circumstances caused
each to feel that the one's interest was not the chief con-
sideration in the other's thoughts. On a mellow evening in
September, I was coming from the garden with a heavy
basket of apples which I had been gathering. It had got
dusk, and the moon looked over the high wall of the court,
causing undefined shadows to lurk in the comers of the
numerous projecting portions of the building. I set my
burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and lingered
to rest, and drew in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet
air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the
entrance, when I heard a voice behind me say, —'Nelly, is
that you?'
It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone ; yet there was
something in the manner of pronouncing my name which
made it sound familiar. I turned about to discover who
spoke, fearfully ; for the doors were shut, and I had seen
nobody on approaching the steps. Something stirred in
the porch ; and, moving nearer, I distinguished a tall man
dressed in dark clothes, with dark face and hair. . He leant
against the side, and held his fingers on the latch as if in-
tending to open for himself.'Who can it be ?'I thought.
'Mr. Eamshaw ? Oh, no 1 The voice has no resemblance
to his.'
'I have waited here an hour,'he resumed, while I oon-
96 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
tinned staring ;'and the whole of that time all ronnd has been
as still as death. I dared not enter. Yon do not know me ?
Look, I'm not a stranger 1'
A ray fell on his features ; the cheeks were sallow, and
half covered with black whiskers ; the brows lowering, the
eyes deep-set and singular. I remembered the eyes.
'What t'I cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a
worldly visitor, and I raised my hands in. amazement.
'What 1 you come back? Is it really you ? Is it ?'
'Yes, Heathdiff,'he replied, glancing from me up to the
windows, which reflected a score of glittering moons, but
showed no lights from within.'Are they at home ? where
is she ?. Nelly, you are not glad 1 you needn't be so dis-
turbed. Is she here ? Speak ! I want to have one word
with her — your mistress. Go, and say some person from
Gimmerton desires to see her.'
'How will she take it?'I exclaimed.'What will she
do ? The surprise bewilders me — ^it will put her out of her
head I And you are Heathcliff I But altered ! Nay, there's
no comprehending it. Have you been for a soldier ?'
'Go and carry my message,'he interrupted, impatiently.
•I'minheUtiUyoudo!'
He lifted the latch, and I entered ; but when I got to the
parlour where Mr. and Mrs. Linton were, I could not
persuade myself to proceed. At length I resolved on
making an excuse to ask if they would have the candles
lighted, and I opened the door.
They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back
against the wall, and displayed, beyond the garden trees,
and the wild green park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a
long line of mist winding nearly to its top (for very soon
after you pass the chapol, as you may have noticed, the
sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows
the bend of the glen). Wuthering Heights rose above this
silvery vapour ; but our old house was invisible ; it rather
dips down on the other side. Both the room and its occu-
pants, and the scene they gazed on, looked wondrously
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 97
peaceful. I shrank reluctantly from performing my errand ;
and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having
put my question about the candles, when a sense of my
folly compelled me to return, and mutter,'A person from
Gimmerton wishes to see you ma'am/
'What does he want ?'asked Mrs. Linton.
'I did not question him,'I answered.
'Well, close the curtains, Nelly,'she said ;'and bring up
tea. I'll be back again directly.'
She quitted the apartment; Mr. Edgar inquired, care-
lessly, who it was.
'Some one mistress does not expect,'I replied.'That
Heathcliff — you recollect him, sir — ^who used to live at Mr.
Eamshaw's.'
* What 1 the gipsy — the ploughboy ? * he cried. * Why did
you not say so to Catherine ?'
'Hush ! you must not call him by those names, master/
I said.'She'd be sadly grieved to hear you. She was
nearly heartbroken when he ran off. I guess his return will
make a jubilee to her.'
Mr. Linton walked to a window on the other side of the
room that overlooked the court He unfastened it, and
leant out. I suppose they were below, for he exclaimed
quickly :'Don't stand there, love ! Bring the person in, if it
be anyone particular.'Ere long, I heard the click of the
latch, and Catherine flew up-stairs, breathless and wild ; too
excited to show gladness : indeed, by her face, you would
rather have surmised an awful calamity.
'Oh, Edgar, Edgar I'she panted, flinging her arms
round his neck.'Oh, Edgar darling! Heathcliff's come
back — he is !'And she tightened her embrace to a squeeze.
'Well, well,'cried her husband, crossly, J don't strangle
me for thatl He never struck me as su^ a marvellous
treasure. There is no need to be frantic !'
'I know you didn't like him,'she answered, repressing a
little the intensity of her delight.'Yet, for my sake, you
must be friends now. Shall I tell him to come up ?'
98 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
'Here/ he said,'into the parlour ?'
'Where else?'she asked.
He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more
suitable plaoe for him. Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll
expression — ^half angry, half laughing at his fastidiousness.
'No/ she added, after a while;'I cannot sit in the
kitchen. Set two tables here, Ellen: one for your master
and Miss Isabella, being gentry; the other for Heathcliff
and myself, being of the lower orders. Will that please you,
dear ? Or must I have a fire lighted elsewhere ? If so, give
directions. I'll run down and secure my guest. I'm afraid
the joy is too great to be real 1'
She was about to dart off again ; but Edgar arrested her.
'Tou bid him step up,'he said, addressing me ;'and,
Catherine, try to be glad, without being absurd. The whole
household need not witness the sight of your welcoming a
runaway servant as a brother.'
I descended, and found Heathcliff waiting under the
porch, evidently anticipating an invitation to enter. He
followed my guidance without waste of words, and I
ushered him into the presence of the master and mistress,
whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking. But
the lady's glowed with another feeling when her friend
appeared at the door: she sprang forward, took both his
hands, and led him to Linton ; and then she seized Linton's
reluctant fingers and crushed them into his. Now, fully
revealed by the fire and candlelight, I was amazed, more
than ever, to behold the transformation of Heathcliff. He
had grown a tail, athletic, well-formed man ; beside whom
my master seemed quite slender and youth-like. His up-
right carriage suggested the idea of his having been in the
army. His countenance was much older in expression and
decision of feature than Mr. Linton's ; it looked intelligent,
and retained no marks of former degradation. A half-
civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and
eyes full of black fire, but it was subdued ; and his manner
was even dignified : quite divested of roughness, though too
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 99
stem for grace. My master's surprise equalled or ezoeeded
mine : he remained for a minute at a loss how to address
the ploughboy, as he had called him. Heatholiff dropped
his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till he chose
to speak.
'Sit down, sir/ he said, at length.'Mrs. Linton,
recalling old times, would have me give you a cordial recep-
tion ; and, of course, I am gratified when anything occurs to
please her.'
'And I also,'answered HeathcUff,'especially if it be
anything in which I have a part. I shall stay an hour or
two willingly.'
He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her gaze
fixed on him as if she feared he would vanish were she to
remove it. He did not raise his to her often : a quick glance .
now and then sufficed ; but it flashed back, each time more
confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from hers.
They were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
embarrassment. Not so Mr. Edgar : he grew pale with pure
annoyance : a feeling that reached its climax when his lady
rose, and stepping across the rug, seized HeathclifTs hands
again, and laughed like one beside herself.
'I shall think it a dream to-morrow 1'she cried.'I
shall not be able to believe that I have seen, and touched,
and spoken to you once more. And yet, cruel Heathcliff!
you don't deserve this welcome. To be absent and silent
for three years, and never to think of me I'
'A little more than you have thought of me,'he mur-
mured.'I heard of your marriage, Cathy, not long since ;
and, while waiting in the yard below, I meditated this plan
— ^just to have one glimpse of your face, a stare of surprise,
perhaps, and pretended pleasure ; afterwards settle my score
with Hindley ; and then prevent the law by doing execution
on myself. Tour welcome has put these ideas out of my
mind ; but beware of meeting me with another aspect next
time! Nay, you'll not drive me off again. You were
really sorry for me, were you ? Well, there was cause. I've
(*
100 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
fought through a bitter life since I last heard your voice ; and
you must forgive me, for I struggled only for you !'
* Catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come
to the table,'interrupted Linton, striving to preserve his
ordinary tone, and a due measure of politeness.'Mr. Heath-
diff will have a long walk, wherever he may lodge to-night ;
and I'm thirsty.',
She took her post before the urn ; and Miss Isabella
came, summoned by the bell; then, having handed their
chairs forward, I left the room. The meal hardly endured
ten minutes. Catherine's cup was never filled : she could
neither eat nor drink. Edgar had made a slop in his saucer,
and scarcely swallowed a mouthful. Their guest did not
protract his stay that evening above an hour longer. I asked,
as he departed, if he went to Gimmerton ?
'No, to Wuthering Heights,'he answered :'Mr. Eam-
shaw invited me, when I called this morning.'
Mr. Eamshaw invited him I and he called on Mr. Eam-
shaw I I pondered this sentence painfully, after he was
gone. Is he turning out a bit of a hypocrite, and coming
into the country to work mischief under a cloak ? I mused :
I had a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he had
better have remained away.
About the middle of the night, I was wakened from my
first nap by Mrs. Linton gliding into my chamber, taking a
seat on my bedside, and pulling me by the hair to rouse me.
'I cannot rest, Ellen,'she said, by way of apology.
'And I want some living creature to keep me company in
my happiness ! Edgar is sulky, because I'm glad of a thing
that does not interest him : he refuses to open his mouth,
except to utter pettish, silly speeches ; and he affirmed I was
cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when he was so sick and
sleepy. He always contrives to be sick at the least cross I
I gave a few sentences of commendation to Heathcliff, and
he, either for a headache or a pang of envy, began to cry :
so I got up and left him.'
'What use is it praising Heathcliff to him ?'I answered.
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 101
'As lads they had an aversion to each other, and Heath*
cliff wonld hate just as much to hear him praised : it's human
nature. Let Mr. Linton alone about him, unless you would
like an open quarrel between them.'
'But does it not show great weakness ?'pursued she.
'I'm not envious: I never feel hurt at the brightness of
Isabella's yellow hair and the whiteness of her skin, at her
dainty elegance, and the fondness all the family exhibit for
her. Even you, Nelly, if we have a dispute sometimes, you
back Isabella at once ; and I yield like a foolish mother : I
call her a darling, and flatter her into a good temper. It
pleases her brother to see us cordial, and that pleases me.
But they are very much alike : they are spoiled children, and
fancy the world was made for their accommodation; and
though I humour both, I think a smart chastisement might
improve them all the same.'
'You're mistaken, Mrs. Linton,'said I.'They humour
you : I know what there would be to do if they did not. You
can well afford to indulge their passing whims as long as
their business is to anticipate all your desires. You may,
however, fall out, at last, over something of equal con-
sequence to both sides ; and then those you term weak are
very capable of being as obstinate as you.'
'And then we shall fight to the death, sha'n't we, Nelly ?'
she returned, laughing.'No ! I tell you, I have such faith
in Linton's love, that I believe I might kill him, and he
wouldn't wish to retaliate.'
I advised her to value him the more for his affection.
'I do,'she answered,'but he needn't resort to whining
for trifles. It is childish ; and, instead of melting into tears
because I said that Heathcliff was now worthy of anyone's
regard, and it would honour the first gentleman in the
country to be his friend, he ought to have said it for me, and
been delighted from sympathy. He must get accustomed to
him, and he may as well like him : considering how Heath-
diff has reason to object to him, I'm sure he behaved
excellently 1'
102 WUTHBRINQ HEIGHTS
'What do yon think of his going to Wnthering Heights ?'
I inquired.'He is reformed in every respect, apparently :
quite a Christian : offering the right hand of fellowship to
his enemies all around I'
'He explained it/ she replied.'I wonder as much as
you. He said he called to gather information concerning
me from you, supposing you resided there still ; and Joseph
told Hindley, who came out and fell to questioning him of
what he had been doing, and how he had been living ; and
finally, desired him to walk in. There were some persons
sitting at cards ; Heathcliff joined them ; my brother lost
some money to him, and, finding him plentifully supplied, he
requested that he would come again in the evening : to which
he consented. Hindley is too reckless to select his acquaint-
ance prudently : he doesn't trouble himself to reflect on the
causes he might have for mistrusting one whom he has
basely injured. But Heathcliff afSrms his principal reason
for resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is a
wish to instal himself in quarters at walking distance from
the Orange, and an attachment to the house where we lived
together; and likewise a hope that I shall have more
opportunities of seeing him there than I could have if he
settled in Oimmerton. He means to offer liberal payment
for permission to lodge at the Heights ; and doubtless my
brother's covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms :
he was eJways greedy ; though what he grasps with one hand
he flings away with the other.'
'It's a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling
in I'said I.'Have you no fear of the consequences, Mrs.
Linton?'
'None for my friend,'she replied :'his strong head will
kaep him from danger ; a little for Hindley : but he can't be
made morally worse than he is ; and I stand between him and
bodily harm. The event of this evening has reconciled me
to God and humanity 1 I had risen in angry rebellion
against Providence. Oh, I've endured very, very bitter
misery, Nelly 1 If that creature knew how bitter, he'd be
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 103
ashamed to cloud its removal with idle petulance. It was
kindness for him which induced me to bear it alone : had I
expressed the agony I frequently felt, he would have been
taught to long for its alleviation as ardently as I. Howeyer,
it's over, and I'll take no revenge on his folly ; I can afford
to suffer anything hereafter! Should the meanest thing
alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn the other, but I'd
ask pardon for provoking it ; and, as a proof, I'll go make
my peace with Edgar instantly. Good-night! I'm an
angel !'
In this self-complacent conviction she departed ; and the
success of her fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow :
Mr. Linton had not only abjured his peevishness (though his
spirits seemed still subdued by Catherine's exuberance of
vivacity), but he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella
with her to Wuthering Heights in the afternoon ; and she
rewarded him with sucdi a summer of sweetness and affection
in return as made the house a paradise for several days;
both master and servants profiting from the perpetual sun-
shine.
Heathcliff — Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future — ^used
the liberty of visiting at Thrushcross Grange cautiously, at
first : he seemed estimating how far its owner would bear
his intrusion. Catherine, also, deemed it judicious to
moderate her expressions of pleasure in receiving him ; and
he gradually established his right to be expected. He
retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood
was remarkable; and that served to repress all startling
demonstrations of feeling. My master's uneasiness
experienced a lull, and further circumstances diverted it into
another channel for a space.
His new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated
misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresist-
ible attraction towards the tolerated guest. She was at that
time a charming young lady of eighteen ; infantile in
manners, though possessed of keen v^t, keen feelings, and a
keen temper, too, if irritated. Her brother, who loved her
104 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
tenderly, wa49 appalled at this fantastic preference. Leaving
aside the degradation of an alliance with a nameless man,
and the possible fact that his property, in default of heirs
male, might pass into such a one's power, he had sense to
comprehend HeathclifTs disposition : to know that, though
his exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable and
unchanged. And he dreaded that mind : it revolted him :
he shrank forebodingly from the idea of committing Isabella
to its keeping. He would have recoiled still more had he
been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited, and was
bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation of sentiment ;
for the minute he discovered its existence he laid the blame
on Heathcliff s deliberate designing.
We had all remarked, during some time, that Miss Linton
fretted and pined over something. She grew cross and
wearisome ; snapping at and teasing Catherine continually,
at the imminent risk of exhausting her limited patience. We
excused her, to a certain extent, on the plea of ill-health :
she was dwindling and fading before our eyes. But one day,
when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her
breakfast, complaining that the servants did not do what she
told them ; that the mistress would allow her to be nothing
in the house, and Edgar neglected her ; that she had caught a
cold with the doors being left open, and we let the parlour
fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a hundred yet more
frivolous accusations, Mrs. Linton peremptorily insisted that
she should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily,
threatened to send for the doctor. Mention of Kenneth
caused her to exclaim, instantly, that her health was perfect,
and it was only Catherine's harshness which made her
unhappy.
'How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling ?'
cried the mistress, amazed at the unreaaonable assertion.
'You are surely losing your reason. When have I been harsh,
tell me?'
'Yesterday,'sobbed Isabella,'and now !'
'Yesterday !'said her sister-in-law.'Qnwhatoccaaion?'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 106
'In our walk along the moor : yon told me to ramble where
I pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliff ?'
'And that's your notion of harshness ?'said Catherine,
laughing.'It was no hint that your company was super-
fluous ? We didn't care whether you kept with us or not ;
I merely thought Heathcliffs talk would have nothing
entertaining for your ears.'
* Oh, no,'wept the young lady ; * you wished me away,
because you knew I liked to be there !'
'Is she sane ?'asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to me.'I'll
repeat our conversation, word for word, Isabella ; and you
point out any charm it could have had for you.'
'I don't mind the conversation,'she answered :'I wanted
to be with'
* Well ?'said Catherine, perceiving her hesitate to com-
plete the sentence.
* With him : and I won't be always sent off !'she con-
tinued, kindling up.'You are a dog in the manger, Cathy,
and desire no one to be loved but yourself 1'
'You are an impertinent little monkey t'exclaimed Mrs.
Linton, in surprise.'But I'll not believe this idiotcy t It
is impossible that you can covet the admiration of Heath-
cliff — that you consider him an agreeable person ! I hope I
have misunderstood you, Isabella ?'
'No, you have not,'said the infatuated girl.'I love him
more than ever you loved Edgar, and he might love me, if
you would let him I'
'I wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then I'Catherine
declared, emphatically : and she seemed to speak sincerely.
* Nelly, help me to convince her of her madness. Tell her
what Heathcliff is : an unreclaimed creature, without refine-
ment, without cultivation ; an arid wilderness of furze and
whinstone. I'd as soon put that little canary into the park on
a winter's day, as recommend you to bestow your heart on
him t It is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and
nothing else, which makes that dream enter your head.
Pray, don't imagine that he conceals depths of benevolence
106 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
and affection beneath a stem exterior ! He's not a rough
diamond — a pearl-oontaining oyster of a rostic : he's a fierce,
pitiless, wolfish man. I never say to him,''Let this or that
enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
harm them ; " I say,''Let them alone, because /should hate
them to be wronged : " and he'd crush you like a sparrow's
egg, Isabella, if he found you a troublesome charge. I know
he couldn't love a Linton ; and yet he'd be quite capable of
marrying your fortune and expectations : avarice is growing
with him a besetting sin. There's my picture : and I'm his
friend — so much so, that had he thought seriously to catch
you, I should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall
into his trap.'
Miss Linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
'For shame 1 for shame !'she repeated, angrily.'You
are worse than twenty foes, you poisonous friend !'
'Ah t you won't believe me, then ?'said Catherine.
'You think I speak from wicked selfishness ?'
'I'm certain you do,'retorted Isabella ;'and I shudder
at you I'
'Gkx)d !'cried the other. * Try for yourself, if that be
your spirit : I have done, and yield the argument to your
saucy insolence.'—
'And I must suffer for her egotism !'she sobbed, as Mrs.
Linton left the room.'All, all is against me: she has
blighted my single consolation. But she uttered falsehoods,
didn't she ? Mr. Heathcliff is not a fiend : he has an honour-
able soul, and a true one, or how could he remember her ?'
'Banish him from your thoughts. Miss,'I said.'He's a
bird of bad omen : no mate for you. Mrs. Linton spoke
strongly, and yet I can't contradict her. She is better
acquainted with his heart than I, or any one besides ; and
she never would represent him as worse than he is. Honest
people don't hide their deeds. How has he been living ? how
has he got rich ? why is he staying at Wuthering Heights,
the house of a man whom he abhors ? They say Mr. Eam-
shaw is worse and worse since he came. They sit up all
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 107
night together oontmnally, and Hindley has been borrowing
money on his land, and does nothing but play and drink : I
heard only a week ago — ^it was Joseph who told me — I met
him at Gimmerton : " Nelly, " he said,''we's hae a orowner's
'quest enow, at ahr folks'. One on'em's a'most getten his
finger oat off wi'handing t'other fro'stiokin'hisseln loike a
oawlf . That's maister, yah knaw,'at's soa np o'going tub
t'grand'sizes. He's noan feared o't'bench o'judges,
norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nur Matthew, nor noan
on'em, not he ! He fair Hkes — he langs to set his brazened
face agean'em 1 And yon bonny lad Heathcliff, yah mind,
he's a rare'xm. He can gim a laugh as well's onybody at
a ndght divil's jest. Does he niver say nowt of his fine
living amang us, when he goes to t'Grange ? This is t'way
on't : — ^up at sun-down : dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
can'le-light till next day at noon : then, t'fooil gangs banning
und raving to his cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig thur
fingers i'thur lugs fur varry shame ; un'the knave, why he
can caint his brass, xm'ate, un'sleep, un'off to his neighbour's
to gossip wi't'wife. I'course, he teUs Dame Catherine how
her fathur's goold runs into his pocket, and her fathur's son
gallops down t'broad road, while he flees afore to oppen t'
pikes 1 " Now, Miss Linton, Joseph is an old rascal, but no
liar ; and, if his account of Heathcliff's conduct be true, you
would never think of desiring such a husband, would you ?'
* Tou are leagued with the rest, Ellen 1'she replied.'I'll
not listen to your slanders. What malevolence you must
have to wish to convince me that there is no happiness in
the world !'
Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to
herself, or persevered in nursing it perpetually, I cannot say :
she had little time to reflect. The day af^^er, there was a
justice-meeting at the next town ; my master was obliged to
attend; and Mr. Heathcliff, aware of his absence, called
rather earlier than usual. Catherine and Isabella were
sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent : the latter
alarmed at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she
108 WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS
V
had made of her secret feelings in a transient fit of passion ;
the former, on mature consideration, really offended with
her companion ; and, if she laughed again at her pertnees,
inclined to make it no laughing matter to her. She did
laugh as she saw Heathcliff pass the window. I was
sweeping the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on
her lips. Isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book,
remained till the door opened ; and it was too late to attempt
an escape, which she would gladly have done had it been
practicable.
'Gome in, that's right !'exclaimed the mistress, gaily,
pulling a chair to the fire.'Here are two people sadly in
need of a third to thaw the ice between them ; and you are the
very one we should both of us choose. Heathcliff, I'm
proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
more than myself. I expect you to feel flattered. Nay, it's
not Nelly ; don't look at her ! My poor little sister-in-law
is breaking her heart by mere contemplation of your physical
and moral beauty. It lies in your own power to be Edgar's
brother ! No, no, Isabella, you sha'n't run off,'she continued,
arresting, with feigned playfulness, the confounded girl, who
had risen indignantly.'We were quarrelling like cats about
you, Heathcliff ; and I was fairly beaten in protestations of
devotion and admiration : and, moreover, I was informed
that if I would but have the manners to stand aside, my
rival, as she will have herself to be, would shoot a shaft into
your soul that would fix you for ever, and send my image
into eternal oblivion I'
'Catherine 1'said Isabella, calling up her dignity, and
disdaining to struggle from the tight grasp that held her,
'I'd thank you to adhere to the truth and not slander me,
even in joke ! Mr. Heathcliff, be kind enough to bid this
friend of yours release me : she forgets that you ^.nd I are
not intimate acquaintances ; and what amuses her is painful
to me beyond expression.'
As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and
looked thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she cherished
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 109
oonoeming him, she turned and whispered an earnest appeal
for liberty to her tormentor.
'By no means t'cried Mrs. Linton in answer.'I won't
be named a dog in the manger again. You shall stay : now
then I Heathcliffy why don't you evince satisfaction at my
pleasant news ? Isabella swears that the love Edgar has for
me is nothing to that she entertains for you. I'm sure she
made some speech of the kind ; did she not, Ellen ? And
she has fasted ever since the day before yesterday's walk,
from sorrow and rage that I despatched her out of your
society under the idea of its being unacceptable.'
'I think you belie her,'said Heathclifif, twisting his
chair to face them.'She wishes to be out of my society
now, at any rate !'
And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one
might do at a strange repulsive animal: a centipede from
the Indies, for instance, which curiosity leads one to examine
in spite of the aversion it raises. The poor thing couldn't
bear that ; she grew white and red in rapid succession, and,
while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength of her small
fingers to loosen the firm clutch of Catherine ; and perceiving
that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another
closed down, and she could not remove the whole together,
she began to make use of her nails ; and their sharpness
presently ornamented the detainer's with crescents of red.
'There's a tigress 1'exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting her
free, and shaking her hand with pain.'Begone, for Qod's
sake, and hide your vixen face 1 How foolish to reveal those
talons to him. Can't you fancy the conclusions he'll draw ?
Look, HeathclifF 1 they are instruments that will do execution
— ^you must beware of your eyes.'
'I'd wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced
me,'he answered, brutally, when the door had closed after
her.'But what did you mean by teasing the creature in
that manner, Cathy? You were not speaking the truth,
were you ?'
'I assure you I was,'she returned. * She has been dying
71
110 WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS
for your sake several weeks, and raving about you ibis
morning, and pouring forth a deluge of abuse, because I
represented your failings in a plain light, for the purpose of
mitigating her adoration. But don't notice it further: I
wished to punish her sauoiness, that's alL I like her too well,
my dear Heathclifif, to let you absolutely seize and devour
her up/
'And I like her too ill to attempt it,'said he,'except in
a very ghoxdish fashion. You'd hear of odd things if I lived
alone with that mawkish, waxen face : the most ordinary
would be painting on its white the colours of the rainbow,
and turning the blue eyes black, every day or two: they
detestably resemble Linton's.'
'Delectably I'observed Catherine.'They are dove's
eyes — angel's I'
'She's her brother's heir, is she not ?'he asked, after a
brief silence.
'I should be sorry to think so,'returned his companion.
'Half a dozen nephews shall erase her title, please heaven I
Abstract your mind from the subject at present : you are too
prone to covet your neighbour's goods; remember this
neighbour's goods are mine.'
'If they were mine^ they would be none the less that,'said
Heathdiff ;'but though Isabella Linton may be silly, she
is scarcely mad ; and, in short, we'll dismiss the matter, as
you advise.'
From their tongues they did dismiss it ; and Catherine,
probably, from her thoughts. The other, I felt certain,
recalled it often in the course of the evening. I saw him
smile to himself — ^grin rather — and lapse into ominous
musing whenever Mrs. Linton had occasion to be absent
from the apartment.
I determined to watch his movements. My heart invari-
ably cleaved to the master's, in preference to Catherine's
side : with reason I imagined, for he was kind, and trustful,
and honourable; and she — she could not be called the
opposite, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide latitude.
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 111
ihat I had little faith in her principles, and still less
sympathy for her feelings. I wanted something to hajqpen
which might have the effect of freeing both Wuthering
Heights and the Grange of Mr. HeatholifF, quietly ; leaving
ns as we had been prior to his advent. His visits were a
oontmual nightmare to me ; and, I suspected, to my master
also. His abode at the Heights was an oppression past
explaining. I felt that God had forsaken the stray sheep
there to its own wicked wanderings, and an evil beast prowled
between it and the fold, waiting his time to spring and
destroy.
CHAPTEB XI
SoHBTDCBB, while meditating on these things in solitude, Fve
got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go
see how all was at the farm. I've persuaded my oonsoienoe
that it was a duty to warn him how people talked regarding
his ways; and then I've recollected his confirmed bad
habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched from
re-entering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be
taken at my word.
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on
a journey to Gimmerton. It was about the period that my
narrative has reached : a bright frosty afternoon ; the ground
bare, and the road hard and dry. I came to a stone where
the highway branches off on to the moor at yoiu: left hand ;
a rough sand-pillar, with the letters W. H. out on its north
side, on the east, G., and on the south-west, T. G. It serves
as a guide-post to the Grange, the Heights, and village. The
sun shone yellow on its grey head, reminding me of summer ;
and I cannot say why, but all at once a gush of child's
sensations flowed into my heart. Hindley and I held it a
favourite spot twenty years before. I gazed long at the
weather-worn block ; and, stooping down, perceived a hole
near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which
we were fond of storing there with more perishiEible things ;
and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I beheld my early
playmate seated on the withered turf : his dark, square head
bent forward, and his little hand scooping out the earth with
a piece of slate.'Poor Hindley I'I exclaimed, involun-
tarily. I started: my bodily eye was cheated into a
momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared
WUTHBMNQ HEIGHTS 113
straight into mine I It vanished in a twinkling ; but imme-
diately I felt an irresistible yearning to be at the Heights.
Superstition urged me to comply with this impulse: sup-
posing he should be dead I I thought — or should die soon I
— supposing it were a sign of death I The nearer I got to
the house the more agitated I grew ; and on catching sight
of it I trembled in every limb. The apparition had out-
stripped me : it stood looking through the gate. That was
my first idea on observing an elf-locked, brown-eyed boy
setting his ruddy countenance against the bars. Further
reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my Hareton, not
altered greatly since I left him, ten months since.
'Gk > d bless thee, darling I'I cried, forgetting instan-
taneously my foolish tears.'Hareton, it's Nelly I Nelly, thy
nurse.'
He retreated out of arm's length, and picked up a large
flint.
'I am come to see thy father, Hareton,'I added, guessing
from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all,
was not recognised as one with me.
He raised his missile to hurl it ; I commenced a soothing
speech, but could not stay his hand : the stone struck my
bonnet ; and then ensued, from the stammering lips of the
little fellow, a string of curses, which, whether he compre-
hended them or not, were delivered with practised emphasis,
and distorted his baby features into a shocking expression of
malignity. You may be certain this grieved more than
angered me. Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket,
and offered it to propitiate him. He hesitated, and then
snatched it from my hold ; as if he fancied I only intended
to tempt and disappoint him. I showed another, keeping it
out of his reach.
'Who has taught you those fine words, my bairn ?'I
inquired.'The curate ?'
'Damn the curate, and thee ! Gie me that,'he replied.
'Tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have
it|'said I.'Who's your master ?'
114 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
'Devil daddy/ was his answer.
'And what do yon learn from daddy ?'I continued.
He jumped at the fruit ; I raised it higher. * What does
he teach you ?'I asked.
'Naught/ said he,'but to keep out of his gait. Daddy
cannot bide me, because I swear at him.'
'Ah ! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy ?'I
observed.
'Ay — nay/ he drawled.
'Who, then ?'
'HeathcUtt*
< I asked if he liked Mr. Heathcli£E.'
'Ay !'he answered again.
Desiring to have his reasons for liking him, I could only
gather the sentences — * I known't : he pays dad back what
he gies to me — he curses daddy for cursing me. He says I
mun do as I wilL'
'And the curate does not teach you to read and write,
then?'I pursued.
'No, I was told the cmrate should have his teeth
dashed down his throat, if he stepped over the threshold
— Heathcliff had promised that t'
I put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father
that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to speak with
him, by the garden gate. He went up the walk, and entered
the house ; but, instead of Hindley, Heathcliff appeared on
the door-stones ; and I turned directly and ran down the
road as hard as ever I could race, making no halt till I gained
the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if I had raised a
goblin. This is not much coimected with Miss Isabella's
affair : except that it urged me to resolve further on mount-
ing vigilant guard, and doing my utmost to check the spread of
such bad influence at the Grange : even though I should
wake a domestic storm, by thwarting Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
The next time Heathcliff came my yoxmg lady chanced
to be feeding some pigeons in the court. She had never
spoken a word to her sister-in-law for three days ; but she
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 115
had likewise dropped her fretful complaining, and we found
it a great comfort. HeathclifF had not the habit of bestow-
ing a single unnecessary civility on Miss Linton, I knew.
Now, as soon as he beheld her, his first precaution was to
take a sweeping survey of the house-front. I was standing
by the kitchen-window, but I drew out of sight. He then
stepped across the pavement to her, and said something :
she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away ; to
prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm. She averted her
face : he apparently put some question which she had no
mind to answer. There was another rapid glance at the
house, and supposing himself unseen, the scoundrel had the
impudence to embrace her.
'Judas ! Traitor !'I ejaculated.'You are a hypocrite,
too, are you ? A deliberate deceiver.'
'Who is, Nelly?'said Catherine's voice at my elbow:
I had been over-intent on watching the pair outside to
mark her entrance.
* Your worthless friend !'I answered, warmly : * the
sneaking rascal yonder. Ah, he has caught a glimpse of us
— ^he is coming in ! I wonder will he have the heart to find
a plausible excuse for making love to Miss, when he told
you he hated her ?'
Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself free, and run into
the garden ; and a minute after, Heathclifif opened the door.
I couldn't withhold giving some loose to my indignation ; but
Catherine angrily insisted on silence, and threatened to
order me out of the kitchen, if I dared to be so presumptuous
as to put in my insolent tongue.
'To hear you, people might think you were the mistress !'
she cried.'You want setting down in your right place I
Heathcliff, what are you about, raising this stir ? I said you
must let Isabella alone ! — I beg you will, unless you are
tired of being received here, and wish Linton to draw the
bolts against you !'
'God forbid that he should try I'answered the black
villain. I detested him just then. * God keep him meek
116 WUTHEBINQ HBIGHfB
and patient I Every day I grow madder after sending him
to heaven I'
* Hash I'said Catherine, shutting the inner door 1 * Don't
vex me. Why have you disregarded my request ? Did she
oome across you on purpose ?'
'What is it to you ?'he growled.'I have aright to kiss
her, if she chooses ; and you have no right to object. I am
not your husband : you needn't be jealous of me I'
'I'm not jealous o/you/ replied the mistress ;'I'm jealous
for you. Clear your face : you sha'n't scowl at me ! If you
like Isabella, you shall marry her. But do you like her ?
Tell the truth, HeathclifF ! There, you won't answer. I'm
certain you don't.'
'And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying
that man ?'I inquired.
'Mr. Linton should approve,'returned my lady, de-
cisively.
* He might spare himself the trouble,'said Heathdiff :'I
could do as well without his approbation. And as to you,
Catherine, I have a mind to speak a few words now, while we
areatit. I want you to be aware that I X^noto you have treated
me infernally — infernally I Do you hear ? And if you flatter
yourself that I don't perceive it, you are a fool ; and if you
think I can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot :
and if you fancy I'll suffer unrevenged, I'll convince you of
the contrary, in a very little while 1 Meantime, thank you
for telling me your sister-in-law's secret : I swear I'll make
the most of it. And stand you aside !'
'What new phase of his character is this?'exclaimed
Mrs. Linton, in amazement. * I've treated you infernally —
and you'll take your revenge 1 How will you take it, un-
grateful brute ? How have I treated you infernally ?'
'I seek no revenge on you,'replied Heathcliff, less
vehemently.'That's not the plan. The tyrant grinds
down his slaves and they don't turn against him ; they
crush those beneath them. You are welcome to torture me
to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 117
a little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much
as yon are able. Having levelled my palace, don't ereot
a hovel and complacently admire your own charity in giving
me that for a home. If I imagined you really wished me to
marry Isabel, I'd cut my throat I'
'Oh, the evil is that I am not jealous, is it?'cried
Catherine.'Well, I won't repeat my offer of a wife : it ia
as bad as offering Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like
his, in inflicting misery. You prove it. Edgar is restored
from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming ; I begin
to be secure and tranquil ; and you, restless to know us at
peace, appear resolved on exciting a quarrel. Quarrel with
Edgar, if you please, Heathcliff, and deceive his sister:
you'll hit on exactly the most efficient method of revenging
yourself on me.'
The conversation ceased. Mrs. Linton sat down by the
fire, flushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her was
growing intractable : she could neither lay nor control it.
£Le stood on the hearth with folded arms, brooding on his
evil thoughts ; and in this position I left them to seek the
master, who was wondering what kept Catherine below so
long.
'Ellen,'said he, when I entered,'have you seen your
mistress?'
'Yes; she's in the kitchen, sur,'I answered.'She's
sadly put out by Mr. Heathcliff's behaviour : and, indeed, I
do think it's time to arrange his visits on another footing.
There's harm in being too soft, and now it's come to this .'
And I related the scene in the court, and, as near as I dared,
the whole subsequent dispute. I fancied it could not be
very prejudicial to Mrs. Linton ; unless she made it so after-
wards, by assuming the defensive for her guest. Edgar
Linton had difficulty in hearing me to the close. His first
words revealed that he did not dear his wife of blame.
'This is insufferable !'he exclaimed.'It is disgraceful
that she should own him for a friend, and force his company
on me I Call me two men out of the hall, Ellen. Catherine
118 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
shall linger no longer to argae with the low ruffian — I have
htimonred her enough/
He descended, and bidding the servantB wait in the
passage, went, followed by me, to the Utohen. Its occupants
had recommenced their angry discussion : Mrs. Linton, at
least, was scolding with renewed vigour; Heathclifif had
moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat cowed
by her violent rating apparently. He saw the master first,
and made a hasty motion that she should be silent;
which she obeyed, abruptly, on discovering the reason of his
intimation.
'How is this?'said Linton, addressing her;'what
notion of propriety must you have to remain here, alter the
language which has been held to you by that blackguard ?
I suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you think nothing
of it : you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps,
imagine I can get used to it too I'
'Have you been listening at the door, Edgar ?'asked the
mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her
husband, implying both carelessness and contempt of his
irritation. Heathcliff, who had raised his eyes at the former
speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter ; on purpose, it
seemed, to draw Mr. Linton's attention to him. He suc-
ceeded ; but Edgar did not mean to entertain him with any
high flights of passion.
'I've been so far forbearing with you, sir,'he said quietly ;
'not that I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded
character, but I felt you were only partly responsible for
that ; and Catherine wishing to keep up your acquaintance,
I acquiesced — foolishly. Your presence is a moral poison
that would contaminate the most virtuous : for that cause,
and to prevent worse consequences, I shall deny you hereafter
admission into this house, and give notice now Uiat I require
yoiu: instant departure. Three minutes'delay will render it
involuntary and ignominious.
Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker
with an eye full of derision.
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 119
'Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull I'he
said.'It is in danger of splitting its skull against my
knuckles. By Qod 1 Mr. Linton, I'm mortally sorry that
you are not worth knocking down I'
My master glanced towards the passage, and signed me
to fetch the men : he had no intention of hazarding a
personal encounter. I obeyed the hint ; but Mrs. Linton,
suspecting something, followed; and when I attempted to
call them, she pulled me back, slammed the door to, and
locked it.
'Fair means I'she said, in answer to her husband's look
of angry surprise.'If you haye not courage to attack him,
make an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will
correct you of feigning more valour than you possess. No,
I'll swsJlow the key before you shall get it ! I'm delightfully
rewarded for my kindness to each I After constant indul-
gence of one's weak natiure, and the other's bad one, I earn
for thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to
absurdity ! Edgar, I was defending you and yours ; and
I wish Heathcliff may flog you sick, for daring to think an
evil thought of me 1'
It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that
effect on the master. He tried to wrest the key from
Catherine's grasp, and for safety she flung it into the hot-
test part of the fire ; whereupon Mr. Edgar was taken with a
nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.
For his life he could not avert that excess of emotion :
mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely.
He leant on the back of a chair, and covered his face.
'Oh, heavens ! In old days this would win you knight-
hood I'exclaimed Mrs. Linton.'We are vanquished I we
are vanquished I HeathcUff would as soon lift a finger at
you as the king would march his army against a colony of
mice. Cheer up ! you sha'n't be hurt 1 Your type is not a
lamb, it's a sucking leveret.'
'I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy 1'
said her friend.'I compliment you on your taste. And that
120 WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS
is the slavering, shivering thing you preferred to me ! I
would not strike him with my fist, but I'd Uok him with my
foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. Is he weep-
ing, or is he going to faint for fear ?'
The fellow approached and gave the chair on which
Linton rested a push. He'd better have kept his distance :
my master quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the
throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter man. It
took his breath for a minute ; and while he choked, Mr.
Linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from
thence to the front entrance.
'There I you've done with coming here,'cried Catherine.
'Oct away, now; he'll return with a brace of pistols and
half-a-dozen assistants. If he did overhear us, of course
he'd never forgive you. You've played me an ill turn,
HeathdifF ! But go — make haste 1 I'd rather see Edgar at
bay than you.'
'Do you suppose I'm going with that blow burning in
my gullet ?'he thundered.'By hell, no ! I'll crush his ribs
in like a rotten hazel-nut before I cross the threshold ! If I
don't floor him now, I shall murder him some time ; so, as
you value his existence, let me get at him I'
'He is not coming,'I interposed, framing a bit of a lie.
'There's the coachman and the two gardeners ; you'll surely
not wait to be thrust into the road by them ! Each has a
bludgeon ; and master will, very likely, be watching from
the parlour-windows to see that Uiey fulfil his orders.'
The gardeners and coachman were there : but Linton
was with them. They had already entered the court.
HeathclifF, on the second thoughts, resolved to avoid a
struggle against three underlings : he seized the poker,
sma^ed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape
as they tramped in.
Mrs. Linton, who was very much excited, bade me
accompany her up-stairs. She did not know my share in
contributing to the disturbance, and I was anxious to keep
her in ignorance.
• 1
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 121
'I'm nearly distracted, Nelly !'she exclaimed, throi^g
herself on the sofa.'A thousand smiths'hammers are beat-
ing in my head 1 Tell Isabella to shun me ; this uproar is
owing to her ; and should she or any one else aggravate my
anger at present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to
Edgar, if you see him again to-night, that I'm in danger of
being seriously ill. I wish it may prove true. He has
startled and distressed me shockingly 1 I want to frighten
him. Besides, he might come and begin a string of abuse
or complainings ; I'm certain I should recriminate, and God
knows where we should end ! Will you do so, my good
Nelly ? You are aware that I am no way blamable in this
matter. What possessed him to turn listener ? Heathcliffs
talk was outrageous, after you left us ; but I could soon
have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant
nothing. Now all is dashed wrong ; by the fool's craving to
hear evil of self, that haunts some pec^le like a demon I
Had Edgar never gathered our conversation, he would never
have been the worse for it. Beally, when he opened on me
in that imreasonable tone of displeasure after I had scolded
Heathcliff till I was hoarse for him, 1 did not care hardly
what they did to each other ; especially as I felt that, how-
ever the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for
nobody knows how longt Well, if I cannot keep Heath-
difif for my friend — if Edgar will be mean and jealous, I'll
try to break their hearts by breaking my own. That will be a
prompt way of finishing all, when I am pushed to extremity !
But it's a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope ; I'd not
take Linton by surprise with it. To this point he has been
discreet in dreading to provoke me ; you must represent the
peril of quitting that policy, and remind him of my passion-
ate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy. I wish you
could dismiss that apathy out of that countenance, and look
rather more anxious about me.'
The stolidity with which I received these instructions
was, no doubt, rather exasperating : for they were dehvered
in perfect sincerity ; but I believed a person who could plan
123 WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS
the turning of her fits of passion to aooount, beforehand,
might, by exerting her will, manage to control herself toler-
ably, even while onder their influence ; and I did not wish
to * frighten'her husband, as she said, and multiply his
annoyances for the purpose of serving her selfishness. There-
fore I said nothing when I met the master coming towards
the parlour ; but I took the liberty of turning back to listen
whether they would resume their quarrel together. He
began to speak first.
'Remain where you are, Gatherine,'he said ; without any
anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency.
'I shall not stay. I am neither come to wrangle nor be
reconciled; but I wish just to learn whether, after this
evening's events, you intend to continue your intimacy
with •
'Oh, for mercy's sake,'interrupted the mistress, stamping
her foot,'for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now !
Your cold blood cannot be worked into a fever : your veins
are full of ice-water ; but mine are boiling, and the sight of
such chillness makes them dance.'
* To get rid of me, answer my question,'persevered Mr.
Linton.'You rn/iist answer it ; and that violence does not
alarm me. I have found that you can be as stoical as any-
one, when you please. Will you give up Heathclifif here-
after, or will you give up me? It is impossible for you to
be my friend and Jim at the same time; and I absolutely
reqmre to know which you choose.'
'I require to be let alone !'exclaimed Gatherine, furiously.
'I demand it ! Don't you see I can scarcely stand ? Edgar,
you — you leave me !'
She rang the bell till it broke with a twang ; I entered
leisurely. It was enough to try the temper of a saint, such
senseless, wicked rages I There she lay dashing her head
against the arm of the sofa, and grinding her teeth, so that
you might fancy she would crash them to splinters I Mr.
Linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and fear.
He told me to fetch some water. She had no breath for
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 128
speaking. I brought a glass fall; and as she would not
drink, I sprinkled it on her faoe. In a few seconds she
stretched herself out stiff, and turned up her eyes, while her
cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the aspect of
death. Linton looked terrified.
'There is nothing in the world the matter,'I whispered.
I did not want him to yield, though I could not help being
afraid in my heart.
'She has blood on her lips I'he said, shuddering.
'Never mind I'I answered, tartly. And I told him how
she had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit
of frenzy. I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she
heard me ; for . she staxted up — her hair flying over her
shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck and
arms standing out pretematurally. I made up my mind for
broken bones, at least ; but she only glared about her for an
instant, and then rushed from the room. The master
directed me to follow; I did, to her chamber-door: she
hindered me from going further by securing it against me.
As she never offered to descend to breakfast next morn-
ing, I went to ask whether she would have some carried up.
'No !'she replied, peremptorily. The same question was
repeated at dinner and tea ; and again on the morrow after,
and received the same answer. Mr. Linton, on his part,
spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning
his wife's occupations. Isabella and he had had an hour's
interview, during which he tried to elicit from her some
sentiment of proper horror for Heathcliff's advances : but he
could make nothing of her evasive replies, and was obliged
to close the examination unsatisfactorily ; adding, however,
a solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage
that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relation-
ship between herself and him.
CHAPTER Xn
Whilb Miss Linton moped about the paxk and garden, always
silent, and almost always in tears; and her brother shut
himself np among books that he never opened — wearying, I
guessed, with a continual vague expectation that Catherine,
repenting her conduct, would come of her own accord to ask
pardon, and seek a reconciliation — ^and she fasted pertina-
ciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal Edgar
was ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone held him
from running to cast himself at her feet ; I went about my
household duties, convinced that the Orange had but one
sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged in my body. I
wasted no condolences on Miss, nor any expostulations on my
mistress ; nor did I pay much attention to the sighs of my
master, who yearned to hear his lady's name, since he might
not hear her voice. I determined they should come about
as they pleased for me; and though it was a tiresomely slow
process, I began to rejoice at length in a faint dawn of its
progress : as I thought at first.
Mrs. Linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and
having finished the water in her pitcher and decanter,
desired a renewed supply, and a basin of gruel, for she
believed she was dying. That I set down as a speech meant
for Edgar's ears ; I believed no such thing, so I kept it to
myself and brought her some tea and diy toast. She ate
and drank eagerly, and sank back on her pillow again,
clenching her hands and groaning.'Oh, I will die,'she
exclaimed, * since no one cares anything about me. I wish
I bad not taken that.'Then a good while after I heard her
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 126
murmur,'No, I'll not die — ^he'd be glad — ^he does not love
me at all — he would never miss me !'
'Did you want anything, ma'am ?'I inquired, still pre-
serving my external composure, in spite of her ghastly ooun-
tenanoe and strange, exaggerated manner.
'What is that apathetic being doing?'she demanded,
pushing the thick entangled locks from her wasted faoe.
'Has he fallen into a lethargy, or is he dead ?'
'Neither,'replied I ;'if you mean Mr. Linton. He's
tolerably well, I think, though his studies occupy him rather
more than they ought : he is continually among his books,
since he has no other society.'
I should not have spoken so if I had known her true
condition, but I could not get rid of the notion that she
acted a part of her disorder.
'Among his books 1'she cried, confounded.'And I
dying 1 I on the brink of the grave ! My Ood I does he
know how I'm altered ?'continued she, staring at her
reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite wall.'Is
that Catherine Linton ? He imagines me in a pet — in play,
perhaps. Cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest ?
Nelly, if it be not too late, as soon as I learn how he feels,
I'll choose between these two: either to starve at once —
that would be no punishment unless he had a heart — or to
recover, and leave the country. Are you speaking the
truth about him now ? Take care. Is he actually so utterly
indifferent for my life ?'
'Why, ma'am,'I answered,'the master has no idea of
your being deranged ; and of course he does not fear that
you will let yourself die of hunger.'
'You think not? Cannot you tell him I will?'she
returned.'Persuade him ! speak of your own mind : say you
are certain I will I'
'No, you forget, Mrs. Ldnton,'I suggested,'that you
have eaten some food with a relish this evening, and to-
morrow you will perceive its good effects.'
'If I were only sure it would kill him/ she interruptedi
136 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
Td kill myself directly I These three awfiil nights Fve
never closed my lids — and oh, I've been tormented I I've
been haunted, Nelly I But I begin to fancy you don't like
me. How strange I I thought, though everybody hated
and despised each other, they could not avoid loving me.
And they have all turned to enemies in a few hours : they have,
I'm positive ; the people here. How dreary to meet death,
surrounded by their cold faces! Isabella, terrified and
repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be so dreadful to
watch Catherine go. And Edgar standing solemnly by to see
it over ; then offering prayers of thanks to God for restoring
peace to his house, and going back to his books I What in
the name of all that feels has he to do with hooks, when I
am dying ?'
She could not bear the notion which I had put into her
head of Mr. Linton's philosophical resignation. Tossing
about, she increased her feverish bewilderment to madness,
and tore the pillow with her teeth ; then raising herself up
all burning, desired that I would open the window. We
were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the
north-east, and I objected. Both the expressions flitting
over her f cuse, and the changes of her moods, began to alarm
me terribly ; and brought to my recollection her former ill-
ness, and the doctor's injunction that she should not be
crossed. A minute previously she was violent ; now, sup-
ported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey her,
she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers
from the rents she had just made, and ranging them on the
sheet according to their different species : her mind had
strayed to other associations.
'That's a turkey's,'she murmured to herself ;'and this is
a wild duck's ; and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they put pigeons'
feathers in the pillows — no wonder I couldn't die I Let me
take care to throw it on the floor when I lie down. And
here is a moor-cock's ; and this — I should know it among a
thousand — it's a lapwing's. Bonny bird ; wheeling over our
beads in the middle of the moor. It wanted to get to its
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 127
nest, for the clonds had touched the swells, and it felt rain
coming. This feather was picked up from the heath, the bird
was not shot : we saw its nest in the winter, full of tittle skele-
tons. Heathcliff set a trap over it, and the old ones dared not
come. I made him promise he'd never shoot a lapwing after
that, and he didn't. Yes, here are more ! Did he shoot my
lapwings, Nelly? Are they red, any of them? Let me
look.'
'Give over with that baby-work I'I interrupted,
dragging the pillow away, and tiuning the holes towards
the mattress, for she was removing its contents by handfuls.
'lie down and shut your eyes : you're wandering. There's a
mess ! The down is flying about like snow.'
I went here and there collecting it.
'I see in you, Nelly,'she continued dreamily,'an aged
woman : you have grey hair and bent shoulders. This bed
is the fairy cave under Fenistone crags, and you are gathering
elf-bolts to hurt our heifers ; pretending, while I am near,
that they are only locks of wool. That's what you'll come
to fifty years hence : I know you are not so now. I'm not
wandering : you're mistaken, or else I should believe you
really were that withered hag, and I should think I wm
under Fenistone Crags; and I'm conscious it's night, and
there are two candles on the table making the black press
shine like jet.'
'The black press ? where is that ?'I asked.'You are
talking in your sleep 1'
'It's against the wall, as it always is,'she replied.'It
does appear odd — I see a face in it !'
'There's no press in the room, and never was,'said I,
resuming my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might
watch her.
'Don't you see that face ?'she inquired, gazing earnestly
at the mirror.
And say what I could, I was incapable of niAlriTig her
comprehend it to be her own ; so I rose and covered it with
a shawl.
128 WUTHBEING HEIGHTS
'It's behind there still !'she pursued, anxiously.'And it
stirred. Who is it ? I hope it will not come out when you
are gone I Oh ! Nelly, the room is haunted ! I'm afraid
of being alone !'
I took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed ; for a
suooession of shudders convulsed her frame, and she would
keep straining her gaze towards the glass.
'There's nobody here 1 * I insisted.'It was yourself ^
Mrs. linton : you knew it a while since.'
* Myself I'she gasped,'and the clock is striking twelve I
It's true, then I that's dreadful 1'
Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over
her eyes. I attempted to steal to the door with an inten-
tion of calling her husband ; but I was summoned back by a
piercing shriek — ^the shawl had dropped from the frame.
'Why, what « the matter?'cried I. * Who is coward
now? Wake up! That is the glass — the mirror, Mrs.
Linton ; and you see yourself in it, and there am I too by
your side.*
Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the
horror gradually passed from her countenance ; its paleness
gave place to a glow of shame.
'Oh, dear ! I thought I was at home,'she sighed.'I
thought I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Heights.
Because I'm weak, my brain got confused, and I screamed
unconsciously. Don't say anything ; but stay with me. I
dread sleeping : my dreams appal me.'
'A sound sleep would do you good, ma'am,'I answered :
'and I hope this suffering wiU prevent your trying starving
again.'
'Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house 1'she
went on bitterly, wringing her hands.'And that wind
sounding in the firs by the lattice. Do let me feel it — it
comes straight down the moor — do let me have one breath !'
To pacify her I held the casement ajar a few seconds. A
cold blast rushed through ; I closed it, and returned to my
post. She lay still now, her face bathed in tears. Ezhaus-
WUTHEKLNQ HEIGHTS 129
tion of body had entirely sabdned her spirit: our fiery
Catherine was no better than a wailing child.
'How long is it since I shut myself in here ?'she asked,
suddenly reviving.
'It was Monday evening/ 1 replied,'and this is Thiursday
night, or rather Friday morning, at present.'
'What ! of the same week ?'she exclaimed.'Only that
brief time ? *
* Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-
temper,* observed I.
* Well, it seems a weary number of hours,'she muttered
doubtfully:'it must be more. I remember being in the
parlour after they had quarrelled, and Edgar being cruelly
provoking, and me running into this room desperate.
As soon as ever I had barred the door, utter blackness over-
whelmed me, and I fell on the floor. I couldn't explain to
Edgar how certain I felt of having a fit, or going raging mad,
if he persisted in teasing me ! I had no command of tongue,
or brain, and he did not guess my agony, perhaps : it barely
left me sense to try to escape from him and his voice.
Before I recovered sufficiently to see and hear, it began to
be dawn, and, Nelly, I'll tell you what I thought, and what
has kept recurring and recurring till I feared for my reason.
I thought as I lay there, vnth my head against that table
leg, and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the
window, that I was enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at
home ; and my heart ached with some great grief which,
just waking, I could not recollect. I pondered, and worried
myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the
whole last seven years of my Hfe grew a blank ! I did not
recall that they had been at all. I was a child ; my father was
just buried, and my misery arose from the separation that
Hindley had ordered between me and Heathcliif. I was
laid alone, for the first time ; and, rousing from a dismal
doze after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to push the
panels aside : it struck the table-top 1 I swept it along the
carpet, and then memory burst in : my late anguish was
180 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
swallowed in a pfiLroxysm of despair. I oannot say why I felt
so wildly wretched : it must have been temporary derange-
ment ; for there is scarcely canse. Bnt, supposing at twelve
yeajrs old I had been wrenched from the Heights, and every
early association, and my all in all, as Heathdiff was at that
time, and been converted at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the
lady of Thrushcross Grange, and the wife of a stranger : an
exile, and outcast, thenceforth, from what had been my
world. You may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where I
grovelled 1 Shake your head as you will, Nelly, ycu have
helped to unsettle me ! You should have spoken to Edgar,
indeed you should, and compelled him to leave me quiet !
Oh, I'm burning t I wish I were out of doors I I wish I
were a girl again, half savage and hardy, and free ; and
laughing at injuries, not maddening under them ! Why
am I so changed ? why does my blood rush into a hell of
tumult at a few words? I*m sure I should be myself
were I once among the heather on those hills. Open the
window again wide : fasten it open ! Quick, why don't you
move ?'
'Because I won't give you your death of cold,'I
answered.
'You won't give me a chance of life, you mean,'she
said, sullenly.'However, I'm not helpless yet ; I'll open it
myself.'
And sliding from the bed before I could hinder her, she
crossed the room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back,
and bent out, careless of the frosty air that cut about her
shoulders as keen as a knife. I entreated, and finally
attempted to force her to retire. But I soon found her
delirious strength much surpassed mine (she wm delirious,
I became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings).
There was no moon, and everything beneatfi lay in misty
darkness : not a light gleamed from any house, far or near —
all had been extinguished long ago : and those at Wuthering
Heights were never visible — still she asserted she caught
their shining.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 181
'Look!'she cried eagerly, HhaVs my room with the
candle in it, and the trees swaying before it ; and the other
candle is in Joseph's garret. Joseph sits up late, doesn't he ?
He's waiting till I come home that he may lock the gate.
Well, he'll wait a while yet. It's a rough journey, and a sad
heart to travel it ; and we must pass by Gimmerton Eirk to
go that journey I We've braved its ghosts often together,
and dared each other to stand among the graves and ask
them to come. But, Heathdiff, if I dare you now, will you
venture? If you do, I'll keep you. Ill not lie there by
myself : they may bury me twelve feet deep, and throw the
church down over me, but I won't rest till you are with me.
I never will I'
She paused, and resumed with a strange smile.'He's
considering — he'd rather I'd come to him ! Find a way,
then ! not through that kirkyard. You are slow ! Be con-
tent, you always followed me !'
Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was
planning how I could reach something to wrap about her,
without quitting my hold of herself (for I could not trust her
alone by the gaping lattice), when, to my consternation, I
heard the rattle of the door-handle, and Mr. Linton entered.
He had only then come from the library ; and, in passing
through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted
by cariosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that lat3
hour.
'Oh, sir !'I cried, checking the exclamation risen to
his lips at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere
of the chamber.'My poor mistress is ill, and she quite
masters me : I cannot manage her at all ; pray, come and
persuade her to go to bed. Forget your anger, for she's hard
to guide any way but her own.'
'Catherine ill?* he said, hastening to us.'Shut the
window, Ellen I Catherine ! why'
He was silent. The haggardness of Mrs. Linton's
appearance smote him speechless, and he could only glance
from her to me in horrified astonishment.
182 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
'She's been frettmg here/ I oontinned,'and eating
scaroely anything, and never complaining : she would admit
none of as till this evening, and so we couldn't inform you
of her state, as we were not aware of it ourselves ; but it is
nothing/
I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly ; the master
frowned.'It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean?'he said
sternly.'You shall account more clearly for keeping me
ignorant of this I'And he took his wife in his arms, and
looked at her with anguish.
At first she gave him no glance of recognition : he was
invisible to her abstracted gaze. The delirium was not fixed,
however ; having weaned her eyes from contemplating the
outer darkness, by degrees she centred her attention on him,
and discovered who it was that held her.
'Ah t you are come, are you, Edgar Linton ?'she said,
with angry animation.'You are one of those things that
are ever found when least wanted, and when you are wanted,
never! I suppose we shall have plenty of lamentations
now — I see we shall — but they can't keep me from my
narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where I'm
bound before spring is over I There it is : not among the
Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof, but in the open air,
with a head-stone; and you may please yourself whether
you go to them or come to me I'
'Catherine, what have you done ?'commenced the
master.'Am I nothing to you any more? X > o you love
that wretch Heath'
'Hush 1'cried Mrs. Linton.'Hush, this moment !
You mention that name and I end the matter instantly by
a spring from the window ! What you touch at present you
may have ; but my soul will be on that hill-top before you
lay hands on me again. I don't want you, Edgar : I'm past
wanting you. Return to your books. I'm glad you possess
a consolation, for all you had in me is gone.'
'Her mind wanders, sir,'I interposed.'She has been
talking nonsense the whole evening ; but let her have quiet,
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 133
and proper attendan6e, and she'll rally. Hereafter, we must
be oantions bow we vex her.'
'I desire no further advice from you/ answered Mr.
Linton.'Yon knew yonr mistress's natore, and you
encouraged me to harass her. And not to give me one hint
of how she has been these three days I It was heartless !
Months of sickness could not cause such a change 1'
I began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed
for another's wicked waywardness.'I knew Mrs. Linton's
nature to be headstrong and domineering/ cried I :'but I
didn't know that you vdshed to foster her fierce temper t I
didn't know that, to humour her, I should wink at Mr.
HeathcUff. I performed the duty of a faithful servant in
telling you, and I have got a faithful servant's wages ! Well,
it will teach me to be careful next time. Next time you may
gather intelligence for yourself 1'
* The next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my
service, EUen Dean,'he repUed.
'You'd rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then,
Mr. Linton?'said I.'Heathcliff has your permission to
come a-courting to Miss, and to drop in at every opportunity
your absence offers, on purpose to poison the mistress against
you?'
Confused as Catherine was, her wits were alert at applying
our conversation.
'Ah ! Nelly has played traitor,'she exclaimed, passion-
ately.'Nelly is my hidden enemy. You witch ! So you
do seek elf-bolts to hurt us ! Let me go, and I'll make her
rue ! I'll make her howl a recantation 1'
A maniac's fury kindled under her brows ; she struggled
desperately to disengage herself from Linton's arms. I felt
no inclination to tarry the event; and, resolving to seek
medical aid on my own responsibility, I quitted the
chamber.
In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where
a bridle hook is driven into the wall, I saw something white
moved irregularly, evidently by another agent than the
IM WUTHBBINO HEIGHTS
wind. Notwithstanding my harry, I stayed to examine il»
lest ever after I should have the conviction impressed on my
imagination that it was a creature of the other world. My
surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch
more than vision, Miss Isabella's springer, Fanny, suspended
by a handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp. I quickly
released the animal, and lifted it into the garden. I had
seen it follow its mistress up-stairs when she went to bed ;
and wondered much how it could have got out there, and
what mischievous person had treated it so. While untying
the knot round the hook, it seemed to me that I repeatedly
caught the beat of horses'feet galloping at some distance ;
but there were such a number of things to occupy my reflec-
tions that I hardly gave the circumstance a thought : though
it was a strange sound, in that place, at two o'clock in the
morning.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house
to see a patient in the village as I came up the street ; and
my account of Catherine Linton's malady induced him to
accompany me back immediately. He was a plain rough
man; and he made no scruple to speak his doubts of
her surviving this second attack; unless she were more
submissive to his directions than she had shown herself
before.
'Nelly Dean,'said he,'I can't help fancying there's an
extra cause for this. What has there been to do at the
Orange? We've odd reports up here. A stout, hearty lass
like Catherine does not fall ill for a trifle ; and that sort of
people should not either. It's hard work bringing them
through fevers, and such things. How did it begin ?'
* The master will inform you,'I answered ;'but you sure
acquainted with the Eamshaws'violent dispositions, and
Mrs. Linton caps them all. I may say this ; it commenced
in a quarrel. She was struck during a tempest of passion
with a kind of fit. That's her account, at least : for she flew
off in the height of it, and locked herself up. Afterwards,
she refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and remains
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 186
in a half dream ; knowing those about her, bnt having her
mind filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions.'
'Mr. Linton will be sorry ?'observed Kenneth, interroga-
tively.
'Sorry ? he'll break his heart should anything happen I'
I replied.'Don't alarm him more than necessary.'
'Well, I told him to beware,'said my companion ;'and
he must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning I
Hasn't he been intimate with Mr. Heathdiff lately?'
'Heathclifif frequently visits at the Grange,'answered I,
'though more on the strength of the mistress having known
him when a boy, than because the master likes his company.
At present he's discharged from the trouble of calling;
owing to some presumptuous aspirations after Miss Linton
which he manifested. I hardly think he'll be taken in
again.'
'And does Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on him?'
was the doctor's next question.
'I'm not in her confidence,'returned I, reluctant to
continue the subject.
'No, she's a sly one,'he remarked, shaking his head.
'She keeps her own coimsel ! But she's a real little fool.
I have it from good authority that last night (and a pretty
night it was I) she and HeathdifiF were walking in the planta-
tion at the back of your house above two hours; and he
pressed her not to go in again, but just mount his horse and
away with him 1 My informant said she could only put him
off by pledging her word of honour to be prepfiired on their
first meeting after that : when it was to be he didn't hear ;
but you urge Mr. Linton to look sharp t'
This news filled me with fresh fears; I outstripped
Kenneth, and ran most of the way back. The little dog was
yelping in the garden yet. I spared a minute to open the
gate for it, but instead of going to the house door, it coursed
up and down snuffing the grass, and would have escaped to
the road, had I not seized it and conveyed it in with me.
On ascending to Isabella's room, my suspidons were oon-
7
136 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
firmed : it was empty. Had I been a few hours sooner
Mrs. Linton's illness might have arrested her rash step. But
what could be done now? There was a bare possibility of
overtaking them if pursued instantly. I could not pursue
them, however ; and I dared not rouse the family, and fill
the place with confusion ; still less unfold the business to
my master, absorbed as he was in his present calamity, and
having no heart to spare for a second grief ! I saw nothing
for it but to hold my tongue, and sufifer matters to take their
course ; and Kenneth being arrived, I went with a badly
composed countenance to announce him. Catherine lay in
a troubled sleep : her husband had succeeded in soothing the
excess of frenzy; he now hung over her pillow, watdiing
every shade and every change of her painfully expressive
features.
The doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke
hopefully to him of its having a favourable termination, if
we could only preserve around her perfect and constant
tranquiUity. To me, he signified the threatening danger was
not so much death, as permanent aUenation of intellect.
I did not close my eyes that night, nor did Mr. Linton :
indeed, we never went to bed ; and the servants were all up
long before the usual hour, moving through the house with
stealthy tread, and exchanging whispers as they encountered
each other in their vocations. Every one was active but
Miss Isabella ; and they began to remark how sound she
slept : her brother, too, asked if she had risen, and seemed
impatient for her presence, and hurt that she showed so little
anxiety for her sister-in-law. I trembled lest he should send
me to call her ; but I was spared the pain of being the first
proclaimant of her flight. One of the maids, a thoughtless
girl, who had been on an early errand to Gimmerton, came
panting up-stairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the
chamber, crying :'Oh, dear, dear 1 What mun we have
next? Master, master, our young lady'
'Hold your noise I'cried I hastily, enraged at her
damorouB manner.
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 187
'Speak lower, Mary — What is the matter?'said Mr.
Linton.'What aik your young lady ?'
'She's gone, she's gone t Yon'HeathoIifTs run off wi'
her t * gasped the girl.
'That is not true I'exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation.
'It cannot be : how has the idea entered your head ? Ellen
Dean, go and seek her. It is incredible : it cannot be.'
As he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then
repeated his demand to know her reasons for such an asser-
tion.
'Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here,'
she stammered,'and he asked whether we weren't in trouble
at the Grange. I thought he meant for missis's sickness, so
I answered, yes. Then says he, " There's somebody gone
after'em, I guess? " I stared. He saw I knew nought
about it, and he told how a gentleman and lady had stopped
to have a horse's shoe fastened at a blacksmith's shop, two
miles out of Gimmerton, not very long after midnight ! and
how the blacksmith's lass had got up to spy who they were :
she knew them both directly. And she noticed the man —
Heathcliff it was, she felt certain : nob'dy could mistake
him, besides—put a sovereign in her father's hand for pay-
ment. The lady had a cloak about her face; but having
desired a sup of water, while she drank it fell back, and she
saw her very plain. Heathcliff held both bridles as they
rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and went
as fast as the rough roads would let them. The lass said
nothing to her father, but she told it all over Gimmerton
this morning.'
I ran and peeped, for form's sake, into Isabella's room ;
confirming, when I returned, the servant's statement. Mr.
Linton had resumed his seat by the bed ; on my re > entrance,
he raised his eyes, read the meaning of my blank aspect, and
dropped them without giving an order, or uttering a word.
'Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing
her back,'I inquired. * How should we do ?'
'She went of her own accord,'answered the master;
188 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
* she had a right to go if she pleased. Trouble me no more
about her. Hereafter she is only my sister in name: not
because I disown her, but because she has disowned me.'
And that was all he said on the subject : he did not make
a single inquiry further, or mention her in any way, except
directing me to send what property she had in the house to
her fresh home, wherever it was, when I knew it.
GHAFTEB XTTT
Fob two monihs the fagitives remamed absent ; in thoee two
months, Mrs. Linton enooontered and oonqneied the worst
shook of what was denominated a brain fever. No mother
oonld have nursed an only child more devotedly than Edgar
tended her. Day and night he was watching, and patiently
endnring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a
shaken reason could inflict ; and, though Kenneth remarked
that what he saved from the grave would only recompense
his care by forming the source of constant future anxiety —
in fact, that his health and strength were being sacrificed to
preserve a mere ruin of himianity — ^he knew no limits in
gratitude and joy when Catherine's life was declared out of
danger ; and hour after hour he would sit beside her, tracing
the gradual return to bodily health, and flattering his too
sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would settle
back to its right balance also, and she would soon be entirely
her former self.
The first time she left her chamber was at the commence-
ment of the following March. Mr. Linton had put on her
pillow, in the morning, a handful of golden crocuses ; her
eye, long stranger to any gleam of pleasure, caught them in
waking, and shone delighted as she gathered them eagerly
together.
'These are the earliest flowers at the Heights,'she ex-
claimed.'They remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm
sunshine, and nearly melted snow. Edgar, is there not a
south wind, and is not the snow almost gone ?'
'The snow is quite gone down here, darUng,'replied her
UO WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS
hnsband;'and I only see two white spots on the whole
range of moors : the sky is blue, and the larks are singing,
and the becks and brooks are all brim full. Catherine, last
spring at this time, I was longing to have you under this
roof ; now, I wish you were a mile or two up those hills :
the air blows so sweetly, I feel that it would cure you.'
'I shaU never be there but once more,'said the invalid ;
'and then you'll leave me, and I shall remain for ever. Next
spring you'll long again to have me under this roof, and you'll
look back and think you were happy to-day.'
Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to
cheer her by the fondest words ; but, vaguely regarding the
flowers, she let the tears collect on her lashes and stream down
her cheeks imheeding. We knew she was really better,
and, therefore, decided that long confinement to a single place
produced much of this despondency, and it might be partially
removed by a change of scene. The master told me to light
a fire in the many-weeks'deserted parlour, and to set an
easy-ohair in the sunshine by the window; and then he
brought her down, and she sat a long while enjoying the
genifij heat, and, as we expected, revived by the objects round
her : which, though familiar, were free from the dreary asso-
ciations investing her hated sick chamber. By evening she
seemed greatly exhausted ; yet no arguments could persuade
her to return to that apartment, and I had to arrange the
parlour sofa for her bed, till another room could be prepared.
To obviate the fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs,
we fitted up this, where you lie at present — on the same floor
with the parlour ; and she was soon strong enough to move
from one to the other, leaning on Edgar's arm. Ah, I
thought myself, she might recover, so waited on as she was.
And there was double cause to desire it, for on her existence
depended that of another : we cherished the hope that in a
little while Mr. Linton's heart would be gladdened, and his
lands secured from a stranger's gripe, by the birth of an heir.
I should mention that Isabella sent to her brother, some
six weeks from her departure, a short note, announcing her
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 141
marriage with Heathdiff. It appeared dry and oold ; but at
the bottom was dotted m with pendl an obsonre apology,
and an entreaty for kind remembranoe and reconciliation, if
her proceeding had offended him : asserting that she could not
help it then, and being done, she had now no power to repeal
it. Linton did not reply to this, I beUeve ; and, in a fortnight
more, I got a long letter, which I considered odd, coming from
the pen of a bride just out of the honeymoon. I'll read it :
for I keep it yet. Any reUc of the dead is precious, if they
were valued living.
Deab EiiLBN, it begins, — I came last night to Wuthering
Heights, and heard, for the first time, that Catherine has
been, and is yet, very ill. I must not write to her, I suppose,
and my brother is either too angry or too distressed to answer
what I sent him. Still, I must write to somebody, and the
only choice left me is you.
Inform Edgar that I'd give the world to see his face again
— ^that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-
four hours after I left it, and is there at this moment, full of
warm feelings for him, and Catherine ! I carCt follow it
though — (these words are underlined) — they need not expect
me, and they may draw what conclusions they please ; taking
care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or
deficient affection.
The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I want
to ask you two questions : the first is, — How did you con-
trive to preserve the common sympathies of human nature
when you resided here ? I cannot recognise any sentiment
which those around share with me.
The second question I have great interest in ; it is this —
Is Mr. Heathcliff a man? If so, is he mad? And if not, is
he a devil? I sha'n't tell my reasons for making this
inquiry ; but I beseech you to explain, if you can, what I
have married : that is, when you call to see me ; and you
must call, Ellen, very soon. Don't write, but come, and
bring me something from Edgar.
142 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Now, yoQ shall hear how I have been reoeived in my new
home, as I am led to imagine the Heights will be. It is to
amuse myself that I dwell on such subjects as the lack of
external comforts : they never occupy my thoughts, except at
the moment when I miss them. I should laugh and dance
for joy, if I found their absence was the total of my miseries,
and the rest was an unnatural dream 1
The sun set behind the Grange as we turned on to the
moors ; by that, I judged it to be six o'clock ; and my com-
panion halted half an hour, to inspect the park, and the
gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as well as he could ;
so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of the
farm-house, and your old fellow-servant, Joseph, issued out to
receive us by the light of a dip candle. He did it with a
courtesy that redounded to his credit. His first act was to
elevate his torch to a level with my face, squint malignantly,
project his under-lip, and turn away. Then he took the two
horses, and led them into the stables ; reappearing for the
purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in an ancient
castle.
Heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and I entered the
kitchen — a dingy, untidy hole ; I daresay you would not
know it, it is so changed since it was in your charge. By
the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb and dirty in
garb, with a look of Catherine in his eyes and about his
mouth.
'This is Edgar's legal nephew,'I reflected —'mine in
a manner; I must shake hands, and — ^yes — ^I must kiss
him. It is right to establish a good understanding at the
beginning.'
I approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist,
said —'How do you do, my dear ?'
He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
'Shall you and I be friends, Hareton ?'was my next
essay at conversation.
An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not
'bame off'rewarded my perseverance.
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 143
'Hey, Throttler, lad !'whispered the little wretoh^
rousing a half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a comer.'Now,
wilt thou be ganging ?'he asked authoritatively.
Love for my life urged a oomplianqe ; I stepped over the
threshold to wait till the others should enter. Mr. Heathcliff
was nowhere visible ; and Joseph, whom I followed to the
stables, and requested to accompany me in, after staring and
muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and replied —
'Mim 1 mim ! mim ! Did iver Christian body hear aught
like it ? Mincing un'munching ! How can I tell whet ye
say?'
'I say, I wish you to come with me into the house !'I
cried, thinking him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
'None o'me ! I getten summut else to do,'he answered,
and continued his work ; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile,
and surveying my dress and countenance (the former a great
deal too fine, but the latter, I'm sure, as sad as he could
desire) with sovereign contempt.
I walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another
door, at which I took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some
more civil servant might show himself. After a short sus-
pense, it was opened by a tall, gaunt man, without necker-
chief, and otherwise extremely slovenly ; his features were
lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders ;
and hia eyes, too, were like a ghostly Catherine's with all
their beauty annihilated.
'What's your business here?'he demanded, grimly.
'Who are you ?'
'My name was Isabella Linton,'I replied.'You've seen
me before, sir. I'm lately married to Mr. Heathcliff, and he
has brought me here — I suppose by your permission.'
'Is he come back, then ?'asked the hermit, glaring like a
hungry wolf.
* Yes — ^we came just now,* I said ; * but he left me by the
kitchen door; and when I would have gone in, your little
boy played sentinel over the place, and frightened me off by
the help of a bull-dog.'
144 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
'It's well the hellish villain has kept his word !'growled
my future host, searohing the darkness beyond me in
expectation of disoovering Heathcliff ; and then he indulged
in a soliloquy of execrations, and threats of what he would
have done had the'fiend'deceived him.
I repented having tried this second entrance, and was
almost inclined to slip away before he finished cursing, but
ere I could execute that intention, he ordered me in, and
shut and re-fastened the door. There was a great fiire, and
that was all the light in the huge apartment, whose floor had
grown a uniform grey ; and the once brilliant pewter-dishes,
which used to attract my gaze when I was a girl, partook of
a similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust. I inquired
whether I might call the maid, and be conducted to a
bedroom! Mr. Eamshaw vouchsafed no answer. He
walked up and down, with his hands in his pockets, appar-
ently quite forgetting my presence ; and his abstraction was
evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical,
that I shrank from disturbing him again.
You'll not be surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particularly
cheerless, seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable
hearth, and remembering that four miles distant lay my
delightful home, containing the only people I loved on earth ;
and there might as well be the Atlantic to part us, instead of
those four miles : I could not overpass them 1 I questioned
with myself — where must I turn for comfort? and — ^mind
you don't tell Edgar, or Catherine — above every sorrow
beside, this rose pre-eminent : despair at finding nobody who
could or would be my ally against Heathdiff 1 I had sought
shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost gladly, because I was
secured by that arrangement from living alone with him ; but
he knew the people we were coming amongst, and he did not
fear their intermeddling.
I sat and thought a doleful time : the clock struck eight,
and nine, and still my companion paced to and fro, his head
bent on his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan or a
bitter ejaculation forced itself out at intervab. I listened to
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 146
detect a woman's voice in the hoase, and filled the interim
with wild regrets and dismal anticipations, which, at last,
spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping. I was
not aware how openly I grieved, till Eamshaw halted
opposite, in his measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-
awakened surprise. Taking advantage of his recovered
attention, I exclaimed —'I'm tired with my journey, and I
want to go to bed ! Where is the maid-servant ? Direct me
to her, as she won't come to me !'
'We have none,'he answered;'you must wait on
yourself!'
'Where must I sleep, then?'I sobbed; I was beyond
regarding self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and
wretchedness.
'Joseph will show you HeathclifiTs chamber,'said he;
'open that door — he's in there.*
I was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and
added in the strangest tone —'Be so good as to turn your
lock, and draw your bolt — don't omit it I'
'Well !'I said.'But why, Mr. Eamshaw ?'I did not
relish the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with
Heathcliff.
'Look here !'he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
onriously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring
knife attached to the barrel.'That's a great tempter to a
desperate man, is it not? I cannot resist going up with this
every night, and trying his door. If once I find it open he's
done for ; I do it invariably, even though the minute before
I have been recalling a hundred reasons that should make
me refrain : it is some devil that urges me to thwart my own
schemes by killing him. You fight against that devil for
love as long as you may ; when the time comes, not all the
angels in heaven shall save him I'
I surveyed the weapon inquisitively. A hideous notion
struck me : how powerful I should be possessing such an
instrument 1 I took it from his hand, and touched the blade.
Se looked astonished at the expression my face assumed
146 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
during a brief seeond : it was not horror, it was oovetousness.
He snatched the pistol back, jealously ; shut the knife, and
returned it to its concealment.
'I don't care if you tell him/ said he.'Put him on his
guard, and watch for him. You know the terms we are on,
I see : his danger does not shock you.'
'What has Heathcliff done to you?'I asked.'In what
has he wronged you, to warrant this appalling hatred?
Wouldn't it be wiser to bid him quit the house ?'
*No!'thundered Eamshaw;'should he offer to leave
me, he's a dead man : persuade him to attempt it, and you
are a murderess! Am I to lose all, without a chance of
retrievfiJ? Is Hareton to be a beggar? Oh, damnation I
I wiU have it back ; and I'll have hds gold too ; and then his
blood ; and hell shall have his soul 1 It will be ten times
blacker with that guest than ever it was before I'
You've acquainted me, Ellen, with your old master's
habits. He is clearly on the verge of madness : he was so
last night at least. I shuddered to be near him, and thought
on the servant's ill-bred moroseness as comparatively agree-
able. He now recommenced his mopdy walk, and I raised
the latch, and escaped into the kitchen. Joseph was bending
over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it ;
and a wooden bowl of oatmesJ stood on the settle dose by.
The contents of the pan began to boil, and he turned to
plunge his hand into the bowl ; I conjectured that this pre-
paration was probably for our supper, and, being hungry, I
resolved it should be eatable ; so, crying out sharply,'Til
make the porridge 1'I removed the vessel out of his
reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit.
* Mr. Eamshaw,'I continued,'directs me to wait on myself :
I will. I'm not going to act the lady among you, for fear I
should starve.'
'Gooid Lord I'he muttered, sitting down, and stroking
his ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle.'If there's
to be fresh ortherings — just when I getten used to two
maisters, if I mun hev'a mistress set o'er my heead, it's
WUTHEKING HEIGHTS 147
like time to be flitting. I niver did think to see t* day
that I mnd lave th'owld place — ^bnt I doubt it's nigh at
handl'
This lamentation drew no notice from me: I went
briskly to work, sighing to remember a period when it would
have been all merry fun ; but compelled speedily to drive off
the remembrance. It racked me to recall past happiness
and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its apparition»
the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the handfuls
of meal fell into the water. Joseph beheld my style of
cookery with growing indignation.
'Thear I'he ejaculated.'Hareton, thou willn't sup thy
porridge to-neeght ; they'll be naught but lumps as big as my
neive. Thear, agean ! I'd fling in bowl un'all, if I wer
ye ! There, pale t'guilp off, un'then ye'U hae done wi''t.
Bang, bang. It's a mercy t'bothom isn't deaved out t'
It was rather a rough mess, I own, when poured into the
basins ; four had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new
milk was brought from the dairy, which Hareton seized and
commenced drinking and spUling from the expansive Hp.
I expostulated, and desired that he should have his in a mug ;
affirming that I could not taste the liquid treated so dirtily.
The old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety;
assuring me, repeatedly, that'the bam was every bit as
good'as I,'and every bit as wollsome,'and wondering how
I could fashion to be so con^ited. Meanwhile, the infant
ruffian continued sucking ; and glowered up at me defyingly,
as he slavered into the jug.
'I shall have my supper in another room,'I said.'Have
you no place you call a parlour ?'
'Parlotir t'he echoed, sneeringly,'pa/rlour I Nay, we've
noa parlou/r9. If yah dunnut loike wer company, there's
maister's ; un'if yah dunnut loike maister, there's us.'
'Then I shall go up-stairs,'I answered;'show me a
chamber.'
I put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch some
more milk. With great grumblings, the fellow rose, and
148 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
preceded me in my ascent : we mounted to the garrets ; he
opened a door, now and then, to look into the apartments we
passed.
'Here's a rahm/ he said, at last, flinging back a cranky
board on hinges. * It's weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in.
There's a pack o'com i't'comer, thear, meeterly dane ; if
ye're feared o'muokying yer grand silk does, spread yer
hankerchir o't'top on't.'
The'rahm'was a kind of Inmber-hole smelling strong of
malt and grain ; various sacks of which articles were piled
around, leaving a wide, bare space in the middle.
'Why, man,'I exclaimed, facing him angrily,'this is not
a place to sleep in. I wish to see my bed-room.'
Bed-mme /'he repeated, in a tone of mockery.'Yah's
see all t'bed-rwmes thear is — yen's mine.'
He pointed into the second garret, only di£Eering from
the first in being more naked about the walls, and having a
large, low, curtainless bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at
one end.
'What do I want with yours ?'I retorted.'I suppose
Mr. Heathdiff does not lodge at the top of the house, does
he?'
'Oh ! it's Maister Hathecliff's ye're wanting ?'cried he,
as if making a new discovery.'Couldn't ye ha'said soa, at
oust ? un'then, I mud ha'tolled ye, baht all this wark, that
that's just one ye cannut see — he alias keeps it locked, un'
nob'dy iver mells on't but hisseln.'
'You've a nice house, Joseph,'I could not refrain from
observing,'and pleasant inmates ; and I think the con-
centrated essence of all the madness in the world took up its
abode in my brain the day I linked my fate with theirs !
However, that is not to the present purpose — there are other
rooms. For heaven's sake be quick, and let me settle
somewhere t'
He made no reply to this adjuration; only plodding
doggedly down the wooden steps, and halting before an
apartment which, from that halt and the superior quality of
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS U9
its famitore, I oonjeotnred to be the best one. There was a
earpet — a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by dust ;
a fireplace hung with cat-paper, dropping to pieces ; a hand-
some oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather
expensive material and modem make; but they had
evidently experienced rough usage: the vallances hxmg in
festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod sup-
porting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the
drapery to trail upon the floor. The chairs were also
damaged, many of them severely; and deep indentations
deformed the panels of the walls. I was endeavouring to
gather resolution for entering and taking possession, when
my fool of a guide announced,'This here is t'maister's.'
My supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my
patience exhausted. I insisted on being provided instantly
with a plaoe of refuge, and means of repose.
'Whear the divil?'began the religious elder. ^The
Lord bless us ! The Lord f orgie us t Whear the heU wold
ye gang? ye marred, wearisome nowt! Ye've seen all but
Hareton's bit of a cham'er. There's not another hoile to lig
down in i'th'hahse 1'
I was so vexed, I flung my tray and its contents on the
ground ; and then seated myself at the stairs'-head, hid my
faoe in my hands, and cried.
'Ech t ech !'exclaimed Joseph.'Weel done. Miss
Gaihy t weel done. Miss Cathy I Howsiver, t'maister sail
just tum'le o'er them brocken pots; un'then we's hear
summut; we's hear how it's to be. Oooid-for-naught
madling 1 ye desarve pining fro'this to Ghurstmas, flinging t'
precious gifts o'God under fooit i'yer flaysome rages t But
I'm mista'en if ye shew yer sperrit lang. Will Hathecliff
bide sich boxmy ways, think ye ? I nobbut wish he may catch
ye i'that pUsky. I nobbut wish he may.'
And so he went on scolding to his den beneath, taking
the candle with him ; and I remained in the dark. The
period of reflection succeeding this silly action compelled me
to admit the necessity of smothering my pride and choking
150 WTJTHBBING HEIGHTS
my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its eflEects. An
unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of Throttler,
whom I now recognised as a son of oxlt old Skulker : it
had spent its whelphood at the Grange, and was given by
my father to Mr. Hindley. I fancy it knew me : it pushed
its nose against mine by way of salute, and then hastened to
devour the porridge ; while I groped from step to step,
collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the spatters
of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. Our
labours were scarcely over when I heard Eamshaw's tread in
the passage ; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to
the wall; I stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's
endeavour to avoid him was unsuccessful ; as I guessed by a
scutter down-stairs, and a prolonged, piteous yelping. I had
better luck : he passed on, entered his chamber, and shut the
door. Directly after Joseph came up with Hareton, to put
him to bed. I had found shelter in Hareton's room, and the
old man, on seeing me, said, —'They's rahm for boath ye un'
yer pride, now, I sud think i'the hahse. It's empty ; ye may
hev'it all to yerseln, un'Him as alius maks a third, i'sich
ill company !'
Gladly did I take advantage of this intimation ; and the
minute I flung myself into a chair, by the fire, I nodded, and
slept. My slumber was deep and sweet, though over far too
soon. Mr. Heathcli£f awoke me ; he had just come in, and
demanded, in his loving manner, what I was doing there ?
I told him the cause of my staying up so late — that he had
the key of our room in his pocket. The adjective (mr gave
mortal offence. He swore it was not, nor ever should be,
mine ; and he'd — but I'll not repeat his language, nor
describe his habitual conduct : he is ingenious and unresting
in seeking to gain my abhorrence I I sometimes wonder at
him with an intensity that deadens my fear : yet, I assure
you, a tiger or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in
me equal to that which he wakens. He told me of
Catherine's illness, and accused my brother of causing it;'
WXJTHESING HEIGHTS 161
promising that I should be Edgar's proxy in suffering, till he
could get hold of him.
I do hate him — I am wretched — I have been a fool!
Beware of uttering one breath of this to any one at the
Grange. I shall expect you every day — don't disappoint me I
— ISABELIiA.
OHAPTEB XIV
As soon as I had penised this epistle I went to the master,
and informed him that his sister had arrived at the Heights,
and sent me a letter expressing her sorrow for Mrs. Linton's
situation, and her ardent desire to see him ; with a wish that
he would transmit to her, as early as possible, some token of
forgiveness by me.
* Forgiveness !'said Linton.'I have nothing to forgive
her, Ellen. You may call at Wuthering Heights this after-
noon, if you like, and say that I am not angry, but I'm sorry
to have lost her ; especially as I can never think she'll be
happy. It is out of the question my going to see her, how-
ever : we are eternally divided ; and should she really wish
to oblige me, let her persuade the villain she has married
to leave the country.'
'And you won't write her a little note, sir?'I asked,
imploringly.
'No,'he answered.'It is needless. My communication
with HeathclifiTs family shall be as sparing as his with mine.
It shall not exist !'
Mr. Edgar's coldness depressed me exceedingly ; and all
the way from the Grange I puzzled my brains how to put
more heart into what he said, when I repeated it ; and how
to soften his refusal of even a few lines to console Isabella.
I daresay she had been on the watch for me since morning :
I saw her looking through the lattice as I came up ^
garden causeway, and I nodded to her; but she drew
back, as if afraid of being observed. I entered without
knocking. There never was such a dreary, dismal scene as
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 168
the formerly oheerfal house presented 1 I must oonfess, that
if I had been in the young lady's place, I would, at least,
have swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster.
But she already partook of the pervading spirit of neglect
which encompassed her. Her pretty face was wan and list-
less ; her hair uncurled : some locks hanging lankly down,
and some carelessly twisted round her head. Probably she
had not touched her dress since yester evening. Hindley was
not there. Mr. Heathcliff sat at a table, turning over some
papers in his pocket-book; but he rose when I appeared,
asked me how I did, quite friendly, and offered me a chair.
He was the only thing there that seemed decent; and I
thought he never looked better. So much had circumstances
altered their positions, that he would certainly have struck
a stranger as a bom and bred gentleman ; and his wife as a
thorough little slattern I She came forward eagerly to greet
me, and held out one hand to take the expected letter. I shook
my head. She wouldn't understand the hint, but followed
me to a sideboard, where I went to lay my bonnet, and im-
portuned me in a whisper to give her directly what I had
brought. Heathcliff guessed the meaning of her mancBuvres,
and said —'If you have got anything for Isabella (as no
doubt you have, Nelly), give it to her. You needn't make a
secret of it : we have no secrete between us.'
'Oh, I have nothing,'I replied, thinking it best to
speak the truth at once.'My master bid me tell his sister
that she must not expect either a letter or a visit from him
at present. He sends his love, ma'am, and his wishes for
your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
occasioned ; but he thinks that after this time his household
and the household here should drop intercommunication, as
nothing could come of keeping it up.'
Mrs. Heathdiff's lip quivered slightly, and she returned
to her seat in the window. Her husband took his stand on
the hearthstone, near me, and began to put questions con-
cerning Catherine. I told him as much as I thought proper
of her illness, and he extorted from me, by oroes-examina-
IM WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
tion, most of the facte oonneoted with its origui. I blamed
her, aB she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and
ended by hoping that he would follow Mr. Linton's example
and avoid futore interference with his family, for good or
eviL
'Mrs. Linton is now just recovering/ I said;'she'll
never be like she was, but her life is spared ; and if you
really have a regard for her, you'll shun crossing her way
again : nay, you'll move out of this country entirely ; and
that you may not regret it, I'll inform you Catherine Linton
is as different now from your old friend Catherine Eamshaw,
as that young lady is different from me. Her appearance is
changed greatly, her character much more so; and the
person who is compelled, of necessity, to be her companion,
will only sustain his affection hereafter by the remembrance
of what she once was, by common humanity, and a sense of
duty I'
'That is quite possible,'remarked Heathdiff, forcing
himself to seem calm :'quite possible that your master
should have nothing but common humanity and a sense of
duty to fall back upon. But do you imagine that I shall
leave Catherine to his duty and humanity'^ and can you
compare my feelings respecting Catherine to his? Before
you leave this house, I must exact a promise from you that
you'll get me an interview with her : consent, or refuse, I will
see her! What do you say?'
'I say, Mr. Heathdiff,'I replied,'you must not : you
never shall, through my means. Another encounter between
you and the master would kill her altogether.'
* With your aid that may be avoided,'he continued ;
'and should there be danger of such an event — should he be
the cause of adding a single trouble more to her existence —
why, I think I shall be justified in going to extremes 1 I
wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether Catherine
would suffer greatly from his loss : the fear that she would
restrains me. And there you see the distinction between our
feelings : had he been in my place, and I in his, though I
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 165
hated him with a hatred that tamed my life to gall» I neyer
would haye raised a hand against 1dm. Ton may look
incredulous, if you please 1 I never would have bemished
him from her sooiety as long as she desired his. The
moment her regard ceased, I would have torn his heart out,
and drunk his blood 1 But, till then — ^if you don't believe
me, you don't know me — ^till then, I would have died by
inches before I touched a single hair of his head I'
'And yet,'I interrupted,'you have no scruples in com-
pletely ruining all hopes of her perfect restoration, by
thrusting yourself into her remembrance now, when she has
nearly forgotten you, and involving her in a new tumult of
discord and distress.'
'You suppose she has nearly forgotten me?'he said.
'Oh, Nelly 1 you know she has not 1 Tou know as well as I
do, that for every thought she spends on linton she spends
a thousand on me ! At a most miserable period of my life,
I had a notion of the kind : it haunted me on my return to
the neighbourhood last smnmer ; but only her own assur-
ance could make me admit the horrible idea again. And
then, Ldnton would be nothing, nor Hindley, nor all the
dreams that ever I dreamt. Two words would comprehend
my future — death and hell: existence, after losing her,
would be hell. Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment that
she valued Edgar Linton's attachment more than mine. If
he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he couldn't
love as much in eighty years as I could in a day. And
Catherine has a heart as deep as I have : the sea could be as
readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole
afifection be monopolised by him. Tush ! He is scarcely a
degree dearer to her than her dog, or her horse. It is not in
him to be loved like me : how can she love in him what he
has not?'
'Catherine and Edgar are as fond of each other as any
two people can be,'cried Isabella, with sudden vivadty.
'No one has a right to talk in that manner, and I won't
hear my brother depreciated in silence I'
166 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
'Tour brother is wondicnB fond of you too, isn't he?'
observed Heathcllff, scornfully.'He turns you adrift on the
world with surprising alacrity/
'He is not aware of what I suffer/ she replied.'I
didn't tell him that/
'You have been telling him something, then : you haTe
written, have you ?'
'To say that I was married, I did vmte — ^you saw the
note.*
'And nothing since ?'
•No.'
'My young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change
of condition,'I remarked.'Somebody's love comes short in
her case, obviously ; whose, I may guess ; but, perhaps, I
shouldn't say.'
'I should guess it was her own,'said Heathdiff. * She
degenerates into a mere slut I She is tired of trying to
please me uncommonly early. You'd hardly credit it, but
the very morrow of our wedding she was weeping to go
home. However, she'll suit this house so much the better
for not being over nice, and I'll take care she does not
disgrace me by rambling abroad.'
'Well, sir,'returned I,'I hope you'll consider that Mrs.
Heathcliff is accustomed to be looked after and waited on ;
and that she has been brought up like an only daughter,
whom every one was ready to serve. You must let her have
a maid to keep things tidy about her, and you must treat
her kindly. Whatever be your notion of Mr. Edgar, you
cannot doubt that she has a capu'^Hy for strong attachments,
or she wouldn't have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts,
and friends of her former home, to fix contentedly, in such a
wilderness as this, with you.'
'She abandoned them under a delusion,'he answered ;
'picturing in me a hero of romance, and expecting unlimited
indulgences from my chivalrous devotion. I can hardly
regard her in the light of a rational creature, so obstinately
has she persisted in forming a fabulous notion of iny
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 167
oharaoter and acting on the false impressions she oherished.
Bat, at last, I think she begins to know me: I don't
peroeive the silly smiles and grimaces that provoked me at
first ; and the senseless incapability of discerning that I was
in earnest when I gave her my opinion of her infatuation
and herself. It was a marvellous efifbrt of perspicacity to
discover that I did not love her. I believed, at one time, no
lessons could teach her that 1 And yet it is poorly learnt ;
for this morning she announced, as a piece of appalling
intelligence, that I had actually succeeded in making her
hate me ! A positive labour of Hercules, I assure you ! If
it be achieved, I have cause to return thanks. Can I trust
your assertion, Isabella ? Are you sure you hate me ? If I
let you alone for half a day, won't you come sighing and
wheedling to me again ? I daresay she would rather I had
seemed all tenderness before you : it wounds her vanity to
have the truth exposed. But I don't care who knows that
the passion was wholly on one side : and I never told her a
lie about it. 8he cannot accuse me of showing one bit of
deceitful softness. The first thing she saw me do, on
coming out of the Grange, was to hang up her little dog ;
and when she pleaded for it, the first words I uttered were a
wish that I had the hanging of every being belonging to her,
except one : possibly she took that exception for herself.
But no brutality disgusted her : I suppose she has an
innate admiration of it, if only her precious person were
secure from injury t Now, was it not the depth of absurdity
— of genuine idiotcy, for that pitiful, slavish, mean-minded
brach to dream that I could love her ? Tell your master,
Nelly, that I never, in all my life, met with such an abject
thing as she is. She even disgraces the name of Linton ;
and I've sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in
my experiments on what she could endure, and still creep
shamefully cringing backl But tell him, also, to set his
fraternal and magisterial heart at ease : that I keep strictly
within the limits of the law. I have avoided, up to this
period, giving her the slightest right to claim a separation ;
168 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
and, what's more, she'd thank nobody for dividing us.
If she desired to go, she might : thenuisanoe of her presence
outweighs the gratification to be derived from tormenting
her!'
'Mr. Heathcliff,'said I, * this is the talk of a madman ;
your wife, most likely, is convinced you are mad ; and, for
that reason, she has borne with you hitherto : but now that
you say she may go, she'll doubtless avail herself of the
permission. You are not so bewitched, ma'am, are you, as
to remain with him of your own accord ?'
'Take care, Ellen !'answered Isabella, her eyes sparkling
irefully ; there was no misdoubting by their expression the
full success of her partner's endeavours to make himself
detested.'Don't put faith in a single word he speaks. He's
a lying fiend 1 a monster, and not a human being ! I've
been told I might leave him before ; and I've made the
attempt, but I dare not repeat itl Only, Ellen, promise
you'll not mention a syllable of his infamous conversation to
my brother or Catherine. Whatever he may pretend, he
wishes to provoke Edgar to desperation: he says he has
married me on purpose to obtain power over him ; and he
sha'n't obtain it — I'll die first I I just hope, I pray, that he
may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me 1 The single
pleasure I can imagine is to die, or to see him dead !'
'There — that will do for the present !'said Heathcliff.
* If you are called upon in a court of law, you'll remember
her language, Nelly I And take a good look at that counten-
ance : she's near the point which would suit me. No ;
you're not fit to be your own guardian, Isabella, now ; and I,
being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody,
however distasteful the obligation may be. Go up-stairs ; I
have something to say to Ellen Dean in private. That's not
the way : up-stairs, I tell you I Why, this is the road up-
stairs. chUd !'
He seized, and thrust her from the room ; and returned
muttering —'I have no pity I I have no pity 1 The more the
worms writhe, the more I yearn to crush out their entrails I
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 169
It is a moral teething ; and I grind with greater energy in
proportion to the increase of pain.'
'Do you understand what the word pity means? * I said,
hastening to resume my bonnet.'Did you ever feel a touch
of it in your life ?'
'Put that down I'he interrupted, perceiving my intention
to depart.'You are not going yet. Gome here now, Nelly :
I must either persuade or compel you to aid me in fulMing
my determination to see Catherine, and that without delay.
I swear that I meditate no harm : I don't desire to cause any
disturbance, or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton ; I only
wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been
ill ; and to ask if anything that I could do would be of use to
her. Last night I was in the Grange garden six hours, and
I'll return there to-night; and every night I'll hatmt the
place, and every day, till I find an opportunity of entering.
If Edgar Linton meets me, I shall not hesitate to knock him
down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while I
stay. If his servants oppose me, I shall threaten them ofif
witii these pistols. But wouldn't it be better to prevent my
coming in contact with them, or their master? And you
could do it so easily. I'd warn you when I came, and then
you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she was alone,
and watch till I departed, your conscience quite calm : you
would be hindering mischief.'
I protested against playing that treacherous part in my
employer's house : and, besides, I urged the cruelty and
selfishness of his destroying Mrs. Linton's tranquillity for his
satisfaction.'The commonest occurrence startles her
painfully,'I said.'She's all nerves, and she couldn't bear
the surprise, I'm positive. Don't persist, sir I or else I shall
be obliged to inform my master of your designs ; and he'll
take measures to secure his house and its inmates from any
such unwarrantable intrusions !'
'In that case I'U take measures to secure you, woman !'
exclaimed Heathcliff;'you shall not leave Wuthering
Heights till to-morrow morning. It is a foolish story to
160 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
assert that Catherine oonld not bear to see me ; and as to
surprising her, I don't desire it : you must prepare her — ask
her if I may come. You say she never mentions my name,
and that I am never mentioned to her. To whom should she
mention me if I am a forbidden topic in the house ? She
thinks you are all spies for her husband. Oh, IVe no doubt
she's in hell among you I I guess by her silence, as much as
anything, what she feels. You say she is often restless, and
anxious-looking : is that a proof of tranquillity ? You talk of
her mind being unsettled. How the devil could it be other-
wise in her frightful isolation? And that insipid, paltry
creature attending her from Aiity and humcmity I From
pity and charity I He might as well plant an oak in a
flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he can restore
her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares ? Let us settle
it at once : will you stay here, and am I to fight my way to
Catherine over Linton and his footman ? Or will you be my
friend, as you have been hitherto, and do what I request?
Decide ! because there is no reason for my lingering another
minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature !'
Well, Mr. Lockwood, I argued and complained, and flatly
refused him fifty times ; but in the long run he forced me to
an agreement. I engaged to carry a letter from him to my
mistress; and should she consent, I promised to let him
have intelligence of Linton's next absence from home, when
he might come, and get in as he was able : I wouldn't be
there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the way.
Was it right or wrong ? I fear it was wrong, though ex-
pedient. I thought I prevented another explosion by my
compliance ; and I thought, too, it might create a favourable
crisis in Catherine's mental illness : and then I remembered
Mr. Edgar's stem rebuke of my carrying tales ; and I tried to
smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by affirming, with
frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it merited so
harsh an appellation, should be the last. Notwithstanding,
my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither ;
and many misgivings I had, ere I could prevail on myself to
put the missive into Mrs. Linton's hand.
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 161
But here is Kenneth ; I'll go down, and tell bun how
much better you are. My history is dree, as we say, and
will serve to while away another nwming.
Dree, and dreary! I refleoted as the good woman
descended to receive the doctor : and not exactly of the kind
which I should have chosen to amuse me. But nevermind I
I'll extract wholesome medicines from Mrs. Dean's bitter
herbs ; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that
lurks in Catherine HeathdifiTs brilliant eyes. I should be
in a curious taking if I surrendered my heart to that young
person, and the daughter turned out a second edition of the
mother.
CHAPTEB XV
Anothsb week over — and I am so many days nearer health,
and spring 1 I have now heard all my neighbour's history,
at difiEerent sittings, as the housekeeper could spare time
from more important occupations. I'll continue it in her
own words, only a little condensed. She is, on the whole,
a very fair narrator, and I don't think I could improve her
style.
In the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the
Heights, I knew, as weU as if I saw him, that Mr. Heathcli£F
was about the place ; and I shunned going out, because I
still carried his letter in my pocket, and didn't want to be
threatened or teased any more. I had made up my mind
not to give it till my master went somewhere, as I could not
guess how its receipt would affect Catherine. The conse-
quence was, that it did not reach her before the lapse of
three days. The fourth was Sunday, and I brought it into
her room after the family were gone to church. There was
a man-servant left to keep the house with me, and we
generally made a practice of locking the doors during the
hours of service ; but on that occasion the weather was so
warm and pleasant that I set them wide open, and, to fulfil
my engagement, as I knew who would be coming, I told my
companion that the mistress wished very much for some
oranges, and he must run over to the village and get a few,
to be paid for on the morrow. He departed, and I went
up-stairs-
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 163
Mrs. Lmton eat in a loose white dress, with a light
Bhawl over her shoulders, in the recess of the open window,
as nsnal. Her thick, long hair had been partly removed at
the beginning of her illness, and now she wore it simply
combed in its natural tresses over her temples and neck.
Her appearance was altered, as I had told Heathcliff ; bat
when she was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the
change. The flash of her eyes had been succeeded by a
dreamy and melancholy softness ; they no longer gave the
impression of looking at the objects around her: they
appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond — you would
have said out of this world. Then, the paleness of her face
— ^its haggard aspect having vanished as she recovered flesh
— and the peculiar expression arising from her mental state,
though painfully suggestive of their causes, added to the
touching interest which she awakened ; and — invariably to
me, I know, and to any person who saw her, I should think
— ^refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped
her as one doomed to decay.
A book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely
perceptible wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. I believe
Linton had laid it there : for she never endeavoured to
divert herself with reading, or occupation of any kind, and he
would spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention
to some subject which had formerly been her amusement.
She was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods
endured his efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness
by now and then suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking
him at last with the saddest of smiles and kisses. At other
times, she would turn petulantly away, and hide her face in
her hands, or even push him off angrily ; and then he took
care to let her alone, for he was certain of doing no good.
Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing ; and the full,
mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothingly
on the ear. It was a sweet substitute for the yet absent
murmur of the summer foliage, which drowned that music
about the Grange when the trees were in leaf. At Wuthering
164 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
Heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great
thaw or a season of steady rain. And of Wuthering Heights
Catherine was thinking as she listened : that is, if she thought
or listened at all ; but she had the vague, distant look I
mentioned before, which expressed no recognition of material
things either by ear or eye.
'There's a letter for you, Mrs. Idnton/ I said, gently
inserting it in one hand that rested on her knee.'You must
read it immediately, because it wants an answer. Shall I
break the seal ?''Yes,'she answered, without altering the
direction of'her eyes. I opened it — ^it vras very short.
'Now,'I continued,'read it.'She drew away her hand, and
let it fall. I replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it
should please her to glance down ; but that movement was
so long delayed that at last I resumed —'Must I read it,
ma'am ? It is from Mr. Heathcliff.'
There was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection,
and a struggle to arrange her ideas. She lifted the letter,
and seemed to peruse it ; and when she came to the signa-
ture she sighed : yet still I found she had not gathered its
import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply, she merely
pointed to the name, and gazed at me with mournful and
questioning eagerness.
* Well, he wishes to see you,'said I, guessing her need of
.an interpreter. * He's in the garden by this time, and im-
patient to know what answer I shall bring.'
As I spoke, I observed a large dog lying on the sunny
grass beneath raise its ears as if about to bark, and then
smoothing them back, announce, by a wag of the tail, that
some one approached whom it did not consider a stranger.
Mrs. Idnton bent forward, and listened breathlessly. The
minute after a step traversed the hall ; the open house was
too tempting for Heathcliff to resist walking in : most likely
he supposed that I was inclined to shirk my promise, and so
resolved to trust to his own audacity. Witli straining eager-
ness Catherine gazed towards the entrance of her chamber.
He did not hit the right room directly : she motioned me to
WUTHBEINQ HEIGHTS 166
admit him, but he foand it oat ere I oonld reaoh the door,
and in a stride or two was at her side, and had her grasped
in his arms.
He neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five
minutes, during which period he bestowed more kisses than
ever he gave in his life before, I daresay: but then my
mistress had kissed him first, and I plahily saw that he
could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look into her
face ! The same conviction had stricken him as me, from
the instant he beheld her, that there was no prospect of
ultimate recovery there — she was fated, sure to die.
'Oh, Cathy I Oh, my Uf e I how can I bear it ?'was the
first sentence he uttered, in a tone that did not seek to
disguise his despair. And now he stared at her so earnestly
that I thought the very intensity of his gaze would bring
tears into his eyes ; but they burned with anguish : they did
not melt.
'What now ?'said Catherine, leaning back, and returning
his look with a suddenly clouded brow : her humour was a
mere vane for constantly varying caprices.'Tou and Edgar
have broken my heart, Heathdiff I And you both come to
bewail the deed to me, as if ^ot^ were the people to be pitied !
I shall not pity you, not I. You have killed me — and
thriven on it, I think. How strong you are 1 How many
years do you mean to live after I am gone?'
Heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he
attempted to rise, but she seized his hair, and kept bim
down.
'I wish I could hold you,* she continued, bitterly,'till
we were both dead ! I shouldn't care what you suffered. I
care nothing for your sufferings. Why shouldn't you suffer ?
I do ! Will you forget me ? Will you be happy when I am
in the earth ? Will you say twenty years hence, " That's
the grave of Catherine Eamshaw ? I loved her long ago,
and was wretched to lose her ; but it is past. I've loved
many others since : my children are dearer to me than she
was ; and, at death, I shall not rejoice that I am going to
166 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
her : I shall be sorry that I most leaye them I'Will you
say so, Heatholiff ?'
* Don't torture me till I*m as mad as yourself/ cried he,
wrenching his head free, and grinding his teeth.
The two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearfnl
picture. Well might Catherine deen^that heaven would be
a land of exile to her, unless with her mortal body she cast
away her moral character also. Her present countenance
had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a bloodless
lip and scintillating eye ; and she retained in her closed
fingers a portion of the locks she had been grasping. As to
her companion, while raising himself with one hand, he had
taken her arm with the other ; and so inadequate was his
stock of gentleness to the requirements of her condition,
that on hk letting go I saw four distinct impressions left
blue in the colourless skin.
'Are you possessed with a devil,'he pursued, savagely,
'to talk in that manner to me when you are dying? Do
you reflect that all those words will be branded in my
memory, and eating deeper eternally after you have left me ?
You know you lie to say I have killed you : and, Catherine,
you know that I could as soon forget you as my existence !
Is it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while
you are at peace I shall writhe in the torments of hell ? *
'I shall not be at peace,'moaned Catherine, recalled to a
sense of physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing
of her hea^, which beat visibly and audibly under this
excess of agitation. She said nothing further till the
paroxysm was over ; then she continued, more kindly —
'I'm not wishing you greater torment than I have,
Heathcliff. I only wish us never to be parted : and should a
word of mine distress you hereafter, think I feel the same dis-
tress underground, and for my own sake, forgive me I Come
here and kneel down again 1 Tou never harmed me in your
life. Nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
than my harsh words 1 Won't you come here again ? Do !'
Heathcliff went to the back of her chair^ and leant over,
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 167*
bat not BO far as to let her see his face, which was livid with
emotion. She bent round to look at him; he would not
permit it: turning abruptly, he walked to the fireplace,
where he stood, silent, with his back towards us. Mrs.
Linton's glance followed him suspiciously : every movement
woke a new sentiment in her. After a pause and a prolonged
gaze, she resumed ; addressing me in accents of indignant
disappointment : —
'Oh, you see, Nelly, he would not relent- a moment to
keep me out of the grave. That is how I'm loved I Well,
never mind. That is not my Heathdiff. I shall love mine
yet ; and take him with me : he's in my soul. And,'added
she musingly,'the thing that irks me most is this shattered
prison, after all. I'm tired of being enclosed here. I'm
wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be
always there : not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearn-
ing for it through the walls of an aching heart : but really
with it, and in it. Nelly, you think you are better and more
fortunate than I ; in full health and strength : you are sorry
for me — ^very soon that will be altered. I shaU be sorry for
you. I shall be incomparably beyond and above you all.
I wonder he won't be near me !'She went on to herself.
'I thought he wished it. Heathcliff, dear ! you should not
be suUen now. Do come to me, Heathdiff.'
In her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the
arm of the chair. At that earnest appeal he turned to her,
looking absolutely desperate. His eyes, wide and wet, at
last flashed fiercely on her ; his breast heaved convulsively.
An instant they held astmder, and then how they met I
hardly saw, but Catherine made a spring, and he caught her,
and they were locked in an embrace from which I thought
my mistress would never be released alive : in fact, to my
eyes, she seemed directly insensible. He flung himself into
the nearest seat, and on my approaching hurriedly to ascer-
tain if she had fainted, he gnashed at me, and foamed like a
mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy jealousy. I
did not feel as if I were in the company of a creature of my
168 WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS
own species : it appeared that he would not understand,
though I spoke to him ; so I stood off, and held my tongue,
in great perplexity.
A movement of Catherine's relieved me a little presently :
she put up her hand to clasp his neck, and hring her cheek
to his as he held her ; while he, in return, covering her with
frantic caresses, said wildly —
'You teach me now how cruel you've been — cruel and
false. Why did you despise me ? Why did you betray your
own heart, Cathy ? I have not one word of comfort. You
deserve this. You have killed yourself. Yes, you may kiss
me, and cry ; and wring out my kisses and tears : they'll
blight you — they'll danm you. You loved me — then what
right had you to leave me ? " What right — answer me — for
the poor fancy you felt for Linton ? Because misery and
degradation, and death, and nothing that Gk > d or Satan could
inflict would have parted us, you, of your own will, did it.
I have not broken your heart — you have broken it ; and in
breaking it, you have broken zpine. So much the worse for
me that I am strong. Do I want to live ? What kind of
living will it be when you — oh, God I would you Uke to live
with your soul in the grave ? *
'Let me alone. Let me alone,'sobbed Catherine.'If
I've done wrong, I'm dying for it. It is enough 1 You left
me too : but I won't upbraid you t I forgive you. Forgive
me I'
'It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and
feel those wasted hands,'he answered.'Kiss me again ;
and don't let me see your eyes 1 I forgive what you have
done to me. I love my murderer — but yov/rs! How
can I?'
They were silent — their faces hid against each other, and
washed by each other's tears. At least, I suppose the weep-
ing was on both sides ; as it seemed Heathcliff could weep
on a great occasion like this.
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile ; for the afternoon
wore fast away,- the man whom I had sent off returned from
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 169
his errand, and I ootdd distrngaish, by the shine of the
western sun up the valley, a concourse thickening outside
Ginimerton chapel porch.
'Service is over/ I announced.'My master will be here
in half an hour.'
Heathclifif groaned a curse, and strained Catherine closer :
she never moved.
Ere long I perceived a group of the servants passing up
the road towards the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton was not far
behind ; he opened the gate himself and sauntered slowly
up, probably enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as
soft as summer.
'Now he is here,'I exclaimed.'For heaven's sake,
hurry down I You'll not meet any one on the front stairs.
Do be quick ; and stay among the trees till he is fairly in.'
* I must go, Cathy,'said Heathclifif, seeking to extricate
himself from his companion's arms. * But if I live, I'll see
you again before you are asleep. I won't stray five yards
from your window.'
'Tou must not go I'she answered, holding him as firmly
as her strength allowed.'You shall not, I tell you.'
'For one hour,'he pleaded earnestly.
'Not for one minute,'she replied.
'I must — Linton will be up immediately,'persisted the
alarmed intruder.
He would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act —
she clung fast, gasping : there was mad resolution in her face.
'No !'she shrieked.'Oh, don't, don't go. It is the
last time t Edgar will not hurt us. Heathclifif, I shall die t
I shaU die !'
'Damn the fool 1 There he is,'cried Heathclifif, sinking
back into his seat.'Hush, my darling! Hush, hush,
Catherine 1 I'll stay. If he shot me so, I'd expire with a
blessing on my lips/
And there they were fast agam. I heard my master
mounting the stairs — the cold sweat ran from my forehead :
I was horrified.
170 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
'Are you going to listen to her ravings ?'I said, passion-
ately. * She does not know what she says. Will you ruin
her, because she has not wit to help herself ? Get up ! You
could be free instantly. That is the most diabolical deed
that ever you did. We are all done for — master, mistress,
and servant.'
I wrung my hands, and cried out; and Mr. Ldnton
hastened his step at the noise. In the midst of my agitation,
I was sincerely glad to observe that Catherine's arms had
fallen relaxed, and her head hung down.
'She's fainted, or dead,'I thought :'so much the better.
Far better that she should be dead, than lingering a burden
and a misery-maker to all about her.'
Edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with
astonishment and rage. What he meant to do I cannot
tell ; however, the other stopped all demonstrations, at once»
by placing the lifeless-looking form in his arms.
'Look there I'he said.'Unless you be a fiend, help her
first — then you shall speak to me I'
He walked into the parlour, and sat down. Mr. Lintou
summoned me, and with great difficulty, and after resorting
to many means, we managed to restore her to sensation ;
but she was all bewildered ; she sighed, and moaned, and
knew nobody. Edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her
hated friend. I did not. I went, at the earliest opportunity,
and besought him to depart ; affirming that Catherine was
better, and he should hear from me in the morning how she
passed the night.
'I shall not refuse to go out of doors,'he answered ;'but
I shall stay in the garden : and, Nelly, mind you keep your
word to-morrow. I shall be under those larch-trees. Mind !
or I pay another visit, whether Ldnton be in or not.'
He sent a rapid glance through the half -open door of the
chamber, and, ascertaining that what I stated was apparently
true, delivered the house of his luckless presence.

CHAPTBB XVI
iiBoirr twelve o'clock that night was bom the Oatheriuib
you saw at Wnthering Heights: a puny, seven-months'
child ; and two hours after the mother died, having never
recovered sufficient consciousness to miss Heathcliff, or know
Edgar. The latter's distraction at his bereavement is a
subject too painful to be dwelt on ; its after-effects showed how
deep the sorrow simk. A great additdon, in my eyes, was
his being left without an heir. I bemoaned that, as I gazed
on the feeble orphan ; and I mtotally abused old Linton for
(what was only natural partiality) the securing his estate to
his own daughter, instead of his son's. An unwelcomed
infant it was, poor thing ! It might have wailed out of life,
and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of
existence. We redeemed the neglect afterwards ; but its
beginning was as friendless as its end is likely to be.
Next morning — bright and cheerful out of doors — ^stole
softened in through the blinds of the silent room, and
suffased the couch and its occupant with a mellow, tender
glow. Edgar Linton had his head laid on the pillow, and his
eyes shut. His young and fair features were almost as
deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as
fixed : but his was the hush of exhausted anguish, and hers
of perfect peace. Her brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips
wearing the expression of a smile ; no angel in heaven could
be more beautiful than she appeared. And I partook of the
infinite calm in which she lay : my mind was never in a
holier frame than while I gazed on that untroubled image of
Divine rest. I instinctively echoed the words she had
uttered a few hours before : * Incomparably beyond and
172 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
above ub all I Whether still on earth or now in heaven, her
spirit is at home with God 1'
I don't know if it be a peccdiarity in me, but I am seldom
otherwise than happy while watching in the chamber of
death, should no frenzied or despairing mourner share the
duty with me. I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can
break, and I feel an assurance of the endless and shadowless
hereafter — ^the Eternity they have entered — where life is
boxmdless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and
joy in its fulness. I noticed on that occasion how much
selfishness there is even in a love like Mr. Linton's, when he
BO regretted Catherine's blessed release I To be sure, one
might have doubted, after the wayward and impatient
existence she had led, whether she merited a haven of peace
at last. One might doubt in seasons of cold reflection ; but
not then, in the presence of her corpse. It asserted its own
tranquillity, which seemed ar pledge of equal quiet to its
former inhabitant.
Do you believe such people aire happy in the other world,
sir ? I'd give a great deal to know.
I declined answering Mrs. Dean's question, which struck
me as something heterodox. She proceeded :
Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have
no right to think she is ; but we'll leave her with her Maker.
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sim-
rise to quit the room and steal out to the pure refreshing air.
The servants thought me gone to shake off the drowsiness of
my protracted watch; in reality, my chief motive was
seeing Mr. Heathcliff. If he had remained among the
larches all night, he would have heard nothing of the stir at
the Grange ; unless, perhaps, he might catch the gallop of
the messenger going to Gimmerton. If he had come nearer,
he would probably be aware, from the lights flitting to and
fro, and the opening and shutting of the outer doors, that all
was not right within. I wished, yet feared, to find him. I
felt the terrible news must be told, and I longed to get it
over ; but hofw to do it I did not know. He was there — at
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 173
least, a few yards further in the park ; leant against an old
ash-tree, his hat off, and his hair soaked with the dew that
had gathered on the budded branches, and fell pattering
round him. He had been standing a long time in that position,
for I saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing scarcely
three feet from him, busy in btiilding their nest, and regarding
his proximity no more than that of a piece of timber. They
flew off at my approach, and he raised his eyes and spoke : —
'She's dead t'he said ;'I've not waited for you to learn
that. Put your handkerchief away — don't snivel before me.
Damn you all 1 she wants none of your tears t'
I was weeping as much for him as her : we do sometimes
pity creatures that have none of the feeling either for them-
selves or others. When I first looked into his face, I
perceived that he had got intelligence of the catastrophe ; and
a foolish notion struck me that his heart was qnelled and he
prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on the
ground.
'Tes, she's dead !'I answered, checking my sobs and
drying my cheeks.'Gone to heaven, I hope ; where we may,
every one, join her, if we take due warning and leave our
evil ways to follow good I *
'Did she take due warning, then?'asked Heathdiff,
attempting a sneer.'Did she die like a saint ? Come, give
me a true history of the event. How did ^?'
He endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not
manage it; and compressing his mouth he held a silent
combat with his inward agony, defying, meanwhile, my
sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.'How did
she die?'he resumed, at last — ^fain, notwithstanding his
hardihood, to have a support behind him ; for, after the
struggle, he trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-
ends.
'Poor wretcht'I thought;'yon have a heart and nerves
the same as your brother men 1 Why shotdd you be anxious
to conceal them ? Your pride cannot blind God I Tou
tempt him to wring them, till he forces a cry of humiliation.'
174 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
* Quietly as a lamb !'I answered, aloud.'She drew a
sigh, and stretched herself, like a ohild reviving, and sinking
again to sleep ; and five minutes after I felt one little pulse
at her heart, and nothing more !'
* And — did she ever mention me ?'he asked, hesitating, as
if he dreaded the answer to his question would introduce
details that he could not bear to hear.
'Her senses never returned : she recognised nobody from
the time you left her,'I said.'She lies with a sweet smile
on her face ; and her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant
early days. Her life closed in a gentle dream — ^may she
wake as kindly in the other world 1'
'May she wake in torment I'he cried, with frightful
vehemence, stamping his foot, and groaning in a sudden
paroxysm of ungovernable passion.'Why, she's a liar to
the end I " Where is she ? Not there — not in heaven — not
perished — where ? Oh 1 you said you oared nothing for my
sufferings ! And I pray one prayer — I repeat it till my
tongue stiffens — Catherine Eamshaw, may you not rest as
long as I am Uving ; you said I killed you — haunt me, then 1
The murdered do haunt their murderers, I believe. I know
that ghosts have wandered on earth. Be with me always
— take any form — drive me mad ! only do not leave me in
this abyss, where I cannot find you I Oh, God I it is
unutterable ! I cannot live without my life 1 I cannot live
without my soul I'
He dashed his head against the knotted trunk ; and, lifting
up his eyes, howled, not like a man, but like a savage beast
being goaded to death with knives and spears. I observed
several splashes of blood about the bark of the tree, and his
hand and forehead were both stained ; probably the scene I
witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the night.
It hardly moved my compassion — it appalled me : still, I felt
reluctant to quit him so. But the moment he recollected
himself enough to notice me watching, he thundered a
command for me to go, and I obeyed. He was beyond my
skill to quiet or console t
J
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 176
Mrs. Linton's funeral was appointed to take place on the
Friday following her decease ; and till then her coffin
remained uncovered, and strewn with flowers and scented
leaves, in the great drawing-room. Linton spent his days
and nights there, a sleepless guardian ; and — a circumstance
concealed from all but me — Heathcliff spent his nights, at
least, outside, equally a stranger to repose. I held no
communication with him : still, I was conscious of his design
to enter, if he could ; and on the Tuesday, a little after dark,
when my master, from sheer fatigue, had been compelled to
retire a couple of hours, I went and opened one of the
windows ; moved by his perseverance to give him a chance
of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one final adieu.
He did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously
and briefly ; too cautiously to betray his presence by the
slightest noise. Indeed, I shouldn't have discovered that he
had been there, except for the disarrangement of the drapery
about the corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl
of hght hair, fastened with a silver thread ; which, on exami-
nation, I ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung
round Catherine's neck. Heathcliff had opened the trinket
and cast out its contents, replacing them by a black lock of
his own. I twisted the two, and enclosed them together.
Mr. Eamshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains
of his sister to the grave ; he sent no excuse, but he never
came ; so that, besides her husband, the mourners were
wholly composed of tenants and servants. Isabella was not
asked.
The place of Catherine's interment, to the surprise of the
villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carved monu-
ment of the Lintons, nor yet by the tombs of her own rela-
tions, outside. It was dug on a green slope in a comer of
the kirk-yard, where the wall is so low that heath and
bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor ; and
peat-mould almost buries it. Her husband lies in the same
spot now ; and they have each a simple headstone above, and
a plain grey block at their feet, to mark the graves.
CHAPTBB XVn
That Friday made the last of our fine days for a month. In
the evening the weather broke : the wind shifted from south
to north-east, and brought rain first, and then sleet and snow.
On the morrow one could hardly imagine that there had
been three weeks of summer : the primroses and crocuses
were hidden under wintry drifts ; the larks were silent, the
yoxmg leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened. And
dreary, and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over 1
My master kept his room ; I took possession of the lonely
parlour, converting it into a nursery: and there I was,
sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid on my knee ;
rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the
door opened, and some person entered, out of breath and
laughing I My anger was greater than my astonishment for
a minute. I supposed it one of the maids, and I cried —
'Have done t How dare you show your giddiness here ;
What would Mr. linton say if he heard you ?'
'Excuse me I'answered a familiar voice ;'but I know
Edgar is in bed, and I cannot stop myself.'
With that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting
and holding her hand to her side.
* I have run the whole way from Wuthering Heights ! *
she continued, after a pause ;'except where I've flown. I
couldn't count the number of falls I've had. Oh, I'm aching
all over t Don't be alarmed ! There shall be an explana-
tion as soon as I can give it ; only just have the goodness
to step out and order the carriage to take me on to
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 177
Giznmerton, and tell a servant to seek up a few dothes in
my wardrobe.'
The intruder was Mrs. HeathdifF. She certainly seemed
in no laughing predicament : her hair streamed on her shoul-
ders, dripping with snow and water ; she was dressed in the
girlish dress she commonly wore, befitting her age more than
her position : a low frock with short sleeyes, and nothing on
either head or neck. The frock was of light silk, and clung
to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by thin
slippers ; add to this a deep cut under one .ear, which only
the cold prevented from bleeding profusely, a white face
scratched and bruised, and a frame hardly able to support
itself through fatigue ; and you may fancy my first fright was
not much allayed when I had had leisure to examine her.
'My dear young lady,'I exclaimed,'I'll stir nowhere, and
hear nothing, till you have removed every article of your
clothes, and put on dry things ; and certainly you shall not
go to Gimmerton to-night, so it is needless to order the
carriage.'
'Certainly I shall,'she said;'walking or riding: yet
I've no objection to dress myself decently. And — ah, see
how it flows down my neck now ! The fire does make it
smart'
She insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she
would let me touch her ; and not till after the coachman had
been instructed to get ready, and a maid set to pack up some
necessary attire, did I obtain her consent for binding the
wound and helping to change her garments.
'Now, Ellen,'she said, when my task was finished and
she was seated in an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of
tea before her,'you sit down opposite me, and put poor
Catherine's baby away : I don't like to see it 1 You mustn't
think I care little for Catherine, because I behaved so foolishly
on entering : I've cried, too, bitterly — ^yes, more than any one
else has reason to cry. We parted unreconciled, you remem-
ber, and I sha'n't forgive myself. But, for all that, I was not
going to sympathise with him — ^the brute beast t Oh, give
178 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
me the poker 1 This is the last thing of his I have about
me :'she slipped the gold ring from her third finger, and
threw it on the floor.'I'll smash it !'she oontinnedi
striking it with childish spite,'and then I'll burn it t'and
she took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
* There! he shall buy another, if he gets me back again.
He'd be capable of coming to seek me, to tease Edgar. I
dare not stay, lest that notion should possess his wicked
head 1 And besides, Edgar has not been kind, has he ? And
I won't come suing for his assistance ; nor will I bring him
into more trouble. Necessity compelled me to seek shelter
here ; though, if I had not learned he was out of the way,
I'd have halted at the kitchen, washed my face, warmed
myself, got you to bring what I wanted, and departed
again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed — of
that incarnate goblin ! Ah, he was in such a fury ! If he
had caught met It's a pity Eamshaw is not his match
in strength : I wouldn't have run till I'd seen him all but
demolished, had Hindley been able to do it 1'
'Well, don't talk so fast, Miss 1'I interrupted ;'you'll
disorder the handkerchief I have tied round your face, and
make the cut bleed again. Drink your tea, and take breath,
and give over laughing : laughter is sadly out of place under
this roof, and in your condition !'
'An undeniable truth,'she replied.'Listen to that child !
It maintains a constant wail — send it out of my hearing for
an hour ; I sha'n't stay any longer.'
I rang the bell, and committed it to a servant's care ; and
then I inquired what had urged her to escape from Wuther-
ing Heights in such an unlikely plight, and where she meant
to go, as she refused remaining with us.
'I ought, and I wished to remain,'answered she,'to
cheer Edgar and take care of the baby, for two things, and
because the Grange is my right home. But I tell you he
wouldn't let me 1 Do you think he could bear to see me
grow fat Sbnd merry — could bear to think that we were tran-
quil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort ? Now, I
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 179
have the satisfaction of being snre that he detests me, to the
point of its annnoying him seriously to have me within ear-
shot or eyesight : I notice, when I enter his presence, the
mnscles of his countenance are involuntarily distorted into an
expression of hatred ; partly arising from his knowledge of
the good causes I have to feel that sentiment for him, and
partly from original aversion. It is strong enough to make
me feel pretty certain that he would not chase me over Eng-
land, supposing I contrived a clear escape ; and therefore I
must get quite away. I've recovered from my first desire to
be killed by him : I'd rather he'd kill himself t'He has
extinguished my love effectually, and so I'm at my ease. I
can recollect yet how I loved him ; and can dimly imagine
that I could still be loving him, if — ^no, no I Even if he had
doted on me, the devilish nature wotdd have revealed its
existence somehow. Catherine had an awfully perverted
taste to esteem him so dearly, knowing him so well.
Monster 1 would that he could be blotted out of creation, and
out of my memory t'
'Hush, hush I He's a human being,'I said.'Be more
charitable : there are worse men than he is yet 1'
'He's not a human being,'she retorted;'and he has no
claim on my charity. I gave him my heart, and he took
and pinched it to death, and flung it back to me. People
feel with their hearts, Ellen : and since he has destroyed
mine, I have not power to feel for him : and I would not,
though he groaned from this to his dying day, and wept
tears of blood for Catherine t No, indeed, indeed, I
wouldn't !'And here Isabella began to cry ; but, imme-
diately dashing the water from her lashes, she recommenced.
'You asked, what has driven me to flight at last ? I was
compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded in rousing
his rage a pitch above his malignity. Pulling out the nerves
with red hot pincers requires more coolness than knocking
on the head. He was worked up to forget the fiendish
prudence he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous vio-
lence. I experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate
180 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
him : the sense of pleasuxe woke my instinot of self -preser-
vation, 80 1 fairly broke free ; and if ever I oome into his
hands again he is welcome to a signal revenge.
'Testerday, yon know, Mr. Eamshaw should have been
at the funeral. He kept himself sober for the purpose —
tolerably sober: not going to bed mad at six o'clock and
getting up drunk at twelve. Consequently, he rose, in
suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance ; and
instead, he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or
brandy by tumblerfuls.
'Heathcliff — I shudder to name him ! has been a
stranger in the house from last Sunday till to-day.
Whether the angels have fed him, or his kin beneath, I
cannot teU ; but he has not eaten a meal with us for nearly a
week. He has just come home at dawn, and gone up-stairs
to his chamber ; locking himself in — as if anybody dreamt of
coveting his company! There he has continued, praying
like a Methodist : only the deity he implored is senseless
dust and ashes ; and God, when addressed, was curiously
confounded with his own black father 1 After concluding
these precious orisons — and they lasted generally till he
grew hoarse and his voice was strangled in his throat — he
would be off again ; always straight down to the Grange 1
I wonder Edgar did not send for a constable, and give him
into custody 1 For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it
was impossible to avoid regarding this season of deliverance
from degrading oppression as a holiday.
'I recovered spirits sufficient to hear Joseph's eternal
lectures without weeping, and to move up and down the
house less with the foot of a frightened thief than formerly.
You wouldn't think that I should cry at anything Joseph
could say ; but he and Hareton are detestable companions.
I'd rather sit with Hindley, and hear his awful talk, than
with ** t'little maister " and his staunch supporter, that odious
old man t When Heathcliff is in, I'm often obliged to seek
the kitchen and their society, or starve among the damp un-
inhabited chambers ; when he is not, as was the case this week.
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 181
I establish a table and chair at one comer of the house fire,
and never mind how Mr. Eamshaw may occupy himself ;
and he does not interfere with my arrangements. He is
quieter now than he used to be, if no one provokes him :
more sullen and depressed, and less furious. Joseph
affirms he's sure he's an altered man : that the Lord has
touched his heart, and he is saved''so as by fire. " I'm
puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change : but it is
not my business.
'Yester-evening I sat in my nook reading some old books
till late on towards twelve. It seemed so dismal to go up-
stairs, with the wild snow blowing outside, and my thoughts
continually reverting to the kirk-yard and the new-made
grave t I dared hardly lift my eyes from the page before me,
that, melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
Hindley sat opposite, his head leant on his hand ; perhaps
meditating on the same subject. He had ceased drinking
at a point below irrationality, and had neither stirred nor
spoken during two or three hours. There was no sound
through the house but the moaning wind, which shook the
windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the
coals, and the click of my snuffers as I removed at intervab
the long wick of the candle. Hareton and Joseph were pro-
bably fast asleep in bed. It was very, very sad : and while
I read I sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished from
the world, never to be restored.
'The doleful silence was broken at length by the sound
of the kitchen latch: Heathdiff had returned from his
watch earlier than usual ; owing, I suppose, to the sudden
storm. That entrance was fastened, and we heard him
coming round to get in by the other. I rose with an
irrepressible expression of what I felt on my lips, which in-
duced my companion, who had been staring towards the
door, to turn and look at me.
* ** I'll keep him out five minutes, " he exclaimed.''Tou
won't object? "
'** No, you may keep him out the whole night for
182 WUTHEMNQ HEIGHTS
me " I answered.'* Do I put the key in the lock, and draw
the bolts. "
'Barnshaw accomplished this ere his gaest reached the
front ; he then came and brought his chair to the other side
of my table, leaning over it, and searching in my eyes for a
sympathy with the burning hate that gleamed from his:
as he both looked and felt like an assassin, he couldn't
exactly find that; but he discovered enough to encourage
him to speak.
'** You, and I, " he said, " have each a great debt to settle
with the man out yonder ! If we were neither of us cowards,
we might combine to discharge it. Are you as soft as your
brother? Are you willing to endure to the last, and not
once attempt a repayment? "
* " I'm weary of enduring now, " I replied ; " and I'd be
glad of a retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself; but
treachery and violence are spears pointed at both ends ;
they wound those who resort to them worse than their
enemies. "
t < c
Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery
and violence! " cried Hindley. " Mrs. Heathcliff, I'll ask
you to do nothing ; but sit still and be dumb. Tell me now,
can you ? I'm sure you would have as much pleasure as I
in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend's existence ; he'll
be your death unless you overreach him ; and he'll be my
ruin. Damn the hellish villain ! He knocks at the door as
if he were master here already 1 Promise to hold your
tongue, and before that clock strikes — ^it wants three minutes
of one — ^you're a free woman ! "
* He took the implements which I described to you in my
letter from his breast, and would have turned down the
candle. I snatched it away, however, and seized his arm.
* " I'll not hold my tongue I " I said ; " you mustn't
touch him. Let the door remain shut, and be quiet 1 "
* " No I I've formed my resolution, and by God I'll
execute it 1 " cried the desperate being. " I'll do you a
kindness in spite of yourself, and Hareton justice I And you
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 183
needn't trouble your head to screen me ; Catherine is gone.
Nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though
I cut my throat this minute — and it's time to make an
end ! "
'I might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned
with a lunatic. The only resource left me was to run to a
lattice and warn his intended victim of the fate which
awaited him.
'" You'd better seek shelter somewhare else to-night 1 " I
exclaimed, in rather a triumphant tone. " Mr. Eamshaw
has a mind to shoot you, if you persist in endeavouring to
enter. "
* " You'd better open the door, you " he answered,
addressing me by some elegant term that I don't care to
repeat.
'** I shall not meddle in the matter, " I retorted again.
" Gome in and get shot, if you please. I've done my duty. "
'With that I shut the window and returned to my place
by the fire ; having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my
command to pretend any anxiety for the danger that
menaced him. Eamshaw swore passionately at me:
affirming that I loved the villain yet ; and calling me all
sorts of names for the base spirit I evinced. And I, in my
secret heart (and conscience never reproached me), thought
what a blessing it would be for him should HeathcUff put
him out of misery ; and what a blessing for me should he
send HeathcUff to his right abode I As I sat nursing these
reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the
floor by a blow from the latter individual, and his black
countenance looked bUghtingly through. The stajichions
stood too close to suffer his shoulders to follow, and I
smiled, exulting in my fancied security. His hair and
clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal
teeth, revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the
dark
'" Isabella, let me in, or I'll make you repent 1 " he
^* gimed, " as Joseph calls it.
184 WDTHERING HEIGHTS
'" I oannot oommit murder/'I replied. " Mr. Hindley
stands sentinel with a knife and loaded pistol. "
'" Let me in by the kitchen door, " he said.
'" Hindley will be there before me, " I answered : " and
that's a poor love of yours that oannot bear a shower of
snow 1 We were left at peace in our beds as long as the
summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter
returns, you must run for shelter I Heathdiff, if I were
you, I'd go stretch myself over her grave and die like a
faithful dog. The world is surely not worth living in now,
is it? You had distinctly impressed on me the idea that
Catherine was the whole joy of your life : I can't imagine
how you think of surviving her loss. "
'" He's there, is he ? " exclaimed my companion, rushing
to the gap. " If I can get my emn out I can hit him 1'*
'I'm airaid, Ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked ;
but you don't know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't have
aided or abetted an attempt on even his life for anything.
Wish that he were dead, I must; and therefore I was
fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the con-
sequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on
Eamshaw's weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.
'The charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back,
closed into its owner's wrist. Heathdiff pulled it away by
main force, slitting up the flesh as it passed on, and thrust it
dripping into his pocket. He then took a stone, struck down
the division between two windows, and sprang in. His
adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the
flow of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.
The ruffian kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his
head repeatedly against the flags, holding me with one hand,
meantime, to prevent me summoning Joseph. He exerted
preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him
completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted,
and dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle.
There he tore off the sleeve of Eamshaw's coat, and bound
up the wound with brutal roughness ; spitting and cursing
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 185
daring the operation as energetioally as he had kicked before.
Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking the old servant ;
who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty
tale, hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two
at once.
* " What is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now ? "
• " There's this to do, " thtmdered Heathdiff, " that your
master's mad ; and should he last another month, I'll have
him to an asylum. And how the devil did you come to
fasten me out, you toothless hound ? Don't stsmd muttering
and mumbling there. Gome, I'm not going to nurse him.
Wash that stuff away ; and mind the sparks of your candle —
it is more than half brandy I "
'** And so ye've be^i murthering on him ? " exclaimed
Joseph, lifting his hands and eyes in horror. ** If iver I seed
a seeght loike this 1 May the Lord "
'Heathdiff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle
of the blood, and flung a towel to him ; but instead of pro-
ceeding to dry it up, he joined his hands and began a prayer,
which excited my laughter from its odd phraseology. I was
in the condition of mind to be shocked at nothing : in fact, I
was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves at the
foot of the gallows.
* " Oh, I forgot you, " said the tyrant. " You shall do
thai Down with you. And you conspire with him against
me, do you, viper? There, that is work fit for you ! "
'He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me
beside Joseph, who steadily concluded his supplications, and
then rose, vowing he would set off for the Grange directly.
Mr. Linton was a magistrate, and though he had fifty wives
dead, he should inquire into this. He wsbs so obstinate in
his resolution, that Heathdiff deemed it expedient to compd
from my lips a recapitulation of what had taken place;
standing over me, heaving with malevolence, as I reluctantly
delivered the account in answer to his questions. It required
a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man that Heathdiff
was not the aggressor ; especially vrith my hardly-wrung
186 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
replies. However, Mr. Eamshaw soon convinced him that he
was alive still; Joseph hastened to administer a dose of
spirits, and by their succour his master presently regained
motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aware that his
opponent was ignorant of the treatment received while
insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said he
should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised
him to get to bed. To my joy, he left us, after giving this
judicious counsel, and Hindley stretched himself on the
hearthstone. I departed to my own room, marvelling that I
had escaped so easily.
'This morning, when I came down, about half an hour
before noon, Mr. Eamshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly
sick; his evil genius, almost as gaunt and ghastly, leant
against the chimney. Neither appeared inclined to dine,
and, having waited till all was cold on the table, I commenced
alone. Nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and I
experienced a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as,
at intervals, I cast a look towards my silent companions, and
felt the comfort of a quiet conscience within me. After I had
done, I ventured on the unusual liberty of drawing near the
fire, going round Eamshaw's seat, and kneeling in the
comer beside him.
* Heathcliff did not glance my way, and I gazed up, and
contemplated his features almost as confidently as if they
had been tumed to stone. His forehead, that I once thought
so manly, and that I now think so diabolical, was shaded
with a heavy cloud ; his basilisk eyes were nearly quenched
by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were
wet then : his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed
in an expression of unspeakable sadness. Had it been
another, I would have covered my face in the presence of
such grief. In his case, I was gratified ; and, ignoble as it
seems to insult a fallen enemy, I couldn't miss this chance
of sticking in a dart : his weakness was the only time when
I could ta^te the delight of paying wrong for wrong.'
'Fie, fie. Miss I'I interrupted.'One might suppose you
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 187
had never opened a Bible in your life. If Ood afflioti your
enemies, surely that ought to suffice you. It is both mean
and presumptuous to add your torture to his !'
'In general I'll allow that it would be, Ellen/ she
continued ;'but what misery laid on Heathcliff could content
me, unless I have a hand in it ? I'd rather he suffered less,
if I might cause his sufferings and he might know that I was
the cause. Oh, I owe him so much. On only one condition
can I hope to forgive him. It is, if I may take an eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony
return a wrench : reduce bun to my level. As he was the
first to injure, make him the first to implore pardon ; and
then — ^why then, Ellen, I might show you some generosity.
But it is utterly impossible I can ever be revenged, and
therefore I cannot forgive him. Hindley wanted some water,
and I handed him a glass, and asked him how he was.
'" Not as ill as I wish, " he replied. " But leaving out
my arm, every inch of me is as sore as if I had been fighting
with a legion of imps I "
* " Yes, no wonder, " was my next remark. " Catherine
used to boast that she stood between you and bodily harm :
she meant that certain persons would not hurt you for fear
of offending her. It's well people don't reaUy rise from their
grave, or, last night, she might have witnessed a repulsive
scene 1 Are not you bruised, and cut over your chest and
shoulders ? "
'** I can't say, " he answered : " but what do you mean ?
Did he dare to strike me when I was down ? "
'" He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the
ground, " I whispered. " And his mouth watered to tear you
with his teeth ; because he's only half man : not so much,
and the rest fiend. "
'Mr. Eamshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of
our mutual foe; who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed
insensible to anything around him : the longer he stood, the
plainer his reflections revealed their blackness through his
features.
188 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
* ** Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle him
fai my last agony, I'd go to hell with joy, " groaned the
impatient man, writhing to rise, and sinking back in despair,
convinced of his inadequacy for the struggle.
'" Nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you, "
I observed aloud. " At the Grange, every one knows your
sister would have been living now had it not been ior Mr.
Heathdiff. After all, it is preferable to be hated than
loved by him. When I recollect how happy we were — ^how
happy CSatherine was before he came — I'm fit to curse the
day. " *
'Most likely, Heathcliff noticed more the truth of what
was said, than the spirit of the person who said it. His
attention was roused, I saw, for his eyes rained down tears
among the ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sighs.
I stared full at him, and laughed scornfully. The clouded
windows of hell flashed a moment towards me; the fiend
which usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and
drowned that I did not fear to hazard another sound of
derision.
"'Get up, and begone out of my sight, " said the
mourner.
'I guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his
voice was hardly intelligible.
'" I beg your pardon, " I replied. " But I loved
Catherine too ; and her brother requires attendance, which,
for her sake, I shall supply. Now, that she's dead, I see her
in Hindley : Hindley has exactly her eyes, if you had not
tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red ; and
her "
'" Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death t "
he cried, making a movement that caused me to make one
also.
'" But then, " I continued, holding myself ready to flee,
" if poor Catherine had trusted you, and assumed the
ridiculous, contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff,
she would soon have presented a similar picture t Slie
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 189
wouldn't have borne yonr abominable behaviour quietly:
her detestation and disgust must have found voice. "
'The back of the settle and Eamshaw's person interposed
between me and him ; so instead of endeavouring to reach
me, he snatched a dinner-knife from the table and flung it
at my head. It struck beneath my ear, and stopped the
sentence I was uttering ; but, pulling it out, I sprang to the
door and delivered another; which I hope went a little
deeper than his missile. The last glimpse I caught of him
was a furious rush on his part, checked by the embrace of
his host ; and both fell locked together on the hearth. In
my flight through the kitchen I bid Joseph speed to his
master ; I knocked over Hareton, who was hanging a litter
of puppies from a chair-back in the doorway ; and, blessed
as a soul escaped from purgatory, I bounded, leaped, and
flew down the steep road ; then, quitting its windings, shot
direct across the moor, rolling over banks, and wading
through marshes : precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
beacon-light of the Orange. And far rather would I be
condemned to a perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions
than, even for one night, abide beneath the roof of
Wuthering Heights again.'
Isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea ; then she
rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl
I had brought, and turning a deaf ear to my entreaties
for her to remain another hour, she stepped on to a chair,
kissed Edgar's and Catherine's portraits, bestowed a similar
salute on me, and descended to the carriage, accompanied
by Fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her
mistress. She was driven away, never to revisit this
neighbourhood: but a regular correspondence was esta-
blished between her and my master when things were more
settled. I believe her new abode was in the south, near
London ; there she had a son bom a few months subsequent
to her escape. He was christened Linton, and, from the
first, she reported him to be an ailing, peevish creature.
Mr. Heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village,
190 WXJTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
inquired where she lived. I refused to tell. He remarked that
it was not of any moment, only she must heware of coming to
her brother : she should not be with him, if he had to keep
her himself. Though I would give no information, he dis-
covered, through some of the other servants, both her
place of residence and the existence of the child. Still,
he didn't molest her: for which forbearance she might
thank his aversion, I suppose. He often asked about the
infant, when he saw me ; and on hearing its name, smiled
grimly, and observed:'They wish me to hate it too, do
they?'
'I don't think they wish you to know anything about it,'
I answered.
'But I'll have it,'he said,'when I want it. They may
reckon on that 1'
Fortunately its mother died before the time arrived ; some
thirteen years after the decease of Catherine, when Idnton
was twelve, or a little more.
On the day succeeding Isabella's unexpected visit I had
no opportunity of speaking to my master : he shunned con-
versation, and was fit for discussing nothing. When I could
get him to listen, I saw it pleased him that his sister had
left her husband; whom he abhorred with an intensity
which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to
allow. So deep and sensitive was his aversion, that he re-
frained from going anywhere where he was likely to see or
hear of Heathdiff. Grief, and that together, transformed
him into a complete hermit : he threw up his office of
magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the
village on all occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion
within the limits of his park and grounds ; only varied by
solitary rambles on the moors, and visits to the grave of his
wife, mostly at evening, or early morning before other
wanderers were abroad. But he was too good to be
thoroughly unhappy long. He didn't pray for Catherine's
soul to haunt him. Time brought resignation, and a
melancholy sweeter than common joy. He recnJled her
WUTHBBINQ HEIGHTS 191
memory with ardent, tender love, and bopefol aspiring to
the better world ; where he doubted not she was gone.
And he had earthly consolation and a£Fection8 also.
For a few days, I said, he seemed regardless of the puny
suooessor to the departed : that coldness melted as fast as
snow in April, and ere the tiny thing oould stammer a word
or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in his heart.
It was named Catherine ; but he never called it the name in
full, as he had never called the first Catherine short : pro-
bably because Heathdiff had a habit of doing so. The little
one was always Cathy : it formed to him a distinction from
the mother, and yet a connection with her ; and his attach-
ment sprang from its relation to her, far more than from its
being his own.
I used to draw a comparison between him and Hindley
Eamshaw, and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why
their conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances^
They had both been fond husbands, and were both attached
to their children ; and I could not see how they shouldn't
both have taken the same road, for good or evil. But, I
thought in my mind, Hindley, with apparently the stronger
head, has shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker
man. When his ship struck, the captain abandoned his
post ; and the crew, instead of trying to save her, rushed
into riot and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless
vesseL Linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage
of a loyal and faithful soul : he trusted God ; and God com-
forted him. One hoped, and the other despaired : they chose
their own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure them.
But you'll not want to hear my moralising, Mr. Lockwood ;
you'U judge, as well as I can, all these things : at least,
you'll think you will, and that's the same. The end of
Eamshaw was what might have been expected ; it followed
fast on his sister's : there were scarcely six months between
them. We, at the Grange, never got a very succinct account
of his state preceding it; all that I did learn was on
occasion of going to aid in the preparations for the
193 WUTHEMNG HEIGHTS
fonaraL Mr. Kenneih came to announce the event to my
master.
* Well, Nelly/ said he, riding into the yard one morning,
too early not to alarm me with an instant presentiment of
bad news,'it's yours and my turn to go into mourning at
I«esent. Who's given us the slip now, do you think ?'
'Who ?'I asked in a flurry.
'Why, guess 1'he returned, dismounting, and slinging
his bridle on a hook by the door.'And nip up the comer
of your apron : I'm certain you'll need it.'
* Not Mr. Heathcliff, surely ?'I exclaimed.
'What I would you have tears for him ?'said the doctor.
'No, HeathclifTs a tough young fellow : he looks blooming
to-day. I've just seen him. He's rapidly regaining flesh
since he lost his better half.'
'Who is it, then, Mr. Kenneth?'I repeated impatiently.
'Hindley Eamshaw! Your old friend Hindley,'he
replied,'and my wicked gossip : though he's been too wild
for me this long while. There ! I said we should draw
water. But cheer up! He died true to his character:
drunk as a lord. Poor lad ! I'm sorry, too. One can't help
missing an old companion : though he had the worst tricks
with him that ever man imagined, and has done me many a
rascally turn. He's barely twenty-seven, it seems ; that's
your own age : who would have thought you were bom in
one year ?'
I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of
Mrs. Linton's death : ancient associations lingered round my
heart ; I sat down in the porch and wept as for a blood
relation, desiring Mr. Kenneth to get another servant to
introduce him to the master. I could not hinder myself
from pondering on the question —'Had he had fair play ?'
Whatever I did, that idea would bother me : it was so tire-
somely pertinacious that I resolved on requesting leave to go
to Wuthering Heights, and assist in the last duties to the
dead. Mr. Linton was extremely reluctant to consent, but I
pleaded eloquently for the friendless condition in which he
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 198
I
lay ; and I said my old master and foster-brother had a
claim on my services as strong as his own. Besides, I re-
minded him that the child Ebjreton was his wife's nephew,
and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to act as its
guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the
property was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-
in-law. He was unfit for attending to such matters then,
but he bid me speak to his lawyer ; and at length permitted
me to go. His lawyer had been Eamshaw's also : I
called at the village, and asked him to accompany me. He
shook his head, and advised that Heathcliff should be let
alone ; affirming, if the truth were known, Hareton would be
found little else than a beggar.
'His father died in debt,'he said ;'the whole property
is mortgaged, and the sole chance for the natural heir is to
allow him an opportunity of creating some interest in the
creditor's heart, that he may be inclined to deal leniently
towards him.'
When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had
come to see everything carried on decently; and Joseph,
who appeared in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction at
my presence. Mr. Heathcliff said he did not perceive that I
was wanted ; but I might stay and order the arrangements
for the funeral, if I chose.
'Correctly/ he remarked,'that fool's body should be
buried at the cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I
happened to leave him ten minutes yesterday afternoon, and
in that interval he fastened the two doors of the house against
me, and he has spent the night in drinking himself to death
deliberately t We broke in this morning, for we heard him
snorting like a horse ; and there he was, laid over the settle :
flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. I sent
for Kenneth, and he came ; but not till the beast had changed
into carrion : he was both dead and cold, and stark ; and
so you'll allow it was useless making more stir about him 1'
The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered :
'I'd rayther he'd goan hisseln for t'doctor I I sud ha'
194 WDTHERINQ HEIGHTS
taen tent o't'maister better nor him — and he wam't deead
when I left, nanght o't'soart 1'
I insisted on the funeral being respectable. Mr. Heath-
cliff said I might have my own way there too : only, he
desired me to remember that the money for the whole affair
came out of his pocket. He maintained a hard, careless
deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow : if anything,
it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work
successfully executed. I observed once, indeed, something
like exultation in his aspect : it was just when the people
were bearing the coffin from the house. He had the hypo-
crisy to represent a mourner : and previous to following with
Hareton, he lifted the unfortunate child on to the table and
muttered, with peculiar gusto,'Now, my bonny lad, you are
mine I And we'll see if one tree won't grow as crooked as
another, with the same wind to twist it t'The unsuspecting
thing was pleased at this speech : he played with Heathcliff s
whiskers, and stroked his cheek ; but I divined its meaning,
and observed tartly,'That boy must go back with me to
Thrushcross Grange, sir. There is nothing in the world less
yours than he is !'
'Does Linton say so ?'he demanded.
* Of course — he has ordered me to take him,* I replied.
'Well,'said the scoundrel,'we'll not argue the subject
now : but I have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young
one ; so intimate to your master that I must supply the place
of this with my own, if he attempt to remove it. I don't
engage to let Hareton go undisputed ; but I'll be pretty sure
to make the other come 1 Bemember to tell him.'
This hint was enough to bind our hands. I repeated its
substance on my return ; and Edgar Linton, little interested
at the commencement, spoke no more of interfering. I'm
not aware that he could have done it to any purpose, had he
been ever so willing.
The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights : he
held firm possession, and proved to the attorney — ^who, in his
torn, proved it to Mr. Linton — that Eamshaw had mortgaged
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 196
every yard of land he owned for cash to supply his mania
for gaming ; and he, Heathcliff, was the mortgagee. In that
manner Hareton, who should now be the first gentleman in
the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete de-
pendence on his father's inveterate enemy ; and lives in his
own house as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages :
quite tmable to right himself, because of his friendlessness,
and his ignorance that he has been wronged.
CHAPTBB XVni
Tbb twelve years, continued Mrs. Dean, following tJiat dismal
period were the happiest of my life : my greatest troubles in
their passage rose from our little lady's tiifling illnesses, which
she had to experience in common with aU children, rich and
poor. For the rest, after the first six months, she grew like
a larch, and could walk and talk too, in her own way, before
the heath blossomed a second time over Mrs. Linton's dust.
She was the most winning thing that ever brought sunshine
into a desolate house : a real beauty in face, with the Earn-
shaws'handsome dark eyes, but the Lintons'fair skin and
small features, and yellow curling hair. Her spirit was high,
though not rough, and qualified by a heart sensitive and
lively to excess in its affections. That capacity for intense
attachments reminded me of her mother : still she did not
resemble her : for she could be soft and mild as a dove, and
she had a gentle voice and pensive expression : her anger
was never furious ; her love never fierce : it wba deep and
tender. However, it must be acknowledged, she had faults
to foil her gifts. A propensity to be saucy was one ; and a
perverse will, that indulged children invariably acquire,
whether they be good tempered or cross. If a servant
chanced to vex her, it was always —'I shall tell papa I'And
if he reproved her, even by a look, you would have thought
it a heart-breaking business : I don't believe he ever did
speak a harsh word to her. He took her education entirely
on himself, and made it an amusement. Fortunately,
curiosity and a quick intellect made her an apt scholar : she
learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to his
WXJTHEEING HEIGHTS 197
Till fihd reached the age of thirteen she had not once been
beyond the range of the park by herself. Mr. Linton would
take her with him a mile or so outside, on rare occasions ; bat
he trosted her to no one else. Qimmerton was an unsubstan-
tial name in her ears ; the chapel, the only building she had
. approached or entered, except her own home. Wuthering
Heights and Mr. Heathdiff did not exist for her : she was
a perfect recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented.
Sometimes, indeed, while surveying the country from her
nursery window, she would observe —
'Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to the top
of those hills ? I wonder what lies on the other side — ^is it
the sea?'
'No, Miss Cathy,'I would answer ;'it is hills again, just
like these.'
'And what are those golden rocks like when you stand
under them ?'she once asked.
The abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly
attracted her notice ; especially when the setting sun shone
on it and the topmost heights, and the whole extent of land-
scape besides lay in shadow. I explained that they were bare
masses of stone, with hardly enough earth in their clefts to
nourish a stunted tree.
'And why are they bright so long after it is evening here ?'
she pursued.
'Because they are a great deal higher up than we are,'
replied I ;'you could not climb them, they are too high and
steep. In winter the frost is always there before it comes to
us ; and deep into stmimer I have found snow under that
Uack hollow on the north-east side I'
'Oh, you have been on them 1'she cried gleefully.
'Then I can go, too, when I am a woman. Has papa been,
Ellen?'
'Papa would tell you, Miss,'I answered, hastily,'that
they are not worth the trouble of visiting. The moors, where
you ramble with him, are much nicer ; and Thrushcross Park
is the finest place in the world/
198 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
'But I know the park, and I don't know those/ she
murmured to herself.'And I should delight to look roond
me from the brow of that tallest. point : my little pony Minny
shall take me some time.'
One of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave, quite turned
her head with a desire to fulfil this project : she teased Mr.
Linton about it ; and he promised she should have the jour-
ney when she got older. But Miss Catherine measured her
age by months, and,'Now, am I old enough to go to Peni-
stone Crags ?'was the constant question in her mouth. The
road thither wound close by Wuthering Heights. Edgar had
not the heart to pass it ; so she received as constantly the
answer,'Not yet, love : not yet.'
I said Mrs. HeathclifF lived above a dozen years after
quitting her husband. Her family were of a delicate con-
stitution : she and Edgar both lacked the ruddy health that
you will generally meet in these parts. What her last ill-
ness was, I am not certain : I conjecture, they died of the
same thing, a kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but
incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close.
She wrote to inform her brother of the probable conclusion
of a four-months'indisposition under which she had
suffered, and entreated him to come to her, if possible ; for
she had much to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu,
and deliver Linton safely into his hands. Her hope was
that Linton might be left with him, as he had been with her :
his father, she would fain convince herself, had no desire to
assume the burden of his maintenance or education. My
master hesitated not a moment in complying with her re-
quest : reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary callr.,
he flew to answer this ; commending Catherine to n^y
peculiar vigilance, in his absence, with reiterated orders that
she must not wander out of the park, even under my escort :
he did not calculate on her going unaccompanied.
He was away three weeks. The first day or two my
charge sat in a'comer of thei library, too sad for either read-
ing or playing: in that quiet state she caused me little
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 199
tirouble ; but it was sncoeeded by an interval of impatient,
fretful weariness ; and being too busy, and too old then, to
run up and down amusing her, I hit on a method by which
she might entertain herself. I used to send her on her
travels round the grounds — now on foot, and now on a pony ;
indulging her with a patient audience of all her real and
imaginary adventures when she returned.
The summer shone in full prime ; and she took such a
taste for this solitary rambling that she often contrived to
remain out from breakfast till tea ; and then the evenings
were spent in recounting her fanciful tales. I did not fear
her breaking bounds; because the gates were generally
locked, and I thought she would scarcely venture forth
alone, if they had stood wide open. Unluckily, my confi-
dence proved misplaced. Catherine came to me, one
morning, at eight o'clock, and said she was that day an
Arabieui merchant, going to cross the Desert with his cara-
van ; and I must give her plenty of provision for herself and
beasts : a horse, and three camels, personated by a large
hound and a couple of pointers. I got together good store
of dainties, and slung them in a basket on one side of the
saddle ; and she sprang up as gay as a fairy, sheltered by
her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the July sun, and
trotted off with a merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel
to avoid galloping, and come back early. The naughty thing
never made her appearance at tea. One traveller, the hound,
being an old dog and fond of its ease, returned ; but neither
Cathy, nor the pony, nor the two pointers were visible in
any direction : I despatched emissaries down this path, and
that path, and at last went wandering in search of her my-
self. There was a labourer working at a fence round a
plantation, on the borders of the grounds. I inquired of him
if he had seen our young lady.
'I saw her at mom,'he replied :'she would have me to
cut her a hazel switch, and then she leapt her Galloway
over the hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and galloped out
of sight.'
200 WUTHEfiING HEIGHTS
You may guess how I felt at hearing tfiis news. It
struck me directly she must have started for Penistone Crags.
'What will become of her ?'I ejaculated, pushing through a
gap which the man was repairing, and making straight to
the high-road. I walked as if for a wager, mile after mile,
till a turn brought me in view of the Heights; but no
Catherine could I detect, far or near. The Crags lie about a
mile and a half beyond Mr. HeathclifTs place, and that is four
from the Grange, so I began to fear night would fall ere I
could reach them. * And what if she should have slipped in
clambering among them,'I reflected,'and been killed, or
broken some of her bones ?'My suspense was truly painful ;
and, at first, it gave me delightful relief to observe, in
hurrying by the farmhouse, Charlie, the fiercest of the
pointers, lying under a window, with swelled head and
bleeding ear. I opened the wickeb and ran to the door,
knocking vehemently for admittance. A woman whom I
knew, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton, answered:
she had been servant there since the death of Mr. Earn-
shaw.
'Ah,'said she,'you are come a-seeking your little
mistress ! Don't be frightened. She's here safe : but I'm glad
it isn't the master.'
'He is not at home then, is he ?'I pcbuted, quite breath-
less with quick walking and alarm.
'No, no,'she replied :'both he and Joseph are off, and
I think they won't return this hour or more. Step in and
rest you a bit.'
I entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth,
rocking herself in a little chair that had been her mother's
when a child. Her hat was hung against the wall, and she
seemed perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the
best spirits imaginable, to Hareton — now a great, strong lad
of eighteen — who stared at her with considerable curiosity
and astonishment : comprehending precious little of the fluent
succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never
ceased pouring forth.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 201
'Very well, Miss !'I exclaimed, ooncealing my joy under
angry countenance.'This is your last ride, till papa
comes back. I'll not trust you over the threshold again, you
naughty, naughty girl 1'
'Aha, Ellen !'she cried, gaily, jumping up and running
to my side.'I shall have a pretty story to tell to-night ; and
so you've found me out. Have you ever been here in your
life before ?'
'Put that hat on, and home at once,'said I.'I'm dresbd-
fuUy grieved at you. Miss Cathy: you've done extremely
wrong I It's no use pouting and crying : that won't repay
the trouble I've had, scouring the country after you. To
think how Mr. Linton charged me to keep you in ; and you
stealing off so 1 It shows you are a cunning little fox, and
nobody will put faith in you any more.'
'What have I done?'sobbed she, instantly checked.
* Papa charged me nothing : he'll not scold me, Ellen — he's
never cross, like you I'
• Gome, come !'I repeated.'I'll tie the riband. Now,
let us have no petulance. Oh, for shame 1 You thirteen
years old, and such a baby 1'
This exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat
from her head, and retreating to the chinmey out of my
reach.
'Nay,'said the servant,'don't be hard on the bonny lass,
Mrs. Dean. We made her stop : she'd fain have ridden for-
wards, afeard you should be uneasy. Hareton offered to
go with her, and I thought he should : it's a wild road over
the hiUs.'
Hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in
his pockets, too awkward to speak ; though he looked as if he
did not relish my intrusion.
'How long am I to wait ?'I continued, disregarding the
woman's interference.'It vrill be dark in ten minutes.
Where is the pony. Miss Cathy ? And where is Phoenix ?
I shall leave you, unless you be quick ; so please yourself.'
'The pony is in the yard/ she replied,'and Phoenix 18 shut
903 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
in there. He's bitten — ^and bo is Charlie. I was going to tell
yon all about it; but you are in a bad temper, and don't
deserve to hear.'
I picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it ; but
perceiving that the people of the house took her part, she
commenced capering round the room ; and on my giving
chase, ran like a mouse over and under and beUnd the
furniture, rendering it ridiculous for me to pursue. Hareton
and the woman laughed, and she joined them, and waxed
more impertinent still; till I cried, in great irritation, —
'Well, Miss Cathy, if you were aware whose house this is
you'd be glad enough to get out.'
'It's your father's, isn't it ?'said she, turning to
Hareton. «
'Nay/ he replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.
He could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes, though
they were just his own.
'Whose then — your master's ?'she asked.
He coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an
oath, and turned away.
'Who is his master ?'continued the tiresome girl,
appealing to me.'He talked about " our house, " and''our
folk. " I thought he had been the owner's son. And he
never said Miss : he should have done, shouldn't he, if he's a
servant?'
Hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud at this childish
speech. I silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded
in equipping her for departure.
'Now, get my horse,'she said, addressing her unknown
kinsman as she would one of the stable-boys at the Grange.
'And you may come with me. I want to see where the
goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear about the
fcwriihMt as you call them : but make haste ! What's the
matter ? Get my horse, I say.'
'ril see thee damned before I be thy servant !'growled
the lad.
'You'll see me what?'asked Catherine in surprise.
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS 908
'Damned — ^thou saucy witoh I'he replied.
'There, Miss Cathy t you see you have got into pretty
oompany,'I interposed.'Nice words to be used to a young
lady I Pray don't begin to dispute with him. CJome, let us
seek for Minny ourselves, and begone.'
'But, Ellen,'cried she, staring fixed in astonishment,
* how dare he speak so to me ? Mustn't he be made to do as
I ask him ? You wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you
said. — Now, then I'
Hareton did not appear to feel this threat ; so the tears
sprang into her eyes with indignation.'You bring the
pony,'she exclaimed, turning to the woman,'and let my ^og
free tl^s moment 1'
'Softly, Miss,'answered she addxessed:'you'll lose
nothing by being civil. Though Mr. Hareton, there, be not
the master's son, he's your cousin : and I was never hired to
serve you.'
'He my cousin I'cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh.
'Yes, indeed,'responded her reprover.
'Oh, Ellen 1 don't let them say such things,'she pursued
in great trouble.'Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from
London : my cousin is a gentleman's son. That my —'she
stopped, and wept outright; upset at the bare notion of
relationship with such a dovm.
'Hush, hush 1'I whispered ;'people can have many
cousins and of all sorts. Miss Cathy, without being any the
worse for it ; only they needn't keep their oompany, if they
be disagreeable and bad.'
'He's not — he's not my cousin, Ellen 1'she went on,
gathering fresh grief from reflection, and flinging herself into
my arms for refuge from the idea.
I was much vexed at her and the servant for their
mutual revelations ; having no doubt of Linton's approaching
arrival, communicated by the former, being reported to Mr.
Heathcliff; and feeling as confident that Catherine's first
Uiought on her father's return would be to seek an explana-
tion of the latter's assertion oonoeming her rude-bred
aM WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
kindred. Hareton, reooyering from his disgust at being
taken for a servant, seemed moved by her distress; and«
having fetched the pony round to the door, he took, to
propitiate her, a fine orooked-legged terrier whelp from the
kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist 1 for he
meant nought. Pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed
him with a glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
I could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to
the poor fellow ; who was a well-made, athletic youth, good-
looking in features, and stout and healthy, but attired in
garments befitting his daily occupations of working on the
farm and loimging among the moors after rabbits and game.
Btfll, I thought I could detect in his physiognomy a mind
owning better qualities than his father ever possessed.
Good things lost amid a wilderness of weeds, to be sure,
whose rankness far over-topped their neglected growth ; yet,
notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy soil, that might
yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable circimi-
stances. Mr. Heathdiff, I believe, had not treated him
physically ill ; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression : he had none of the
timid susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treat-
ment, in Heathdiff's judgment. He appeared to have bent
his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never
taught to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit
which did not annoy his keeper; never led a single step
towards virtue, or guarded by a single precept against vice.
And from what I heard, Joseph contributed much to his
deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted
him to flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the
head of the old family. And as he had been in the habit of
accusing Catherine Eamshaw and Heathclifl, when children,
of putting the master past his patience, and compelling him
to seek solace in drink by what he termed their * oSaii ways,'
so at present he laid the whole burden of Hareton's faults on
the shoulders of the usurper of his property. If the lad
Dwore, he wouldn't correct him: nor however culpably he
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 206
behaved. It gave Joseph satisfaoidon, apparently, to watoh
him go the worst lengths: he allowed that the lad was
mined : that his soul was abandoned to perdition ; but then
he reflected that HeathclifF must answer for it. Hareton's
blood would be required at his hands ; and there lay immense
consolation in that thought. Joseph had instiUed into him a
pride of name, and of his lineage ; he would, had he dared,
have fostered hate between him and the present owner of
the Heights : but his dread of that owner amounted to
superstition ; and he confined his feeUngs regarding him to
muttered innuendoes and private comminations. I don't
pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode of living
customary in those days at Wuthering Heights : I only
speak from hearsay ; for I saw little. The villagers afBrmed
Mr. HeathcUff was mar^ and a cruel hard landlord to his
tenants; but the house, inside, had regained its ancient
aspect of comfort under female management, and the scenes
of riot common in Hindley's time were not now enacted
within its walls. The master was too gloomy to seek
companionship with any people, good or bad ; and he is yet
This, however, is not making progress with my story.
Miss Cathy rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and
demanded her own dogs, Charlie and Phoenix. They came
limping and hanging their heads ; and we set out for home,
sadly out of sorts, every one of us. I could not wring from
my Uttle lady how she had spent the day ; except that, as I
supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage was Penistone Crags ;
and she arrived without adventure to the gate of the farm-
house, when Hareton happened to issue forth, attended by
some canine followers, who attacked her train. They had a
smart battle, before their owners could separate them : that
formed an introduction. Catherine told Hareton who she
was, and where she was going ; and asked him to show her
the way: finally, beguiling him to accompany her. He
opened the mysteries of the Fairy Cave, and twenty other
queer places. .But, being in dis^prace, I was not favoured
with a description of the interesting objects she saw. I
a06 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
oonld gather, however, that her guide had beenafayomite
till she hurt his feelings by addressing him as a servant ; and
HeathclifTs housekeeper hurt hers by calling him her cousin.
Then the language he had held to her rankled in her heart ;
she who was always'love/ and'darling/ and'queen/ and
'angel/ with everybody at the Orange, to be insulted so
shockingly by a stiunger I She did not comprehend it ; and
hard work I had to obtain a promise that she would not lay
the grievance before her father. I explained how he objected
to the whole household at the Heights, and how sorry he
would be to find she had been there ; but I insisted most on
the fact, that if she revealed my negligence of his orders, he
would perhaps be so angry that I should have to leave ; and
Cathy couldn't bear that prospect: she pledged her word,
and kept it for my sake. After all, she was a sweet little
girL

CHAPTEB XIX
A iiBTTBB, edged with blaok, annotmoed the day of my
master's retam. Isabella was dead ; and he wrote to bid me
get mourning for his daughter, and arrange a room, and
other accommodations, for his youthful nephew. Catherine
ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming her father back ;
and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the innumerable
excellencies of her'real'cousin. The evening of their
expected arriyal came. Since early morning she had been
busy ordering her own small affairs ; and now attired in her
new black frock — poor thing ! her aunt's death impressed her
with no definite sorrow — ^she obliged me, by constant
worrying, to wsJk with her down through the grounds to
meet them.
'Linton is just six months younger than I am,'she
chattered, as we strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows
of mossy turf, under shadow of the trees.'How delightful
it will be to have him for a playfellow I Aunt Isabella sent
papa a beautiful lock of his hair ; it was lighter than mine —
more flaxen, and quite as fine. I have it carefully preserved
in a little glass box ; and I've often thought what a pleasure
it would be to see its owner. Oh ! I am happy — and papa,
dear, dear papa I Gome, Ellen, let us run ! come, run.'
She ran, and returned and ran again, many times before
my sober footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated
hfflrself on the grassy bank beside the path, and tried to wait
patiently; but that was impossible : she couldn't be still a
minute.
208 WUTHBEING HEIGHTS
'How long they are 1'she exclaimed.'Ah, I see some
dust on the road — ^they are coming ! No 1 When will they
be here? May we not go a little way — ^half a mile, Ellen .
only just half a mile ? Do say Yes : to that dump of
birches at the turn I'
I refused staunchly. At length her suspense was ended :
the travelling carriage rolled in sight. Miss Cathy shrieked
and stretched out her arms as soon as she caught her
father's face looking from the window. He descended,
nearly as eager as herself; and a considerable interval
elapsed ere they had a thought to spare for any but themselves.
While they exchanged caresses I took a peep in to see after
Linton. He was asleep in a comer, wrapped in a warm, fur-
lined cloak, as if it had been winter. A pale, delicate,
effeminate boy, who might have been taken for my master's
yoimger brother, so strong was the resemblance : but there
was a sickly peevishness in his aspect that Edgar Linton
never had. The latter saw me looking ; and having shaken
hands, advised me to close the door, and leave him undis-
turbed ; for the journey had fatigued him. Cathy would fain
have taken one glance, but her father told her to come, and
they walked together up the park, while I hastened before
to prepare the servants.
'Now, darling,'said Mr. Linton, addressing his daughter,
as £hey halted at the bottom of the front steps :'your cousin
is not so strong or so merry as you are, and he has lost his
mother, remember, a very short time since ; therefore, don't
expect him to play and run about with you directly. And
don't harass him much by talking: let him be quiet this
evening, at least, will you ?'
'Yes, yes, papa,'answered Catherine : * but I do want to
see him ; and he hasn't once looked out.'
The carriage stopped ; and the sleeper being roused, was
lifted to the ground by his uncle.
'This is your cousin Cathy, Linton,'he said, putting their
little hands together.'She's fond of you already ; and mind
you don't grieve her by crying to-night. Try to be cheerful
WDTHEBING HEIGHTS 209
now ; the travelling is at an end, and yon have nothing to
do but leet and amuse yourself as you please/
'Let me go to bed, then/ answered the boy, shrinking
from Catherine's salute ; and he put his fingers to remove
incipient tears.
'Gome, come, there's a good child,'I whispered, leading
him in.'You'll make her weep too — see how sorry she is for
youl'
I do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his
oousin put on as sad a countenance as himself, and returned
to her father. All three entered, and mounted to the library,
where tea was laid ready. I proceeded to remove Linton's
cap and mantle, and placed him on a chair by the table ; but
he was no sooner seated than he began to cry afresh. My
master inquired what was the matter.
'I can't sit on a chair,'sobbed the boy.
'Qo to the sofa, then, and Ellen shall bring you some
tea,'answered his uncle patiently.
He had been greatly tried, during the journey, I felt con-
vinced, by his fretful ailing charge. Linton slowly trailed
himself off, and lay down. Cathy carried a footstool and her
cup to his side. At first she sat silent ; but that could not
last : she had resolved to make a pet of her little cousin, as
she would have him to be ; and she commenced stroking his
curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in her
saucer, like a baby. This pleased him, for he was not
much better : he dried his eyes, and lightened into a faint
smile.
'Oh, he'll do very well,* said the master to me, after
watching them a minute.'Very well, if we can keep him,
Ellen. The company of a child of his own age will instil
new spirit into him soon, and by wishing for strength he'll
gain it.'
'Ay, if we can keep him 1'I mused to myself ; and sore
misgivings came over me that there was slight hope of that.
And then, I thought, how ever will that weakling live at
Wuthering Heights? Between his father and Hareton,
210 WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS
what playmates and instructors they'll be. Onr doubts were
presently decided — even earlier than I expected. I had just
taken the children up-stairs, after tea was finished, and seen
Linton asleep — he would not suffer me to leave him till
that was the case — I had come down, and was standing by
the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for Mr.
Edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and informed
me that Mr. Heathclifirs servant Joseph was at the door, and
wished to speak with the master.
'I shall ask him what he wants first,'I said, in consider-
able trepidation.'A very unlikely hour to be troubling
people, and the instant they have returned from a long
journey. I don't think the master can see him.'
Joseph had advanced through the kitchen as I uttered
these words, and now presented himself in the hall. He
was donned in his Sunday garments, with his most sancti-
monious and sourest face, and, holding his hat in one hand,
and his stick in the other, he proceeded to dean his shoes on
the mat.
'Good-evening, Joseph,'I said, coldly.'What business
brings you here to night ?'
'It's Maister Linton I mun spake to,'he answered, waving
me disdainfully aside.
'Mr. Linton is going to bed ; unless you have something
particular to say, I'm sure he won't hear it now,'I continued.
'You had better sit down in there, and entrust your
message to me.'
'Which is his rahm ?'pursued the fellow, surveying the
range of closed doors.
I perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation, so
very reluctantly I went up to the library, and announced the
unseasonable visitor, advising that he should be dismissed
till next day. Mr. Linton had no time to empower me to do
so, for Joseph mounted close at my heels, and, pushing into
the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the table,
with his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began
in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition —
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 211
'Haiheoliff has sent me for his lad, and I mmm't goa
back'bout him.'
Edgar Linton was silent a minute ; an expression of ex-
ceeding sorrow overcast his features : he would have pitied
the child on his own account ; but, recalling Isabella's hopes
and fears, and anxious wishes for her son, and her commen-
dations of him to his care, he grieved bitterly at the prospect
of yielding him up, and searched in his heart how it might
be avoided. No plan offered itself : the very exhibition of
any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant
more peremptory : there was nothing left but to resign him.
However, he was not going to rouse him from his sleep.
'Tell Mr. Heathcliff,'he answered calmly,'that his son
shall come to Wuthering Heights to-morrow. He is in bed,
and too tired to go the distance now. You may also tell
him that the mother of Linton desired him to remain under
my guardianship ; and, at present, his health is very pre-
carious.'
* Noa t'said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the
floor, and assuming an authoritative air.'Noa ! that means
naught. HathecUff maks noa'count o't'mother, nor ye
norther ; but he'll hev'his lad ; und I mun tak'him — soa
now ye knaw !'
'You shall not to-night !'answered Linton decisively.
'Walk down stairs at once, and repeat to your master what
I have said. Ellen, show him down. Go'
And, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he
rid the room of him and closed the door.
'Yarrah weell 1'shouted Joseph, as he slowly drew
off.'To-mom, he's come hissehiy and thrust Mm out, if ye
doir!'
CHAPPEB XX
To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, Mr. Linton
oommisffloned me to take the boy home early, on Catherine's
pony ; and, said he —'As we shall now have no influence
over his destiny, good or bad, you must say nothing of where
he is gone to my daughter : she cannot associate with him
hereafter, and it is better for her to remain in ignorance of
his proximity ; lest she should be restless, and anxious to
visit the Heights. Merely tell her his father sent for him
suddenly, and he has been obliged to leave us.'
Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at
five o'clock, and astonished to be informed that he must pre-
pare for further travelling ; but I softened off the matter by
stating that he was going to spend some time with his father,
Mr. Heathcliff, who wished to see him so much, he did not
like to defer the pleasure till he should recover from his late
journey.
'My father f'he cried, in strange perplexity. * Mamma
never told me I had a father. Where does he live ? I'd
rather stay with uncle.'
'He lives a little distance from the Grange,'I replied ;
'just beyond those hills : not so far, but you may walk over
here when you get hearty. And you should be glad to go
home, and to see him. You must try to love him, as you did
your mother, and then he will love you.'
'But why have I not heard of him before ?'asked Linton.
'Why didn't mamma and he live together, as other people
do?'
1
WTJTHBEING HEIGHTS S13
* He had baedness to keep him in the north/ I answered,
'and your mother's health required her to reside in the
south.'
'And why didn't mamma speak to me about him ?'per-
severed the ohild. * She often talked of uncle, and I learnt
to love him long ago. How am I to love papa ? I don't
know him.'
'Oh, all children love their parents,'I said.'Your
mother, perhaps, thought you would want to be with him if
she mentioned him often to you. Let us make haste. An
early ride on such a beautiful morning is much preferable to
an hour's more sleep.'
'Is ^Ae to go with us,'he demanded ;'the little girl I saw
yesterday?'
'Not now,'replied I.
'Is uncle ?'he continued.
'No, I shall be your companion there,'I said.
Linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown
study.
'I won't go without uncle,'he cried at length :'I can't
tell where you mean to take me.'
I attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing
reluctance to meet his father ; still he obstinately resisted
any progress towards dressing, and I had to call for my
master's assistance in coaxing him out of bed. The poor
thing was finally got off, with several delusive assurances
that his absence should be short : that Mr. Edgar and Cathy
would visit him, and other promises, equally ill-founded,
which I invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the
way. The pure heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and
the gentle canter of Minny, relieved his despondency after a
whil6. He began to put questions concerning his new home,
and its inhabitants, with greater interest and liveliness.
'Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross
Grange ?'he inquired, turning to take a last glance into the
valley, whence a light mist mounted and formed a fleecy
cloud on the skirts of the blue.
aU WUTHERING HEIGHTS
'It is not 80 buried in trees/ I replied,'and it is not quite
80 large, but you can see the country beautifully all round ;
and the air is healthier for you — fresher and drier. You will,
perhaps, think the building old and dark at first ; though it
is a respectable house : the next best in the neighbourhood.
And you will have such nice rambles on the moors. Hareton
Eamshaw — that is, Miss Cathy's other cousin, and so yours
in a manner — ^will show you all the sweetest spots ; and you
can bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow
your study ; and, now and then, your uncle may join you in
a walk : he does, frequently, walk out on the hills.'
'And what is my father like?'heasked.'Isheasyoung
and handsome as unde ?'
* He's as young,'said I ;'but he has bdack hair and eyes,
and looks sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.
He'll not seem to you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps,
because it is not his way : still, mind you, be frank and
cordial with him ; and naturally he'll be fonder of you than
any uncle, for you are his own.'
* Black hair and eyes 1'mused Linton.'I can't fancy
him. Then I am not like him, am I ?'
'Not much,'I answered : not a morsel, I thought, survey-
ing with regret the white complexion and slim frame of my
companion, and his large languid eyes — his mother's eyes,
save that, unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a moment,
they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.
'How strange that he should never come to see mamma
and me 1'he murmured.'Has he ever seen me ? If he has,
I must have been a baby. I remember not a single thing
about him 1'
'Why, Master Linton,'said I,'three hundred miles is a
great distance ; and ten years seem very dififerent in length
to a grown-up person compared with what they do to you.
It is probable Mr. Heathcliff proposed going from summer to
summer, but never found a convenient opportunity ; and now
it is too late. Don't trouble him with questions on the sub-
ject : it will disturb him, for no good.'
)
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 316
The boy was folly occupied with his own oogitationB for
the remainder of the ride, till we halted before the f armhoiise
garden-gate. I watched to catch his impressions in his
countenance. He surveyed the carved front and low-browed
lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and crooked firs,
With solemn intentness, and then shook his head : his private
feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.
But he had sense to postpone complaining : there might be
compensation within. Before he dismounted, I went and
opened the door. It was half -past six ; the family had just
finished breakfast : the servant was clearing cmd wiping down
the table. Joseph stood by his master's chair telling some
tale concerning a lame horse ; and Hareton was preparing
for the hayfield.
'Hallo, Nelly 1'said Mr. Heathcliff, when he saw me.
'I feared I should have to come down and fetch my property
myself. You've brought it, have you? Let us see what we
can make of it.'
He got up and strode to the door : Hareton and Joseph
followed in gaping curiosity. Poor Linton ran a frightened
eye over the faces of the three.
* Sure-ly,'said Joseph after a grave inspection,'he's
swopped wi'ye, Maister, an'yen's his lass I'
Heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of confusion,
uttered a scornful laugh.
'Ood ! what a beauty ! what a lovely, charming thing I'
he exclaimed.'Hav'n't they reared it on snails and sour
milk, Nelly ? Oh, damn my soul I but that's worse than I
expected — and the devil knows I was not sanguine 1'
I bid the trembling and bewildered child get dovni, and
enter. He did not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of
bis father's speech, or whether it were intended for him :
indeed, he was not yet certain that the grim, sneering stranger
was his father. But he clung to me with growing trepi-
dation; and on Mr. Heathcliff's taking a seat and bidding
him'come hither'he hid his face on my shoulder and wept.
'Tut, tut I'said Heathcliff, stretching out a hand and
216 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
him roughly between his knees, and then holding
up his head by the chin.'None of that nonsense t We're
not going to hurt thee, Linton — ^isn't that thy name ? Thon
art thy mother's child, entirely 1 Where is my share in
thee, puling chicken ?'
He took off the boy's cap and pushed back his thick
flaxen curls, felt his dender arms and his small fingers;
during which examination Linton ceased crying, and lifted
his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.
'Do you know me ?'asked Heathcliff, having satisfied
himself tiiat the limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
'No,'said Linton, with a gaze of yacant fear.
'You've heard of me, I daresay ?'
'No/ he replied again.
'No t What a shame of your mother, never to waken
your filial regard for me 1 You are my son, then, I'll tell
you ; and your mother was a wicked slut to leave you in
ignorance of the sort of father you possessed. Now, don't
wince, and colour up ! Though it is some thing to see you
have not white blood. Be a good lad ; and I'll do for you.
Nelly, if you be tired you may sit down ; if not, get home
again. I guess you'll report what you hear and see to the
cipher at the Orange ; and this thing won't be settled while
you linger about it.'
* Well,'replied I,'I hope you'll be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliff, or you'll not keep him long ; and he's all you
have akin in the wide world, that you will ever know —
remember.'
'I'll be very kind to him, you needn't fear/ he said,
laughing.'Only nobody else must be kind to him : I'm
jealous of monopolising his affection. And, to begin my
kindness, Joseph, bring the lad some breakfast. Hareton,
you infernal calf, begone to your work. Yes, Nell,'he added,
when they had departed,'my son is prospective owner of
your place, and I should not wish him to die till I was
certain of being his successor. Besides, he's mdnef and I want
the triumph of seeing my descendant fairly lord of their
WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS 317
estates ; my ohild hiring their children to till their fathers'
lands for wages. That is the sole consideration which can
make me endure the whelp : I despise him for himself, and
hate him for the memories he revives ! But that considera-
tion is soflioient : he's as safe with me, and shall be tended
as carefully as your master tends his own. I have a room
up-stairs, furnished for him in handsome style ; I've engaged
a tutor, also, to come three times a week, from twenty miles'
distance, to teach him what he pleases to learn. I've
ordered Hareton to obey him : and in fact I've arranged
everything with a view to preserve the superior and the
genUeman in him, above his associates. I do regret,
however, that he so little deserves the trouble : if I wished
any blessing in the world, it was to find him a worthy
object of pride ; and I'm bitterly disappointed with the whey-
faced, whining wretch 1'
While he was speaking, Joseph returned bearing a basin
of milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton : who stirred
round the homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed
he could not eat it. I saw the old man-servant shared
largely in his master's scorn of the child ; though he was
compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart, because
Heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in
honour.
'Cannot ate it ?'repeated he, peering in Linton's face,
and subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear of being over-
heard.'But Maister Hareton nivir ate naught else, when
he wer a little'un ; and what wer gooid eneugh for him's
gooid eneugh for ye, I's rayther think I'
'I sha'n't eat it !'answered Linton, snappishly.'Take it
away.'
Joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it
tons.
'Is there aught ails th'victuals ?'he asked, thrusting the
tray under HeathdifTs nose.
'What should ail them ?'he said.
'Wah !'answered Joseph,'yon dainty chap says he
218 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
cannnt ate'em. But I guess it's roight I His mother wer
just soa — ^we wer a'most too mucky to sow t'com for
makfcing her breead.'
'Don't mention his mother to me,'said the master,
angrily.'Get him something that he oan eat, that's all.
What is his usual food, Nelly ?'
I suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper
reoeiyed instructions to prepare some. Gome, I reflected,
his lather's selfishness may contribute to his comfort. He
perceives his delicate constitution, and the necessity of
treating him tolerably. I'll console Mr. Edgar by ac-
quainting him with the turn HeathclifTs humour has taken.
Having no excuse for lingering longer, I slipped out, while
Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a
friendly sheep-dog. But he was too much on the alert to
be cheated : as Idosed the door, I heard a cry, and a frantic
repetition of the words —
'Don't leave mel I'll not stay here! I'll not stay
herel'
Then the latch was raised and fell : they did not suffer
him to come forth. I mounted Minny, and urged her to a
trot ; and so my brief guardianship ended*
CHAPTEE XXI
Wb had sad work with little Cathy that day : she rose in
high glee, eager to join her coasin, and such passionate tears
and lamentations followed the news of his departure that
Edgar himself was obliged to soothe her, by aflSrming he
should oome back soon : he added, however,'if I can get
him'; and there were no hopes of that This promise
poorly pacified her ; but time was more potent ; and though
still at intervals she inquired of her father when Linton
would return, before she did see him again his features
had waxed so dim in her memory that she did not recognise
him.
When I chanced to enooonter the housekeeper of
Wuthering Heights, in paying business visits to Oimmerton,
I used to ask how the young master got on ; for he lived
almost as secluded as Catherine herself, and was never to be
seen. I could gather from her that he continued in weak
health, and was a tiresome inmate. She said Mr. Heath-
cliff seemed to dislike him ever longer and worse, though he
took some trouble to conceal it : he had an antipathy to the
sound of his voice, and could not do at all with his sitting
in the same room with him many minutes together. There
seldom passed much talk between them : Linton learnt his
lessons and spent his evenings in a small apartment they
called the parlour : or else lay in bed all day : for he was
constantly getting coughs, an^ colds, and aches, and pains of
some sort.
'And I never knew such a faint-hearted creature,'added
the woman ;'nor one so careful of hisseln. He wiU go on,
Sao WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
if I leave the window open a bit late in the evening. Oh I
it's killing, a breath of night air 1 And he must have a fire
in the middle of summer ; and Joseph's bacca-pipe is poison ;
and he must always have sweets and dainties, and always
milk, milk for ever — heeding nanght how the rest of us are
pinched in winter ; and there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred
cloak in his chair by the fire, with some toast and water or
other slop on the hob to sip at ; and if Hareton, for pity,
comes to amuse him — Hareton is not bad-natured, though
he's rough — ^they're sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. I believe the master would relish Eamshaw'a
thrashing him to a mummy, if he were not his son ; and I'm
certain he would be fit to turn him out of doors, if he knew
half the nursing he gives hisseln. But then he won't go into
danger of temptation: he never enters the parlour, and
should Linton show those ways in the house where he is, he
sends him up-stairs directly.'
I divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy
had rendered young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if be
were not so originally; and my interest in him, conse-
quently, decayed : though still I was moved with a sense of
grief at his lot, cmd a wish that he had been left with us.
Mr. Edgar encouraged me to gain information : he thought
a great deal about him, I fancy, and would have run some
risk to see him ; and he told me once to ask the housekeeper
whether he ever came into the village ? She said he had
only been twice, on horseback, accompanying his father;
and both times he pretended to be quite knocked up
for three or four days afterwards. That housekeeper
left, if I recollect rightly, two years after he came ; and an-
other, whom I did not know, was her successor ; she lives
there still.
Time wore on at the Orange in its former pleasant way
till Miss Cathy reached sixteen. On the anniversary of her
birth we never manifested any signs of rejoicing, because it
was also the anniversary of my late mistress's death. Her
father invariably spent that day alone in the library ; and
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 231
walked, at dusk, as far as Gimmerton kirkyard, where he
would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight. There-
fore Catherine was thrown on her own resources for amuse-
ment. This twentieth of March was a beautiful sprmg day,
and when her father had retired, my young lady came down
dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a ramble
on the edge of the moor with me : Mr. Linton had given her
leave, if we went only a short distance and were back within
the hour.
'So make haste, Ellen !'she cried.'I know where I
wish to go; where a colony of moor-game are settled: I
want to see whether they have made their nests yet.'
'That must be a good distance up,'I answered ;'they
don't breed on the edge of the moor.'
'No, it's not,'she said.'I've gone very near with
papa.'
I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more
of the matter. She bounded before me, and returned to my
side, and was ofif again like a young greyhound ; and, at first,
I found plenty of entertainment in listening to the larks
singing far and near, and enjoying the sweet, warm sun-
shine ; and watching her, my pet and my delight, with her
golden ringlets flying loose behind, and her bright cheek, as
soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose, and her eyes
radiant with cloudless pleasure. She was a happy creature,
and an angel, in those days. It's a pity she could not be
content.
'Well,'said I,'where are your moor-gtime, Miss Cathy ?
We should be at them : the Grange park-fence is a great way
off now.'
'Oh, a little further — only a little further, Ellen,'was her
answer, continually.'CHmb to that hillock, pass that bank,
and by the time you reach the other side I shall have raised
the birds.'
But there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and
pass, that, at length, I began to be weary, and told her we
must halt, and retrace our steps. I shouted to her, as she
322 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
had ontBtripped me ft long way ; fthe either did not hear or
did not regard, for she still sprang on, and I was compelled to
follow. Finally, she dived into a hollow ; and before I came
in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer Wuthering
Heights than her own home ; and I beheld a couple of persons
arrest her, one of whom I felt convinced was Mr. Heathdiflf
himself.
Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or,
at least, hunting out the nests of the grouse. The
Heights were HeathdifTs land, and he was reproving the
poacher.
'I've neither taken any nor found any,'she said, as
I toiled to them, expanding her hands in corroboration of
the statement.'I didn't mean to take them ; but papa told
me there were quantities up here, and I wished to see the
eggs.'
Heathdiff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile,
expressing his acquaintance with the party, and, conse-
quently, his malevolence towards it, and demanded who
'papa'was?
'Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Orange,'she replied.'I
thought you did not know me, or you wouldn't have spoken
in that way.'
'You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected,
then ?'he said, sarccbstically.
'And what are you ?'inquired Catherine, gazing curi-
ously on the speaker.'That man I've seen before. Is he
your son ?'
She pointed to Hareton, the other individual, who had
gained nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addi-
tion of two years to his age : he seemed as awkward and
rough as ever.
'Miss Cathy,'I interrupted,'it will be three hours in-
stead of one that we are out, presently. We really must go
back.'
'No, that man is not my son,'answered Heathcliff, push-
ing me aside.'But I have one, and you have seen him
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 223
before too ; and, though your nurse is in a hurry, I think
both yoQ and she would be the better for a little rest.
Will you just torn this nab of heath, and walk into my
honse ? You'll get home earlier for the ease ; and you shall
receive a kind welcome.'
I whispered Catherine that she mustn't, on any
account, accede to the proposal : it was entirely out of the
question.
'Why?'she asked, aloud.'I'm tired of running, and
the ground is dewy: I can't sit here. Let us go, Ellen.
Besides, he says I have seen his son. He's mistaken,
I think ; but I guess where he lives : at the farmhouse I
visited in coming from Penistone Crags. Don't you ?'
'I do. Come, Nelly, hold your tongue — ^it will be a treat
for her to look in on us. Hareton, get forwards with the lass.
You shall walk with me, Nelly.'
'No, she's not going to any such place,'I cried, struggling
to release my arm, which he had seized: but she was
almost at the door-stones already, scampering round the
brow at full speed. Her appointed companion did not
pretend to escort her: he shied ofif by the road-side, and
vanished.
'Mr. Heathcliff, it's very wrong,'I continued :'you know
you mean no good. And there she'll see Linton, and all will
be told as soon as ever we return; and I shall have the
blame.'
'I want her to see Linton,'he answered ;'he's looking
better these few days; it's not often he's fit to be seen.
And we'll soon persuade her to keep the visit secret : where
is the harm of it ?'
'The harm of it is, that her father would hate me if he
found I suffered her to enter your house; and I am con-
vinced ypu have a bad design in encouraging her to do so,'I
replied.
'My design is as honest as possible. I'll inform you of
its whole scope,'he said.'That the two cousins may fall in
love, and get married. I'm acting generously to your
234 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
master : hie yoong chit has no expectations, and should she
second my wishes she'll be provided for at once as joinv
successor with linton.'
* If Linton died/ I answered,'and his life is qnite nn-
certain, Catherine would be the heir.'
'No, she would not/ he said.'There is no clause in the
will to secure it so : his property would go to me ; but, to
prevent disputes, I desire their union, and am resolved to
bring it about.'
'And I'm resolved she shall never approach your house
with me again,'I returned, as we reached the gate, where
Miss Cathy waited our coming.
Heatholifif bade me be quiet ; and, preceding us up the
path, hastened to open the door. My young lady gave him
several looks, as if she could not exactly make up her mind
what to think of him ; but now he smiled when he met her
eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and I was
foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might
disarm him from desiring her injury. Linton stood on the
hearth. He had been out walking in the fields, for his cap
was on, and he was calling to Joseph to bring him dry shoes.
He had grown tall of his age, still wanting some months of
sixteen. His features were pretty yet, and his eye and com-
plexion brighter than I remembered them, though with
merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air
and genial sun.
'Now, who is that?'asked Mr. Heathcliff, turning to
Cathy.'Can you tell ?'
'Your son ?'she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first
one and then the other.
'Yes, yes,'answered he :'but is this the only time you
have beheld him ? Think I Ah i you have a short memory.
Linton, don't you recall your cousin, that you used to tease
us so with wishing to see ?'
* What, Linton !'cried Cathy, kindling into joyful sur-
prise at the name.'Is that little Linton ? He's taller than
I am ! Are you Linton ?'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 225
The youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself :
she kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wonder at
the change time had wrought in the appearance of each
Catherine had reached her full height ; her figure was both
plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole aspect
sparkling with health and spirits. Linton's looks and move-
ments were very languid, and his form extremely slight ;
but there was a grace in his manner that mitigated these
defects, and rendered him not unpleasing. After exchanging
numerous marks of fondness with him, his cousin went to
Mr. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his atten-
tion between the objects inside and those that lay without :
pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting
the former alone.
'And you are my uncle, then !'she cried, reaching up to
salute him.'I thought I liked you, though you were cross
at first. Why don't you visit at the Orange with linton ?
To live all these years such close neighbours, and never see
us, is odd : what have you done so f or ?'
* I visited it once or twice too often before you were bom,'
he answered.'There — damn it ! If you have any kisses to
spare, give them to Linton : they are thrown away on me.'
'Naughty Ellen 1'exclaimed Catherine, flying to attack
me next with her lavish caresses.'Wicked Ellen ! to
try to hinder me from entering. But I'll take this walk
every morning in future: may I, uncle? and sometimes
bring papa. Won't you be glad to see us ?'
'Of course,'rephed the uncle, with a hardly suppressed
grimace, resulting from his deep aversion to both the pro-
posed visitors. * But stay,'he continued, turning towards
the young lady.'Now I think of it, I'd better tell you.
Mr. Linton has a prejudice against me : we quarrelled at one
time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if you
mention coming here to him, he'll put a veto on your visits
altogether. Therefore, you must not mention it, unless you
be careless of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may
come, if you will, but you must not mention it'
226 WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS
'Why did you quarrel ?'asked Catherine, oonsiderably
crestfallen.
'He thought me too poor to wed his sister/ answered
Heathdifif,'and was grieved that I got her : his pride was
hurt, and he'll never forgive it.*
'That's wrong !'said the young lady :'some time I'll
tell him so. But linton and I have no share in your
quarrel. I'll not come here, then ; he shall come to the
Orange.'
'It will be too far for me/ murmured her cousin :'to
walk four miles would kill me. No, come here. Miss
Catherine, now and then : not every morning, but once or
twice a week.'
The father launched towards his son a glance of bitter
contempt.
'I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour,'he muttered
to me.'Miss Catherine, as the ninny calls her, will dis-
cover his value, and send him to the devil. Now, if it had
been Hareton ! — Do you know that, twenty times a day, I
covet Hareton, with all his degradation? I'd have loved
the lad had he been some one else. But I think he's safe
from her love. I'll pit him against that paltry creature,
unless it bestir itself briskly. We calculate it will scarcely
last till it is eighteen. Oh, confound the vapid thing!
He's absorbed in drying his feet, and never looks at her. —
Linton 1'
'Yes, father,'answered the boy.
'Have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about,
not even a rabbit or a weasel's nest ? Take her into the
garden, before you change your shoes ; and into the stable
to see your horse.'
'Wouldn't you rather sit here ?'asked Linton, address-
ing Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctance to move
again.
'I don't know,'she replied, casting a longing look to the
door, and evidently eager to be active.
He kept hys seat, and shrank closer to the fire. Heath-
WXITHEEING HEIGHTS 227
oliff rose, and went into the kitchen, and from thence to the
yard, calling out for Hareton. Hareton responded, and
presently the two re-entered. The yoong man had been
washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
and his wetted hair.
'Oh, I'll ask you, uncle,* cried Miss Cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion.'That is not my cousin, is he ?'
'Yes,'he replied,'your mother's nephew. Don't you
like him I'
Catherine looked queer.
'Is he not a handsome lad ?'he continued.
The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, cmd whispered
a sentence in Heathcliff's ear. He laughed; Hareton
darkened : I perceived he was very sensitive to suspected
slights, and had obviously a dim notion of his inferiority.
But his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming —
'You'll be the favourite among us, Hareton I She says
you are a — What was it? Well, something very flattering.
Here ! you go with her round the farm. And behave like
a gentleman, mind ! Don't use any bad words ; and don't
stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be
ready to hide your face when she is ; and, when you speak,
say your words slowly, and keep your hands out of your
pockets. Be off, and entertain her as nicely as you can.'
He watched the couple walking past the window.
Eamshaw had his countenance completely averted from his
companion. He seemed studying the familiar landscape
with a stranger's and an artist's interest. Catherine took a
sly look at him, expressing small admiration. She then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for
herself, and tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the
lack of conversation.
'I've tied his tongue,'observed Heathcliff.'He'll not
venture a single syllable all the time 1 Nelly, you recollect
me at his age — ^nay, some years younger. Did I ever look
BO stupid : so " gaumless, " as Joseph calls it ?'
'Worse/ I replied,'because more sullen with it.'
338 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS
'IVe a pleasure in him/ he oontinaed, reflecting aloud.
'He has satisfied my expectations. If he were a bom fool I
should not enjoy it half so much. But he's no fool ; and I
con sympathise with all his feelings, having felt them myself.
I know what he suffers now, for instance, exactly: it is
merely a beginning of what he shall suffer, though. And
he'll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness
and ignorance. I've got him faster than his scoundrel of a
father secured me, and lower ; for he takes a pride in his
brutishness. I've taught him to scorn everything extra-
animal as silly and weak. Don't you think Hindley would
be proud of his son, if he could see him ? almost as proud as
I am of mine. But there's this difference ; one is gold put
to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to
ape a service of silver. Mine has nothing valuable about it ;
yet I shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor
stuff can go. His had first-rate qualities, and they are lost :
rendered worse than unavailing. I have nothing to regret ;
he would have more than any but I are aware of. And the
best of it is, Hareton is damnably fond of me 1 You'll own
that I've outmatched Hindley there. If the dead villain
could rise from his grave to abuse me for his offspring's
wrongs, I should have the fun of seeing the said offspring
fight him back again, indignant that he should dare to rail
at the one friend he has in the world 1'
Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea. I made
no reply, because I saw that he expected none. Meantime,
our young companion, who sat too removed from us to hear
what was said, began to evince symptoms of uneasiness,
probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat of
Catherine's society for fear of a little fatigue. His father
remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and
the hand irresolutely extended towards his cap.
'Get up, you idle boy 1'he exclaimed, with assumed
heartiness.
'Away after them 1 they are just at the comer, by the
stand of hives.'
WTJTHEEING HEIGHTS 229
Linton gathered his energies, and left ihe hearth. The
lattice was open, and, as he stepped out, I heard Cathy
inqtdiing of her nnsooiable attendant what was that inscrip-
tion over the door ? Hareton stared up, and scratched his
head like a tnie clown.
'It's some daionable writing/ he answered.'I cannot
read it.'
'Can't read it?'cried Catherine;'I can read it: it's
English. But I want to know why it is there.'
linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth he had
exhibited.
* He does not know his letters/ he said to his cousin.
'Could you believe in the existence of such a colossal
dunce?'
'Is he all as he should be ?'asked Miss Cathy, seriously ;
'or is he simple : not right ? I've questioned him twice now^
and each time he looked so stupid I think he does not
imderstand me. I can hardly understand him, I'm sure 1'
Linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at Hareton
tauntingly ; who certainly did not seem quite dear of com-
prehension at that moment
'There's nothing the matter but laziness; is there,
Eamshaw?'he said.'My cousin fancies you are an idiot.
There you experience the consequence of scorning " book-
Ic^ndng, " as you would say. Have you noticed, Catherine,
his frightful Yorkshire pronunciation ?'
* Why, where the devil is the use on't ? * growled Hareton,
more ready in answering his daily companion. He was
about to enlarge further, but the two youngsters broke into a
noisy fit of uierriment : my giddy miss being deUghted to
discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
amusement.
'Where is the use of the devil in that sentence ?'tittered
Linton.'Papa told you not to say any bad words, and you
can't open your moulJi without one. Do try to behave like
a gentleman, now do I'
'If thou weren't more a lass than a lad, I'd fell thee
280 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
this minute, I would ; pitiful lath of a crater 1'retorted the
angry boor, retreating, while his face burnt with mingled
rage and mortification! for he was conscious of being
insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.
Mr. Heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as
well as I, smiled when he saw him go ; but immediately
afterwards cast a look of singular aversion on the flippant
pair, who remained chattering in the door-way : the boy
finding animation enough whUe discussing Hareton's faults
and deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on ;
and the girl relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without
considering the ill-nature they evinced. I began to dislike,
more than to compassionate Linton, and to excuse his father
in some measure for holding him cheap.
We stayed till afternoon : I could not tear Miss Cathy away
sooner ; but happily my master had not quitted his apart-
ment, and remained ignorant of our prolonged absence. As
we walked home, I would fain have enlightened my charge
on the characters of the people we had quitted : but she got
it into her head that I was prejudiced against them.
* Aha 1'she cried,'you take papa's side, Ellen : you are
partial I know ; or else you wouldn't have cheated me so
many years into the notion that Linton lived a long way
from here. I'm really extremely angry ; only I'm so pleased
I can't show it 1 But you must hold your tongue about my
imde ; he's my uncle, remember ; and I'll scold papa for
quarrelling with him.'
And so she ran on, till I relinquished the endeavour to
convince her of her mistake. She did not mention the visit
that night, because she did not see Mr. Linton. Next day
it all cetme out, sadly to my chagrin ; and still I was not
altogether sorry: I thought the burden of directing and
warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me.
But he was too timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his
wish that she should shun connection with the household of
the Heights, and Catherine liked good reasons for every
restraint that harassed her petted will.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 231
'Papa !'she exclaimed, after the morning's salutationai
'goeas whom I saw yesterday, in my walk on the moor &
Ah, papa, yon started 1 you've not done right, have you,
now ? I saw — but listen, and you shall hear how I found
you out ; and Ellen, who is in league with you, and yet
pretended to pity me so, when I kept hoping, and was
always disappointed about Linton's coming back !'
She gave a faithful account of her excursion and its
consequences ; and my master, though he cast more than
one reproachful look at me, said nothing till she had con-
cluded. Then he drew her to him, and asked if she knew
why he had concealed Linton's near neighbourhood from
her ? Gould she think it was to deny her a pleasure that
she might harmlessly enjoy?
'It was because you disliked Mr. Heatholi£F/ she
answered.
* Then you believe I care more for my own feelings than
yours, Cathy?'he said.'No, it was not because I disliked -^
Mr. Heathcliff, but because Mr. Heathcliff dislikes me ; and
is a most diabolical man, delighting to wrong suid ruin those
he hates, if they give him the slightest opportunity. I knew
that you could not keep up an acquaintance ynih your
cousin without being brought into contact with him ; and I
knew he would detest you on my account ; so for your own
good, and nothing else, I took precautions that you should
not see Linton again. I meant to explain this some time as
you grew older, and I'm sorry I delayed it.*
'But Mr. Heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,'observed
Catherine, not at all convinced ;'and he didn't object to our
seeing each other : he said I might come to his house when
I pleased; only I must not tell you, because you hEbd
quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for marrying
aunt Isabella. And you won't. You are the one to be
blamed : he is willing to let ii« 1)6 friends, at least ; Linton
and I ; and you are not.'
My master, perceiving that she would not take his word
for her unole-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of
zo
1
/
283 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
his oonduct to Isabella, and the manner in which Wnthering
Heights became his property. He could not bear to disoonrse
long upon the topic ; for though he spoke little of it, he still
felt the same horror and detestation of his ancient enemy
that had occupied his heart ever since Mrs. Linton's death.
'She might have been living yet, if it had not been for him I'
was his constant bitter reflection ; and, in his eyes, Heath-
cliff seemed a murderer. Miss Cathy — conversant with no
bad deeds except her own slight acts of disobedience,
injustice, and passion, arising from hot temper and thought-
lessness, sjid repented of on the day they were committed —
/Was amazed at the blackness of spirit tiiat could brood on
and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its
plans without a visitation of remorse. She appeared so deeply
impressed and shocked at this new view of human nature —
excluded from all her studies and all her ideas till now — ^that
Mr. Edgar deemed it unnecessary to pursue the subject He
merely added :'You will know hereafter, darling, why I
wish you to avoid his house and family ; now return to your
old employments and amusements, and think no more about
them.'
Catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her
lessons for a couple of hours, according to custom ; then she
accompanied him into the grounds, and the whole day
passed as usual : but in the evening, when she had retired to
her room, and I went to help her to undress, I found her
crying, on her knees by the bedside.
'Oh, fie, silly child !'I exclaimed.'If you had any real
griefs you'd be ashamed to waste a tear on this little con-
trariety. You never had one shadow of substantial sorrow,
Miss Catherine. Suppose, for a minute, that master and I
were dead, and you were by yourself in the world : how
would you feel, then ? Compare the present occasion with
such an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you
have, instead of coveting more.'
'I'm not crying for myself, Ellen,'she answered,'it's for
him. He expected to see me again to-morrow, and there
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 388
he'll be so diBappointed : and he'll wait for me, and I sha'n't
oomel'
'Nonsense I'said I,'do you imagine he has thought as
much of you as yon have of him ? Hasn't he Hareton for a
companion ? Not one in a hundred would weep at losing a
relation they had just seen twice, for two afternoons.
Linton will conjectcure how it is, and trouble himself no
further about you.'
'But may I not write a note to tell him why I cannot
come ?'she asked, rising to her feet.'And just send those
books I promised to lend him ? His books are not as nice
as mine, and he wanted to have them extremely, when I told
him how interesting they were. May I not, EUen ?'
'No, indeed I no, indeed I'replied I with decision.'Then
he would write to you, and there'd never be an end of it.
No, Miss Catherine, the acquaintance must be dropped
entirely : so papa expects, and I shall see that it is done.'
'But how can one little note ?'she recommenced,
putting on an imploring countenance.
'Silence !'I interrupted.'We'll not begin with your
little notes. Get into bed.'
She threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that
I would not kiss her good-night at first : I covered her up,
and shut her door, in great displeasure; but, repenting
half-way, I returned softly, and lo I there was Miss standing
at the table with a bit of blank paper before her and a
pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight
on my entrance.
'You'll get nobody to take that, Catherine,'I said,'if you
write it ; and at present I shall put out your candle.'
I set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as I did so
a slap on my hand and a petulant'cross thing !'I then
quitted her again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst,
most peevish humours. The letter was finished and
forwarded to its destination by a milk-f etcher who came from
the village ; but that I didn't learn till some time afterwards.
Weeks passed on, and Cathy recovered her temper ; though
r
284 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
she grew wondrous fond of stealing off to comers by herself ;
and often, if I came near her suddenly while reading, she
would start and bend over the book, evidently desirous to
hide it; and I detected edges of loose paper sticking out
beyond the leaves. She also got a trick of coming down
early in the morning and Lingering about the kitchen, as if
Bhe were expecting the arival of something ; and she had a
small drawer in a cabinet in the library, which she would
trifle over for hours, and whose key she took special care to
remove when she left it.
One day, as she inspected this drawer, I observed that
the playthings and trinkets which recently formed its con-
tents were transmuted into bits of folded paper. My
curiosity and suspicions were roused ; I determined to take
a peep at her mysterious treasures ; so, at night, as soon as
she and my master were safe upstairs, I searched, and readily
found among my house keys one that would fit the lock.
Having opened, I emptied the whole contents into my apron,
and took them with me to examine at leisure in my own
chamber. Though I could not but suspect, I was still
surprised to discover that they were a mass of correspondence
-—daily almost, it must have been — ^from Linton Heathcliff :
answers to documents forwarded by her. The earlier dated
were embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they
expanded into copious love-letters, foolish, as the age of the
writer rendered natural, yet with touches here and there
which I thought were borrowed from a more experienced
source. Some of them struck me as singularly odd com-
pounds of ardour and flatness ; commencing in strong feeling,
and concluding in the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy
might use to a fancied, incorporeal sweetheart. Whether
they satisfied Cathy I don't know ; but they appeared very
worthless trash to me. After turning over as many as I
thought proper, I tied them in a handkerchief and set them
aside, relocking the vacant drawer.
Following her habit, my young lady descended early, and
visited the Utchen: I watched her go to the door, on the
..w^ ...^^G HEIGHTS ass
I
aimalof aeorteinliideboy; uid, while tbedairpittidfillei
his e & n, she tacked gftmAtliiwg into his jsfekei pockety and
phidkBd something oat. I ivent round Iqr the gulden, sad
bid wiit for the messenger; ivho fought Taloroosly to defend
his kost^ and we spilt the milk hetween ns ; bat I saooeeded
in sfastnctiiig the epistle; and, threatening serioos eon-
seqnfflioQs if he did not look sharp home, I remained under
the wall and perused Miss Cathy's affectionate composition.
It was more simple and more eloquent than her cousin's:
very pretty and yery silly. I shook my head, and went
meditating into the house. The day being wet, she could
not divert herself with rambling about the park ; so, at the
conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace
of the drawer. Her & ther sat reading at the table ; and I,
< m purpose, had sought a bit of workinsome unripped fringes
of the window-curtain, keefsng my eye steadily fixed on her
proceedings. Never did any bird flying back to a plundered
nest, which it had left brimful of chirping young ones, express
more complete despair, in its anguished cries and flutterings,
than she by her single'Oh I'and the change that transfigured
her late happy countenance. Mr. Linton looked up.
'What is the matter, love? Have you hurt yourself ?'he
said.
His tone and look assured her he had not been the dis*
ooverer of the hoard.
'No, papa I'she gasped.'Ellen I Ellen I come up-stairs
—I'm sick I'
I obeyed h^ summons, and accompanied h^ out.
'Oh, Ellen I you have got them,'she commenced
immediately, dropping on her knees, when we were enclosed
alone.'Oh, give them to me, and I'll never, never do so
again I Don't tell papa. You have not told papa, Ellen?
say you have not ? I've been exceedingly naughty, but I won't
do it any more I'
With a grave severity in my manner I bade her
stand up.
'So,'I exclaimed,'Miss Catherine, you are tolerably far on.
236 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
it seems : you may well be ashamed of them 1 A fine bundle
of trash you study in your leisure hours, to be sure : why, it's
good enough to be printed t And what do you suppose the
master will think when I display it before him? I hav'n't
shown it yet, but you needn't imagine I shall keep your
ridioulous secrets. For shame 1 and you must have led the
way in writing such absurdities : he would not have thought
of beginning, I'm certain.'
'I didn't ! I didn't 1'sobbed Cathy, fit to break her heart.
* I didn't once think of loving him till'
'Loving !'cried I, as scornfully as I could utter the
word.'Loving / Did anybody ever hear the like I I might
just as well talk of loving the miller who comes once a year
to buy our com. Pretty loving, indeed ! and both times
together you have seen Linton hardly four hours in your
life! Now here is the babyish trash. I'm going with it
to the library ; and we'll see what your father says to such
loving.*
She sprang at her precious epistles, but I held them above
my head ; and then she poured out further frantic entreaties
that I would bum them — do anything rather than show them
And being really fully as much inclined to laugh as scold —
for I esteemed it all girlish vanity — I at length relented in a
measure, and asked, — * If I consent to bum them, will you
promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again,
nor a book (for I perceive you have sent him books), nor locks
of hair, nor rings, nor playthings ?'
'We don't send playthings,'cried Catherine, her pride
overcoming her shame.
'Nor anything at all, then, my lady ?'I said.'Unless
you will, here I go.'
* I promise, Ellen 1'she cried, catching my dress.'Oh,
put them in the fire, do, do 1'
But when I proceeded to open a place with the poker the
sacrifice was too painful to be borne. She earnestly suppli-
cated that I would spare her one or two.
'One or two, Ellen, to keep for Linton's sake I'
1
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 237
I unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping
them in from an angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
'I will have one, you cruel wretch !'she screamed,
darting her hand into the fire, and drawing forth some half-
consumed fragments, at the expense of her fingers.
* Very well — and I will have some to exhibit to papa I'
I answered, shaking back the rest into the bundle, and
turning anew to the door.
She emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and
motioned me to finish the immolation. It was done; I
stirred up the ashes, and interred them under a shovelful of
coals ; and she mutely, and with a sense of intense injury,
retired to her private apartment. I descended to tell my
master that the young lady's qualm of sickness was almost
gone, but I judged it best for her to lie down a while. She
wouldn't dine ; but she reappeared at tea, pale, and red
about the eyes, and marvellously subdued in outward aspect.
Next morning I answered the letter by a slip of paper,
inscribed,'Master Heathcliff is requested to send no more
notes to Miss Linton, as she will not receive them.'And,
thenceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.
CHAPTEB XXII
SuMMBB drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past
Michaelmas, but the harvest was late that year, and a few of
our fields were still uncleared. Mr. Linton and his daughter
would frequently walk out among the reapers ; at the carrying
of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk, and the evening
happening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad
cold, that settled obstinately on his lungs, and confined him
indoors throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without
intermission.
Poor Gathy, frightened from her little romance, had been
oonsiderably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and
her father insisted on her reading less, and taking more
exercise. She had his companionship no longer ; I esteemed
it a duty to supply its lack, as much as possible, with mine :
an inefficient substitute ; for I could only spare two or three
hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow
her footsteps, and then my society was obviously less
desirable than his.
On an afternoon in October, or the beginning of
November — a fresh watery afternoon, when the turf and
paths were rustling with moist, withered leaves, and the cold
blue sky was half hidden by clouds — dark grey streamers,
rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant
rain — I requested my young lady to forego her ramble,
because I was certain of showers. She refused ; and I
unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my umbrella to
accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park: a
formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited —
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 989
and that she invariably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse
than ordinary, a thing never known from his oonfession, but
guessed both by her and me from his increased silence and
the melancholy of his countenance. She went sadly on:
there was no running or bounding now, though the chill
wind might well have tempted her to race. And often, from
the side of my eye, I could detect her raising a hand, and
brushing something off her cheek. I gazed round for a
means of diverting her thoughts. On one side of the road
rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks,
with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure : the soil
was too loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown
some nearly horizontal. In summer Miss Catherine de-
lighted to climb along these trunks, and sit in the branches,
swinging twenty feet above the ground ; and I, pleased with
her agility and her light, childish heart, still considered it
proper to scold every time I caught her at such an elevation,
but so that she knew there was no necessity for descending.
From dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle,
doing nothing except singing old songs — my nursery lore —
to herself, or watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and
entice their young ones to fly : or nestling with dosed lids,
half thinking, half dreaming, happier than words can express.
'Look, Miss I'I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the
roots of one twisted tree.'Winter is not here yet. There's
a little flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of
bluebells that clouded those turf steps in July with a lilac
mist. Will you clamber up, and pluck it to show to papa ?'
Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trembling
in its ecirthy shelter, and replied, at length —'No, I'll not
touch it : but it looks melancholy, does it not, Ellen ?'
'Yes,'I observed,'about as starved and suckless as you :
your cheeks are bloodless ; let us take hold of hands and
run. You're so low, I daresay I shall keep up with you.'
'No,'she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing
at intervals to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched
grass, or a fungus spreading its bright orange among the
340 WUTHEBma HEIGHTS
heaps of brown foliage ; and, ever and anon, her hand was
lifted to her averted face.
'Catherine, why are you crying, love?'I asked,
approaching and putting my arm over her shoulder.'You
mustn't cry because papa has a cold; be thankful it is
nothing worse.'
She now put no further restraint on her tears ; her breath
was stifled by sobs.
* Oh, it will be something worse,'she said.'And what
shall I do when papa and you leave me, and I am by myself ?
I can't forget your words, Ellen ; they are always in my ear.
How life will be changed, how dreary the world will be,
when papa and you are dead.'
'None can tell whether you won't die before us,'I
replied.'It's wrong to anticipate evil. We'll hope there
are years and years to come before any of us go : master is
young, and I am strong, and hardly forty-five. My mother
lived till eighty, a canty dame to the last. And suppose Mr.
Linton were spared till he saw sixty, that would be more
years than you have counted. Miss. And would it not be
foolish to mourn a calamity above twenty years beforehand ?'
'But Aunt Isabella was younger than papa,'she remarked,
gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation.
'Aunt Isabella had not you and me to nurse her,'I
replied.'She wasn't as happy as Master: she hadn't as
much to live for. All you need do, is to wait well on your
father, and cheer him by letting him see you cheerful ; and
avoid giving him anxiety on any subject: mind that,
Cathy 1 I'll not disguise but you might kill him if you were
wild and reckless, and cherished a foolish, fanciful afiEection
for the son of a person who would be glad to have him in
his grave ; and allowed him to discover that you fretted over
the separation he has judged it expedient to make.'
'I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness,'
answered my companion.'I care for nothing in comparison
with papa. And I'll never — ^never — oh, never, while I have
my senses, do an act or say a word to vex him. I love him
WDTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 241
better than myself, Ellen ; and I know it by this : I pray
every night that I may live after him; beoause I would
rather be miserable than that he shotdd be : that proves I
love him better than myself.'
'Good words/ I replied.'But deeds must prove it also ;
and after he is well, remember you don't forget resolutions
formed in the hour of fear.'
As we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road ;
and my young lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed
up and seated herself on the top of the wall, reaching over to
gather some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit
branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the highway side :
the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could touch
the upper, except from Cathy's present station. In stretching
to pull them, her hat fell off ; and as the door was locked,
she proposed scrambling down to recover it. I bid her be
cautious lest she got a fall, and she nimbly disappeared.
B)Lt the return was no such easy matter : the stones were
smooth and neatly cemented, and the rose-bushes and black-
berry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending*
I, like a fool, didn't recollect that, till I heard her laughing
and exclaiming —'Ellen ! you'll have to fetch the key, or else
I must run round to the porter's lodge. I can't scale the
ramparts on this side I'
'Stay where you are,'I answered ;'I have my bundle of
keys in my pocket : perhaps I may manage to open it ; if not,
ru go.'
Catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before
the door, while I tried all the large keys in succession. I had
applied the last, and found that none would do ; so, repeating
my desire that she would remain there, I was about to hurry
home as fast as I could, when an approaching sound
arrested me. It was the trot of a horse; Cathy's dance
stopped also.
* Who is that ?'I whispered.
'Ellen, 1 wish you could open the door,'whispered back
my companion, anxiously.
242 WUTHBMNG HEIGHTS
'Ho, Miss Linton !'oried a deep yoioe (the rider's),'I'm
glad to meet yon. Don't be in haste to enter, for I have an
explanation to ask and obtain.'
'I sha'n't speak to you, Mr. Heatholiff/ answered
Catherine.'Papa says you are a wicked man, and you
hate both him and me ; and Ellen says the same.'
'That is nothing to the purpose,'said HeatholiflF. (He
it was.)'I don't hate my son, I suppose; and it is
concerning him that I demand your attention. Yes; you
have cause to blush. Two or three months since, were you
not in the habit of writing to Linton? making love in play,
eh? You deserved, both of you, flogging for that! You
especially, the elder ; and less sensitive, as it turns out. I've
got your letters, and if you give me any pertness I'll send
them to your father. I presume you grew weary of the
amusement and dropped it, didn't you ? Well, you dropped
Linton with it into a Slough of Despond. He was in
earnest: in love, really. As true as I live, he's dying for
you ; breaking his heaoii at your fickleness : not figuratively,
but actually. Though Hareton has made him a standing
jest for six weeks, and I have used more serious measures,
and attempted to frighten him out of his idiotcy, he gets
worse daily ; and he'll be imder the sod before summer,
unless you restore him f'
'How can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?'I
called from the inside.'Pray ride on I How can you
deliberately get up such paltry falsehoods ? Miss Cathy, I'll
knock the lock off with a stone : you won't believe that vile
nonsense. You can feel in yourself it is impossible that a
person should die for love of a stranger.'
'I was not aware there were eavesdroppers,'muttered
the detected villain.'Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you, but I
don't like your double-dealing,'he added aloud.'How
could you lie so glaringly as to affirm I hated the " poor child " ?
and invent bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-
stones ? Catherine Linton (the very name warms me), my
bonny lass, I shall be from home all this week ; go and see
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS 24S
if I have not spoken truth : do, there's a darling 1 Jnst
imagine your father in my place, and Linton in yours ; then
think how you would value your careless lover if he refused
to stir a step to comfort you, when your father himself
entreated him ; and don't, from pure stupidity, fall into the
same error. I swear, on my salvation, he's going to his
grave, and none hut you can save him I'
The lock gave way and I issued out.
'I swear Linton is dying,'repeated Heathdiff, looking
hard at me.'And grief and disappointment are hastening
his death. Nelly, if you won't let her go, you can walk over
yourself. But I shall not return till this time next week ;
and I think your master himself would scarcely object to her
visiting her cousin.'
'Gome in,'said I, taking Cathy by the arm and half
forcing her to re-enter ; for she lingered, viewing with
troubled eyes the features of the speaker, too stem to express
his inward deceit.
He pushed his horse dose, and, bending down, observed —
* Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have little patience
with Linton ; and Hareton and Joseph have less. I'll own
that he's with a harsh set. He pines for kindness, as well as
love ; and a kind word from you would be his best medicine.
Don't mind Mrs. Dean's cruel cautions ; but be generous,
and contrive to see him. He dreams of you day and night,
and cannot be persuaded that you don't hate him, since you
neither write nor call.'
I closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened
lock in holding it ; and spreading my umbrella, I drew my
charge underneath : for the rain began to drive through the
moaning branches of the trees, and warned us to avoid delay.
Our hurry prevented any comment on the encounter with
Heathcliff, as we stretched towards home ; but I divined
instinctively that Catherine's heart was clouded now in
double darkness. Her features were so sad, they did not
seem hers : Ae evidently regarded what she had heard as
every syllable true.
2a WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
The master had retdred to rest before we came m. Cathy
stole to his room to mquire how he was ; he had fallen asleep.
She retamed, and asked me to sit with her in the library.
We took our tea together; and afterwards she lay down on
the rag, and told me not to talk, for she was weary. I got a
book, and pretended to read. As soon as she supposed me
absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent
weeping : it appeared, at present, her favourite diversion. I
suffered her to enjoy it a while ; then I expostulated :
deriding and ridiculing all Mr. Heathcliff's assertions about
his son, as if I were certain she would coincide. Alas ! I
hadn't skill to counteract the effect his account had
produced : it was just what he intended.
'You may be right, Ellen,'she answered ;'but I shall
liever feel at ease till I know. And I must tell Linton it is
not my fault that I don't write, and convince him that I
shall not change.'
What use were anger and protestations against her silly
credulity? We parted that night — ^hostile; but next day
beheld me on the road to Wuthering Heights, by the side of
my wilful young mistress's pony. I couldn't bear to witness
her sorrow : to see her pale, dejected countenance, and heavy
eyes : and I yielded, in the faint hope that Linton himself
might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the tale
was founded on fact

CHAPTEE XXm
Thb rainy night had UBheied in a misty morning — half frost,
half drizzle — and temporary brooks crossed our path — ^gurgling
from the uplands. My feet were thoroughly wetted ; I was
cross and low; exactly the humour suited for making the
most of these disagreeable things. We entered the farm-
house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether Mr. Heath-
cliff were really absent : because I put slight faith in his own
afiBrmation.
Joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a
roaring fire ; a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling
rvith large pieces of toasted oai4f-cake ; and his black, short
pipe in his mouth. Catherine ran to the hearth to warm
herself. I asked if the master was in? My question
remained so long unanswered, that I thought the old man had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.
'Na — ay 1'he snarled, or rather screamed through his
nose.'Na — ay 1 yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough.'
'Joseph !'cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me,
from the inner room.'How often am I to call you ? There
are only a few red ashes now. Joseph ! come this moment.'
Vigorous pufEs, and a resolute stare into the grate,
declared he had no ear for this appeal. The housekeeper
and Hareton were invisible ; one gone on an errand, and the
other at his work, probably. We knew Idnton's tones, and
entered.
'Oh, I hope you'll die in a garret, starved to death I'said
the boy, mistaking our approach for that of his negligent
attendant.
246 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
He stopped on obserying his error : his oonsin flew to him.
'Is that you, Miss linton?'he said, raising his head
from thearm of the great chair, in whioh he redined.'No —
don't kiss me : it takes my breath. Dear me I Papa said
you would call,'continued he, after recovering a little from
Catherine's embrace; while she stood by looking very
contrite.'Will you shut the door, if you please ? you left it
open ; and those — those detestable creatures won't bring coals
to the fire. It's so cold !'
I stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself.
The invalid complained of being covered with ashes ; but he
had a tiresome cough, and looked feverish and iU, so I did
not rebuke his temper.
'Well, Linton,'murmured Catherine, when his corrugated
brow relaxed,'are you glad to see me? Can I do you any
good?'
'Why didn't you come before ?'he asked. * Tou should
have come, instead of writing. It tired me dreadfully
writing those long letters. I'd far rather have talked to you.
Now, I can neither bear to talk, nor anything else. I wonder
where Zillah is t Will you'(looking at me)'step into the
kitchen and see ?'
I had received no thanks for my other service ; and being
unwilling to run to and fro at his behest, I replied —
* Nobody is out there but Joseph.'
* 1 want to drink,'he exclaimed fretfuUy, turning away.
* Zillah is constantly gadding off to Gimmerton since papa
went : it's miserable ! And I'm obliged to come down here
— they resolved never to hear me up-stairs.'
'Is your father attentive to you, Master Heathcliff?'I
asked, perceiving Catherine to be checked in her friendly
advances.
'Attentive? He makes them a little more attentive at
least,'he cried.'The wretches I Do you know. Miss
Linton, that brute Hareton laughs at me ! I hate him I
indeed, I hate them all : they are odious beings.'
Cathy began searching for some water ; she lighted on a
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 247
pitcher in the dresser, filled a tumbler, and brooght it. He
bid her add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ;
and having swallowed a small portion, appeared more
tranquil, and said she was very kind.
'And are you glad to see me ?'asked she, reiterating her
former question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a
smile.
'Yes, I am. It's something new to hear a voice like
yours !'he replied.'But I have been vexed, because you
wouldn't come. And papa swore it was owing to me : he
called me a pitiful, shufSing, worthless thing ; and said you
despised me ; and if he had been in my place, he would be
more the master of the Grange than your father by this
time. But you don't despise me, do you. Miss ?'
'I wish you would say Catherine, or Cathy,'interrupted
my young lady.'Despise you ? No ! Next to papa and
Ellen, I love you better than anybody living. I don't love
Mr. Heathcliff, though; and I dare not come when he
returns : will he stay away many days ?'
'Not many,'answered Linton ;'but he goes on to the
moors frequently, since the shooting season commenced ; and
you might spend an hour or two with me in his absence. Do
say you will. I think I should not be peevish with you :
you'd not provoke me, and you'd always be ready to help me,
wouldn't you ?'
'Yes,'said Catherine, stroking his long soft hair ;'if I
could only get -papa's consent, I'd spend half my time with
you. Pretty Linton 1 I wish you were my brother.'
'And then you wotild like me as well as your father?'
observed he, more cheerfully.'But papa says you would
love me better than him and all the world, if you were my
wife ; so I'd rather you were that.'
'No, I should never love anybody better than papa,'she
returned gravely.'And people hate their wives, sometimes ;
but not their sisters and brothers : and if you were the latter,
you wotild live with us, and papa would be as fond of you as
he is of me.'
248 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
Linton denied that people ever hated their wives ; bat
Cathy affirmed they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his
own father's aversion to her aunt. I endeavoured to stop
her thoughtless tongae. I couldn't succeed till everything
she knew was out. Master Heathdiff, much irritated,
asserted her relation was false.
'Papa told me ; and papa does not tell falsehoods,'she
answered pertly.
'My papa scorns yours !'cried Idnton.'He calls him a
sneaking fool.'
'Yours is a wicked man,'retorted Catherine ;'and you
are very naughty to dare to repeat what he says.'He must
be wicked to have made Aunt Isabella leave him as she did.'
'She didn't leave him,'said the boy ;'you sha'n't contra-
dict me.'
'She did,'cried my young lady.
* Well, I'll tell you something I'said Linton.'Your
mother hated your father : now then.'
'Oh I'exclaimed Catherine, too enraged to continue.
'And she loved mine,'added he.
'You little liar ! I hate you now !'She panted, and her
face grew red with passion.
'She did t she did !'sang Linton, sinking into the recess
of his chair, and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation
of the other disputant, who stood behind.
'Hush, Master Heathcliff 1'I said ;'that's your father's
tale, too, I suppose.'
'It isn't : you hold your tongue 1'he answered. * She did,
she did, Catherine ! she did, she did !'
Cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and
caused him to fall against one arm. He was immediately
seized by a suffocating cough that soon ended his triumph.
It lasted so long that it frightened even me. As to his
cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the mischief
she had done : though she said nothing. I held him till the
fit exhausted itself. Then he thrust me away, and leant his
/lead -down silently. Catherine quelled her lamentations
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 249
ftlsOf took a seat opposite, and looked solemnly into the
fire.
'How do yon feel now, Master Heatholiff?'I inquired,
after waiting ten minutes.
'I wish she felt as I do/ he replied:'spiteful, cruel
thing 1 Hareton never touches me : he never struck me in
his life. And I was better to-day : and there'his voice
died in a whimper.
'I didn't strike you I'muttered Cathy, chewing her lip to
prevent another burst of emotion.
He sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and
kept it up for a quarter of an hour ; on purpose to distress
his cousin apparently, for whenever he caught a stifled sob
from her he put renewed pain and pathos into the inflexions
of his voice.
'I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton,'she said at length, racked
beyond endurance.'But I cotildn't have been hurt by that
little push, and I had no idea that you could, either : you're
not much, are you, Linton ? Don't let me go home thinking
I've done you harm. Answer ! speak to me.'
'I can't speak to you,'he murmured ;'you've hurt me so
that I shall lie awake all night choking with this cough. If
you had it you'd know what it was ; but you'll be comfort-
ably aleep while I'm in agony, and nobody near me. I
wonder how you would like to pass those fearful nights 1'
And he began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.
'Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,'I
said,'it won't be Miss who spoils your ease : you'd be the
same had she never come. However, she shall not disturb
you again ; and perhaps you'll get quieter when we leave
you.'
'Must I go ?'asked Catherine dolefully, bending dver
him.'Do you want me to go, Linton ?'
'You can't alter what you've done,'he replied pettishly,
shrinking from her,'unless you alter it for the worse by
teasing me into a fever.'
'Welly then, I must go ?'she repeated.
260 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
'Let me alone, at least/ said he ;'I can't bear your
talking.'
She lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a
tiresome while ; bnt as he neither looked up nor spoke, she
finally made a movement to the door, and I followed. We
were recalled by a scream. Linton had slid from his seat
on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing in the mere perverse-
nesB of an indulged plague of a child, determined to be as
grievous and harassing as it can. I thoroughly gauged his
disposition from his behaviour, and saw at once it would be
folly to attempt humouring him. Not so my companion :
she ran back in terror, knelt down, and cried, and soothed,
and entreated, till he grew quiet from lack of breath : by no
means from compunction at distressing her.
'I shall lift him on to the settle,'I said,'and he may
roll about as he pleases : we can't stop to watch him.
I hope you are satisfied. Miss Cathy, that you are not the
person to benefit him ; and that his condition of health is
not occasioned by attachment to you. Now, then, there he
is ! Gome away : as soon as he knows there is nobody by
to care for his nonsense, he'll be glad to lie still.'
She placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some
water ; he rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the
former, as if it were a stone or a block of wood. She tried
to put it more comfortably.
'I can't do with that,'he said ;'it's not high enough.'
Catherine brought another to lay above it.
* That's too high,'murmured the provoking thing.
'How must I arrange it, then ?'she asked despairingly.
He twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the
settle, and converted her shoulder into a support.
'No, that won't do,'I said.'You'll be content with the
cushion. Master Heathcliff. Miss has wasted too much time
on you already : we cannot remain five minutes longer.'
'Tes, yes, we can I'replied Cathy.'He's good and
patient now. He's beginning to think I shall have far greater
misery than he will to-night, if I believe he is the worse for
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 361
my visit : and then I dare not oome again* Tell the troth
abont it, Linton ; for I musn't oome, if I have hurt yoo.'
'Yon must oome, to oore me,'he answered.'You ought
to oome, beeause you have hurt me : you know you have ex-
tremely ! I was not as ill when you entered as I am at pre-
sent — ^was I ?'
'But you Ve made yourself ill by crying and being in a
passion. — I didn't do it all,'said his cousin.'However, we'll
be friends now. And you want me : you would wish to see
me sometimes, really ?'
'I told you I did,'he repUed impatiently. * Bit on the
settle and let me lean on your knee. That's as mamma used
to do, whole afternoons together. Sit quite still and don't
talk : but you may sing a song, if you can sing ; or you may
say a nice long interesting ballad — one of those you promised
to teach me ; or a story. I'd rather have a ballad, though :
begin.'
Catherine repeated the longest she could remember. The
employment pleased both mightily. Linton would have
another, and after that another, notwithstanding my strenuous
objections ; and so they went on until the clock struck twelve,
and we heard Hareton in the court, returning for his dinner.
* And to-morrow, Catherine, will you be here to-morrow ?'
asked young Heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose
reluctantly.
* No,'I answered, * nor next day neither.'She, however,
gave a different response evidently, for his forehead cleared
as she stooped and whispered in his ear.
'You won't go to-morrow, recollect. Miss !'I commenced,
when we were out of the house.'You are not dreaming of
it, are you ?'
She smiled.
'Oh, I'll take good care,'I continued :'I'll have that
lock mended, and you can escape by no way else.'
'I can get over the wall,'she said laughing.'The
Grange is not a prison, Ellen, and you are not my gaoler.
And besides, I'm almost seventeen : I'm a woman. And
262 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
I'm oextain Linton would leoover qtdokly if he had me to
look after him. I'm older than he is, you know, and wiser :
less childish, am I not? And he'll soon do as I direct him,
with some slight coaxing. He's a pretty Uttle darling when
he's good. I'd make such a pet of him, if he were mine. We
should, never quarrel, should we after we were used to each
other ? Don't you like hun, BUen ?'
'like him 1'I exclaimed.'The worst-tempered bit of a
sickly slip that ever struggled into its teens. Happily, as
Mr. Heathcliff conjectured, he'll not win twenty. I doubt
whether he'U see spring, indeed. And small loss to his
family whenever he drops off. And lucky it is for us that
his father took him : the kinder he was treated, the more
tedious and selfish he'd be. I'm glad you have no chance of
having him for a husband. Miss Catherine.'
My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech.
To speak of his death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.
'He's younger than I,'she answered, after a protracted
pause of meditation,'and he ought to live the longest : he
wiU — ^he must live as long as I do. He's as strong now as
when he first came into the north ; I'm positive of that.
It's only a cold that ails him, the same as papa has. You
say papa will get better, and why shouldn't he ?'
'Well, well,'I cried,'after all, we needn't trouble our-
selves ; for listen. Miss, — and mind, I'll keep my word, — ^if
you attempt going to Wuthering Heights again, with or
without me, I shall inform Mr. Linton, and, unless he allow
it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be revived.'
'It has been revived,'muttered Cathy, sulkily.
'Must not be continued, then,'I said.
'We'U see,'was her reply, and she set off at a gallop,
leaving me to toil in the rear.
We both reached home before our dinner-time; my
rnaster supposed we had been wandering through the park,
pmd therefore he demanded no explanation of our absence.
As soon as I entered I hastened to change my soaked shoes
and stockings ; but sitting such a while at the Heights had
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS SSS
done the mischief. On the suooeeding morning I was laid
up, and during three weeks I remained incapacitated for
attending to my duties : a calamity never experienced prior
to that period, and never, I am thankful to say, since.
My little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to
wait on me, and cheer my solitude ; the confinement brought
me exceedingly low. It is wearisome, to a stirring active
body : but few have slighter reasons for complaint than I
had. The moment Catherine left Mr. linton's room she
appeared at my bedside. Her day was divided between us ;
no amusement usurped a minute : she neglected her meals,
her studies, and her play ; and she was the fondest nurse
that ever watched. She must have had a warm heart, when
she loved her father so, to give so much to me. I said her
days were divided between us ; but the master retired early,
and I generally needed nothing after six o'clock, thus the
evening was her own. Poor thing I I never considered
what she did with herself after tea. And though frequently,
when she looked in to bid me good-night, I remarked a fresh
colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender fingers,
instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride
across the moors, I laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the
library.
CHAPTEB XXIV
At the dose of thzee weeks I was able to quit my chamber
and move about the house. And on the first oocasion of my
sitting up in the evening I asked Catherine to read to me»
because my eyes were weak. We were in the library, the
master having gone to bed : she consented, rather unwillingly,
I fancied ; and imagining my sort of books did not suit her,
I bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
She selected one of her own favourites, and got forward
steadily about an hour ; then came frequent questions.
'EUen, are not you tired ? Hadn't you better lie down
now? You'll be sick, keeping up so long, Ellen.'
'No, no, dear, I'm not tired,'I returned, continually.
Perceiving me immovable, she essayed another method of
showing her disrelish for her occupation. It changed to
yawning, and stretching, and —
, • Ellen, I'm tired.'
'Give over then and talk,'I answered.
That was worse : she fretted and sighed, and looked at
her watch till eight, and finally went to her room, com-
pletely overdone with sleep ; judging by her peevish, heavy
look, and the constant rubbing she inflicted on her eyes.
The following night she seemed more impatient still ; and on
the third from recovering my company she complained of a
headache, and left me. I thought her conduct odd ; and
having remained alone a long while, I resolved on going and
inquiring whether she were better, and asking her to come
and he on the sofa, instead of up-stairs in the dark. No
Catherine could I discover up-stairs, and none below. The
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 366
servuits affirmed they had not seen her. I listened at
Mr. Edgar's door; all was silence. I returned to her
apartment, extinguished my candle, and seated myself in the
window.
The moon shone bright ; a sprinkling of snow covered
the ground, and I reflected that she might, possibly, have
taken it into her head to walk about the garden, for refresh-
ment. I did detect a figure creeping along the inner fence
of the park ; but it was not my young mistress : on its
emerging into the light, I recognised one of the grooms. He
stood a considerable period, viewing the carriage-road
through the grounds ; then started off at a brisk pace, as if
he had detected something, and reappeared presently, lead-
ing Miss's pony ; and there she was, just dismounted, and
walking by its side. The man took his charge stealthily
across the grass towards the stable. Cathy entered by the
casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noise-
lessly up to where I awaited her. She put the door gently
too, slipped off her snowy shoes, untied her hat, and was
proceeding, unconscious of my espionage, to lay aside her
mantle, when I suddenly rose and revealed myself. The
surprise petrified her an instant : she uttered an inarticulate
exclamation, and stood fixed.
'My dear Miss Catherine,'I began, too vividly impressed
by her recent kindness to break into a scold,'wheie have
you been riding out at this hour? And why should you try
to deceive me by telling a tale? Where have you been?
Speakl'
'To the bottom of the park,'she stammered.'I didn't
tell a tale.'
'And nowhere else ?'I demanded.
'No,'was the muttered reply.
'Oh, Catherine t'I cried, sorrowfully.'You know
you have been doing wrong, or you wouldn't be driven to
uttering an untruth to me. That does grieve me. I'd
rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a deliberate
lie.'
366 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
She sprang forward, and burBting into tears, threw her
arms nnind my neok.
'Well, Ellen, I'm so afraid of yon being angry,'she said.
'Promise not to be angry, and you shall know the very trath :
I hate to hide it.'
We sat down in the window-seat ; I assured her I wonld
not soold, whatever her secret might be, and I guessed it, of
course ; so she commenced —
'I've been to Wuthering Heights, Ellen, and I've never
missed going a day since you fell ill ; except thrice before,
and twice after you left your room. I gave Michael books
and pictures to prepare Minny every evening, and to put
her back in the stable : you mustn't scold him either, mind.
I was at the Heights by half ^past six, and generally stayed
till half -past eight, and then galloped home. It was not to
amuse myself that I went : I was often wretched all the
time. Now and then I was happy : once in a week perhaps.
At first, I expected there would be sad work persuading you
to let me keep my word to Linton : for I had engaged to call
again next day, when we quitted him ; but, as you stayed up-
stairs on the morrow, I escaped that trouble. While
Michael was ref astening the lock of the park door in the
afternoon, I got possession of the key, and told him how my
cousin wished me to visit him, because he was sick, and
couldn't come to the Grange ; and how papa wotild object to
my going : and then I negotiated with him about the pony.
He is fond of reading, and he thinks of leaving soon to get
married ; so he ofiEered, if I would lend him books out of the
library, to do what I wished : but I preferred giving him my
own, and that satisfied him better.
'On my second visit Linton seemed in lively spirits ;
and Zillah (that is their housekeeper) made us a clean room
and a good fire, and told us that, as Joseph was out at a
prayer-meeting and Hareton Eamshaw was o£f with his
dogs — ^robbing our woods of pheasants, as I heard after-
wards — ^we might do what we liked. She brought me some
warm wine and gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 267
natured ; and Linton sat in the ann*ohair, and I in the little
rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and talked
so merrily, and found so much to say : we planned where we
would go, and what we would do in summer. I needn't
repeat that, because you would call it silly.
'One time, however, we were near quarrelling. He said
the pleasantest manner of spending a hot July day was lying
from morning till evening on a bank of heath in the middle
of the moors, with the bees humming dreamily about among
the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead, and the
blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly.
That was his most perfect idea of heaven's happiness : mine
was rocking in a rustling green tree, with a west wind
blowing, and bright white clouds flitting rapidly above ; and
not only larks, but throstles, and blackbirds, and linnets, and
cuckoos pouring out music on every side, and the moors
seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky dells ; but close
by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the
breeze; and woods and sounding water, and the whole
world awake and wild with joy. He wanted all to lie in an
ecstasy of peace; I wanted sJl to sparkle and dance in a
glorious jubilee. I said his heaven would be only half alive ;
and he said mine would be drunk: I said I should fall
asleep in his ; and he said he could not breathe in mine, and
began to grow very snappish. At last, we agreed to try
both, as soon as the right weather came ; and then we kissed
each other and were friends.
'After sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room
with its smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it
would be to play in, if we removed the table ; and I asked
Linton to call Zillah in to help us, and we'd have a game at
blindman's-buff ; she should try to catch us : you used to, you
know, Ellen. He wouldn't : there was no pleasure in it, he
said ; but he consented to play at ball with me. We found
two in a cupboard, among a heap of old toys, tops, and
hoops, and battledores and shuttlecocks. One was marked
C, and the other H. ; I wished to have the C, because that
268 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
stood for Gaiiheriiie, and the H. might be for Heathcliff, his
name ; but the bran came out of H., and Linton didn't like
it. I beat him constantly : and he got cross again, and
coughed, and returned to his chair. That night, though, he
easily recovered his good humour : he was charmed with two
or three pretty songs — your songs, Ellen ; and when I was
obliged to go, he begged and entreated me to come the
following evening; and I promised. Minny and I went
flying home as hght as air; and I dreamt of Wuthenng
Heights and my sweet, darling cousin, till morning.
'On the morrow I was sad; partly because you were
poorly, and partly that I wished my father knew, and
approved of my excursions : but it was beautiful moonlight
after tea ; and, as I rode on, the gloom cleared. I shall have
another happy evening, I thought to myself; and what
delights me more, my pretty Linton will. I trotted up their
garden, and was turning round to the back, when that fellow
Eamshaw met me, took my bridle, and bid me go in by the
front entrance. He patted Minny's neck, and said she was a
bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted me to speak to
him. I only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it
would kick him. He answered in his vulgar accent, " It
wouldn't do mitch hurt if it did ; " and surveyed its legs with
a smile. I was half inclined to make it try ; however, he
moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch, he
looked up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupid
mixture of awkwardness and elation: " Miss Catherine! I
can read yon, now. "
* " Wonderful, " I exclaimed. " Pray let us hear you —
you are grown clever ! "
'He spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name —
** Hareton Eamshaw. "
'** And the figures ? " I cried, encouragingly, perceiving
that he came to a dead halt.
* " I cannot tell them yet, " he answered.
'" Oh, you dunce ! " I said, laughing heartily at his
failure.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS S69
'The fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips»
and a soowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether
he might not join in my mirth : whether it were not pleasant
familiarity, or what it really was, contempt. I settled his
doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity and desiring him
to walk away, for I came to see Linton, not him. He
reddened — I saw that by the moonlight — dropped his hand
from the latch, and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity.
He imagined himself to be as accomplished as Linton, I
suppose, because he could spell his own name ; and was
marvellously discomfited that I didn't think the same.'
'Stop, Miss Catherine, dear !'I interrupted.'I shall
not scold, but I don't Uke your conduct there. If you had
remembered that Hareton was your cousin as much as
Master Heathcliff, you would have felt how improper it was
to behave in that way. At least, it was praiseworthy
ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as Linton ;
and probably he did not learn merely to show off : you had
made him a^amed of his ignorance before, I have no doubt ;
and he wished to remedy it and please you. To sneer at his
imperfect attempt was very bad breeding. Had you been
brought up in his circumstances, would you be less rude ?
He was as quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were ;
and I'm hurt that he should be despised now, because that
base HeathcUff has treated him so unjustly.'
'Well, Ellen, you won't cry about it, will you ?'she
exclaimed, surprised at my earnestness.'But wait, and you
shall hear if he conned his A B to please me ; and if it
were worth while being civil to the brute. I entered ;
Linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to welcome me.
* " I'm ill to-night, Catherine, love, " he said ; " and you
must have all the talk, and let me listen. Come, and sit by
me. I was sure you wouldn't break your word, and I'U
make you promise again, before you go. "
'I knew now that I mustn't tease him, as he was ill ; and
I spoke softly and put no questions, and avoided irritating
him in any way. I had brought some of my nicest boob
960 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
for him : he asked me to read a little of one, and I was about
to comply, when Eamshaw burst the door open: having
gathered venom with reflection. He advanced direct to us,
seized Ldnton by the arm, and swung him off the seat.
'** Get to thy own room 1 " he said, in a voice almost
inarticulate with passion ; imd his face looked swelled and
furious. " Take her there if she comes to see thee : thou
shalln't keep me out of this. Begone wi'ye both ! "
'He swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer,
nearly throwing him into the kitchen ; and he clenched his
fist as I followed, seemingly longing to knock me down. I
was afraid for a moment, and I let one volume fall; he
kicked it after me, and shut us out. I heard a malignant,
crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
Joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quiverii^.
'" I wer sure he'd sarve ye out ! He's a grand lad 1
He's gotten t'radght sperrit in him 1 He knaws — ^ay, he
knaws, as weel as I do, who sud be t'maister yonder — Ech,
ech, ech ! He made ye sMft properly ! Ech, ech, ech ! "
'" Where must we go ? " I asked of my coUsin, dis-
regarding the old wretch's mockery.
'Linton was white and trembhng. He was not pretty
then, Ellen : oh, no 1 he looked frightful ; for his thin face
and large ey^s were wrought into an expression of frantic,
powerless fury. He grasped the handle of the door, and
shook it : it was fastened inside.
'" If you don't let me in, I'll kill you I— If you don't let
me in, I'll kill you 1 " he rather shrieked than said. " Devil I
devU !— I'll kill you— I'U kiU you ! "
'Joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.
'" Thear, that's t'father 1 " he cried. " That's father!
We've alias summut o'either side in us. Niver heed,
Hareton, lad — dunnut be'feard — ^he cannot get at thee ! "
'I took hold of Linton's hands, and tried to pull him
away; but he shrieked so shockingly that I dared not
proceed. At last his cries were choked by a dreadful fit of
coughing ; blood gushed from his mouth, and he fell on the
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 261
groand. I ran into the yard, dok with terror ; and called for
Zillah, as loud as I oould. She soon heard me : she was
miUdng the oows in a shed behind the bam, and hurrying
from her work, she inquired what there was to do ? I hadn't
breath to explain; dragging her in, I looked about for
Linton. Eamshaw had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing
up-stairs. Zillah and I ascended after him ; but he stopped
me at the top of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in : I must
go home. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, and I
would enter. Joseph looked the door, and declared I should
do " no sich stuff, " and asked me whether I were''bahn to
be as mad as him. " I stood crying till the housekeeper
reappeared. She affirmed he would be better in a bit, but
}ie couldn't do with that shrieking and din ; and she took me,
and nearly carried me into the house.
'Ellen, I was ready to tear my hair off my headl I
sobbed and wept so that my eyes were almost blind ; and the
ruffian you have such sympathy with stood opposite : pre-
suming every now and then to bid me " wisht, " and denying
that it was his fault ; and, finally, frightened by my assertions
that I would tell papa, and that he should be put in prison
and hanged, he commenced blubbering himself, and hurried
out to hide his cowardly agitation. Still, I was not rid of
him : when at length they compelled me to depart, and I had
got some hundred yards off the premises, he suddenly issued
from the shadow of the road-side, and checked Minny and
took hold of me.
'''Miss Catherine, I'm ill grieved, " he began, " but it's
rayther too bad "
'I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps he
would murder me. He let go, thundering one of his horrid
curses, and I galloped home more than half out of my senses.
* I didn't bid you good-night that evening, and I didn't go
to Wuthering Heights the next : I wished to go exceedingly ;
but I was strangely excited, and dreaded to hear that Linton
was dead, sometimes; and sometimes shuddered at the
263 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
ihonght of enoountering Hareton. On the third day I took
courage : at least, I couldn't bear longer suspense, and stole
off once more. I went at five o'clock, and walked ; fancying
I might manage to creep into the house, and up to Linton's
room, unobserved. However, the dogs gave notice of my
approach. Zillah received me, and saying " the lad was
mending nicely, " showed me into a smi^ tidy, carpeted
apartment, where,, to my inexpressible joy, I beheld linton
laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books. But he would
neither speak to me nor look at me, through a whole hour,
Ellen : he has such an unhappy temper. And what quite
confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was to utter
the falsehood that I had occasioned the uproar, and Hareton
was not to blame t Unable to reply, except passionately, I
got up and walked from the room. He sent after me a faint
" Catherine t " He did not reckon on being answered so :
but I wouldn't turn back ; and the morrow was the second
day on which I stayed at home, nearly determined to visit
him no more. But it was so miserable going to bed and
getting up, and never hearing anything about him, that my
resolution melted into air before it was properly formed. It
had appeared wrong to take the journey once ; now it seemed
wrong to refrain. Michael came to ask if he must saddle
Minny ; I said " Yes, " and considered myself doing a duty
as she bore me over the hills. I was forced to pass the front
windows to get to the court : it was no use trying to conceal
my presence.
* ** Young master is in the house, " said Zillah, as she saw
me making for the parlour. I went in ; Eamshaw was there
also, but he quitted the room directly. Linton sat in the
great arm-chair half asleep ; walking up to the fire, I began
in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true —
'" As you don't like me, Linton, and as you think I come
on purpose to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time,
this is our last meeting : let us say good-bye ; and tell Mr.
Heathcliff that you have no wish to see me, and that he
mustn't invent any more falsehoods on the subject. "
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 263
(C«
Sit down and take your hat off, Catherine, " he
answered. " You are so muoh happier than I am, you
ought to be better. Papa talks enough of my defects, and
shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural I should doubt
myself. I doubt whether I am not altogether as worthless
as he calls me, frequently ; and then I feel so cross and
bitter, I hate everybody t I am worthless, and bad in
temper, and bad in^spirit, almost always ; and, if you choose,
you may say good-bye : you'll get rid of an annoyance.
Only, Catherine, do me this justice : believe that if I might
be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, I would be ;
as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy.
And believe that your kindness has made me love you deeper
than if I deserved your love : and though I couldn't, and
cannot help showing my nature to you, I regret it and
repent it ; and shall regret and repent it till I die ! "
'I felt he spoke the truth ; and I felt I must forgive him :
and, though we should quarrel the next moment, I must
forgive him again. We were reconciled ; but we cried, both
of us, the whole time I stayed : not entirely for sorrow ;
yet I was sorry linton had that distorted nature. He'll
never let his friends be at ease, and he'll never be at ease
himself ! I have always gone to his little parlour, since that
night ; because his father returned the day after.
'About three times, I think, we have been merry and
hopeful, as we were the first evening ; the rest of my visits
were dreary and troubled : now with his selfishness and
spite, and now with his sufferings : but I've learned to endure
the former with nearly as little resentment as the latter.
Mr. Heathdiff purposely avoids me : I have hardly seen him
at all. Last Sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, I
heard him abusing poor Linton cruelly for his conduct of
the night before. I can't tell how he knew of it, unless he
listened. Linton had certainly behaved provokingly : how-
ever, it was the business of nobody but me, and I interrupted
Mr. HeathclifiTs lecture by entering and telling him so. He
burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he was glad I took
IZ
264 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
that view of the matter. Sinoe then, I've told Linton he
must whisper his bitter things. Now, Ellen, yon have heard
all. I can't be prevented from going to Wuthering Heights,
except by inflicting misery on two people ; whereas, if you'll
only not tell papa, my going need distnrb the tranquillity of
none. Tou'll not tell, will you ? It will be Very heartless, if
you do.*
'I'll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, Miss
Catherine,'I repUed.'It requires some study ; and so I'll
leave you to your rest, and go think it over.'
I thought it over aloud, in my master's presence ; walking
straight from her room to his, and relating the whole story :
with the exception of her conversations with her. cousin, and
any mention of Hareton. Mr. Linton was alarmed and
distressed, more than he would acknowledge to me. In
the morning, Catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence,
and she learnt also that her secret visits were to end. In
vain she wept and writhed against the interdict, and
iml^lored her father to have pity on Linton : all she got to
comfort her was a promise that he would write and give him
leave to come to the Grange when he pleased ; but explain-
ing that he must no longer expect to see Catherine at
Wuthering Heights. Perhaps, had he been aware of his
nephew's disposition and state of health, he would have seen
fit to withhold even that slight consolation.
OHAPTEE XXV
'Thbsb things happened last winter, sir/ said Mrs. Dean ;
'hardly more than a year ago. Last winter, I did not think,
at another twelve months'end, I should be amusing a
stranger to the family with relating them ! Yet, who knows
how long you'll be a stranger ? You're too young to rest
always contented, living by yourself ; and I some way fancy
no one could see Catherine Linton and not love her. You
smile ; but why do you look so lively and interested
when I talk about her ? and why have you asked me to hang
her picture over your fireplace ? and why ^?'
* 8top, my good friend I'I cried. * It may be very
possible that I should love her ; but would she love me ? I
doubt it too much to venture my tranquillity by running into
temptation : and then my home is not here. I'm of
the busy world, and to its arms I must return. Go
on. Was Catherine obedient to her father's commands ?'
'She was,'continued the housekeeper.'Her affection
for him was still the chief sentiment in her heart ; and he
spoke without anger : he spoke in the deep tenderness of one
about to leave his treasure amid perils and foes, where his
remembered words would be the only aid that he could
bequeath to guide her. He said to me, a few days after-
wards, " I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call. Tell
me, sincerely, what you think of him : is he changed for the
better, or is there a prospect of improvement, as he grows a
man ? "
* " He's very delicate, sir, " I replied ; " and scarcely
likely to reach manhood : but this I can say, he does not
366 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
resemble his father; and if Miss Catherine had the mi8 <
fortune to marry him, he would not be beyond her control :
unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent. How-
ever, master, you'll have plenty of time to get acquainted
with him and see whether he would suit her : it wants four
years and more to his being of age. "'
Edgar sighed ; and, walking to the window, looked out
towards Gimmerton Kirk. It was a misty afternoon, but
the February sun shone dimly, and we could just distinguish
the two fir-trees in the yard, and the sparely-scattered grave-
stones.
*Tve prayed often,'he half soliloquised,'for the
approach of what is coming ; and now I begin to shrink, and
fear it I thought the memory of the hour I came down that
glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than the anticipation
that I was soon, in a few months, or, possibly, weeks, to
be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow 1 Ellen, I've
been very happy with my little Cathy : through winter
nights and summer days she was a living hope at my side.
But I've been as happy musing by myself among those
stones, under that old church : lying, through the long June
evenings, on the green mound of her mother's grave, and
wishing — yearning for the time when I might lie beneath it.
What can I do for Cathy ? How must I quit her ? I'd not
care one moment for Linton being HeathclifiTs son ; nor for
his taking her from me, if he could console her for my loss.
I'd not care that Heathcliff gained his ends, and triumphed
in robbing me of my last blessing 1 But should Linton be
unworthy — only a feeble tool to his father — ^I cannot
abandon her to him ! And, hard though it be to crush her
buoyant spirit, I must persevere in making her sad while I
live, and leaving her solitary when I die. Darling !
I'd rather resign her to God, and lay her in the earth before
me.'
'Resign her to God as it is, sir,'I answered, * and if we
should lose you — ^which may He forbid — under His provi-
dence, I'll stand her friend and counsellor to the last. Miss
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 267
Gaiherine is a good girl : I don't fear that she will go wilfolly
wrong ; and people who do their duty are always finally re-
warded.'
Spring advanced; yet my master gathered no real
strength, though he resumed his walks in the grounds with
his daughter. To her inexperienced notions, this itself was
a sign of convalescence; and then his cheek was often
flushed, and his eyes were bright ; she felt sure of his
recovering. On her seventeenth birthday, he did not visit
the churchyard : it was raining, and I observed —
* You'll surely not go out to-night, sir ?'
He answered, —'No, I'll defer it this year a little longer.'
He wrote again to Linton, expressing his great desire to
see him; and, had the invalid been presentable, I've no
doubt his father would have permitted him to come. As it
was, being instructed, he returned an answer, intimating that
Mr. Heathcliff objected to his calling at the Grange ; but
his uncle's kind remembrance delighted him, and he hoped
to meet him sometimes in his rambles, and personally to
petition that his cousin and he might not remain long so
utterly divided.
That part of his letter was simple, and probably his own.
HeathchfP knew he could plead eloquently for Catherine's
company, then.
'I do not ask,'he said,'that she may visit here ; but am
I never to see her, because my father forbids me to go to her
home, and you forbid her to come to mine ? Do, now and
then, ride with her towards the Heights ; and let us ex-
change a few words, in your presence 1 We have done
nothing to deserve this separation ; and you are not angry
with me: you have no reason to dislike me, you allow,
yourself. Dear uncle t send me a kind note to-morrow, and
leave to join you anywhere you please, except at Thrush-
cross Grange. I believe an interview would convince you
that my father's character is not mine : he affirms I am
more your nephew than his son ; and though I have faults
which render me unworthy of Catherine, she has excused
268 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
ihem, and for her sake, yon should also. Yon inquire after
my health — ^it is better ; but while I remain oat ofif from all
hope, and doomed to solitude, or. the society of those who
never did and never will like me, how can I be cheerful and
well?'
Edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to
grant his request; because he could not accompany
Catherine. He said, in summer, perhaps, they might meet :
meantime, he wished him to continue writing at intervals,
and engaged to give him what advice and comfort he was
able by letter ; being well aware of his hard position in his
family. Linton comphed ; and had he been unrestrained,
would probably have spoiled all by filling his epistles with
complaints and lamentations : but his father kept a sharp
watch over him ; and, of course, insisted on every line that
my master sent being shown ; so, instead of penning his
pecuhar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes
constantly uppermost in his thoughts, he harped on the
cruel obligation of being held asunder from his friend and
love ; and gently intimated that Mr. Linton must allow an
interview soon, or he should fear he was purposely deceiving
him with empty promises.
Oathy was a powerful ally at home ; and between them
they at length persuaded my master to acquiesce in their
having a ride or a walk together about once a week, under
my guardianship, and on the moors nearest the Grange : for
June found him still declining. Though he had set aside
yearly a portion of his income for my young lady's fortune,
he had a natural desire that she might retain — or at least
return in a short time to — the house of her ancestors ; and
he considered her only prospect of doing that was by a
union with his heir; he had no idea that the latter was
failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one, I
believe : no doctor visited the Heights, and no one saw
Master Heathcliff to make report of his condition among as.
I, for my part, began to fancy my forebodings were false,
and that he must be actually rallying, when he mentioned
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 269
riding and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in
pursoing his object. I could not picture a father treating a
dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterwards
learned Heathcliff had treated him, to compel this apparent
eagerness : his efiforts redoubling the more imminently his
avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened with defeat
by death.
OHAPTBB XXVI
SuHMBB was already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly
yielded his assent to their entreaties, and Catherine and I
set out on our first ride to join her cousin. It was a close,
sultry day : devoid of sunshine, but with a sky too dappled
and hazy to threaten rain : and our place of meeting had
been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads. On
arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, despatched as a
messenger, told us that, —'Maister Linton wer just o'this
side th'Heights : and he'd be mitch obleeged to us to gang
on a bit further.'
'Then Master Linton has forgot the first injunction of
his uncle,'I observed : * he bid us keep on the Orange land,
and here we are ofif at once.'
'Well, we'll turn our horses'heads round when we
reach him,'answered my companion ;'our excursion shall
lie towards home.'
But when ^e reached him, and that was scarcely a
quarter of a mile from his own door, we found he had no
horse ; and we were forced to dismount, and leave ours to
graze, fie lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and
did not rise till we came within a few yards. Then he
walked so feebly, and looked so pale, that I immediately
exclaimed, —'Why, Master Heatholiff, you are not fit for
enjoying a ramble this morning. How ill you do look I'
Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment:
she changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm ;
and the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting to
an anxious inqtdry, whether he were worse than usual ?
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 271
< No — better — ^better I'he panted, trembling, and retaining
her hand as if he needed its support, while his large blue
eyes wandered timidly over her ; the hollowness ronnd them
transforming to haggard wildness the languid expression
they onoe possessed.
* But you have been worse,'persisted his oousin ;'worse
than when I saw you last ; you are thinner, and'
'I'm tired,'he interrupted, hurriedly. * It is too hot for
waJMng, let us rest here. And, in the morning, I often feel
sick — papa says I grow so fast.'
Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her.
'This is something like your paradise,'said she, mn.1ring
an effort at cheerfulness.'You recollect the two days we
agreed to spend in the place and way each thought
pleasantest ? This is nearly yours, only there are clouds ;
but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer than
sunshine. Next week, if you can, we'll ride down to the
Grange Park, and try mine.'
Linton did not appear to remember what she talked of ;
and he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind
of conversation. His lack of interest in the subjects she
started, and his equal incapacity to contribute to her
entertainment, were so obvious that she could not conceal her
disappointment. An indefinite alteration had come over his
whole person and manner. The pettishness that might be
caressed into fondness, had yielded to a listless apathy;
there was less of the peevish temper of a child which frets
and teases on purpose to be soothed, and more of the self-
absorbed moroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling
consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured mirth
of others as an insult. Catherine perceived, as well as I did,
that he held it rather a punishment, than a gratification, to
endure our company ; and she made no scruple of proposing,
presently, to depart. That proposal, unexpectedly, roused
linton irom his lethargy, and threw him into a strange state
of agitation. He glanced fearfully towards the Heights,
begging she would remain another half -hour, at least.
272 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
* But I think/ said Cathy,'you'd be more comfortable at
home than sitting here ; and I cannot amuse you to-day, I
see, by my tales, and songs, and chatter : you have grown
wiser than I, in these six months ; you have little taste for
my diversions now: or else, if I could amuse you^ I'd
willingly stay.'
'Stay to rest yourself,'he replied.'And, Catherine,
don't think or say that I'm very unwell: it is the heavy
weather and heat that make me dull ; and I walked about,
before you came, a great deal for me. Tell uncle I'm in
tolerable health, will you ?'
'I'll tell him that you say so, Linton. I couldn't affirm
that you are,'observed my young lady, wondering at his
pertinacious assertion of what was evidently an untruth.
'And be here again next Thursday,'continued he,
shunning her puzzled gaze.'And give him my thanks for
permitting you to come — my best thanks, Catherine. And
— and, if you did meet my father, and he asked you about
me, don't lead him to suppose that I've been extremely silent
and stupid : don't look sad and downcast, as you are doing
— he'll be angry.*
'I care nothing for his anger,'exclaimed Cathy, imagining
she would be its object.
'But I do,'said her cousin, shuddering.'DorCt provoke
him against me, Catherine, for he is very hard.'
'Is he severe to you, Master Heathclifif?'I inquired.
'Has he grown weary of indulgence, and passed from
passive to active hatred ?''
Linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after
keeping her seat by his side another ten minutes, during
which his head fell drowsily on his breast, and he uttered
nothing except suppressed moans of exhaustion or pain,
Cathy began to seek solace in looking for bilberries, and
sharing the produce of her researches with me : she did not
o£kr them to him, for she saw further notice would only
weary and annoy.
'Is it half -an-hour now, Ellen ?'she whispered in my
WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS 278
ear, at last.'I can't tell why we shoiild stay. He's asleep,
and papa will be wanting us back.'
'Well, we must not leave him asleep,'I answered ; * wait
till he wakes, and be patient. You were mighty eager to
set off, but your longing to see poor Ldnton has soon
evaporated I'
'Why did he wish to see me ?'returned Catherine.'In
his Grossest humours, formerly, I liked him better than I do
in his present curious mood. It's just as if it were a task
he was compelled to perform — this interview — for fear his
father should scold him. But I'm hardly going to come to give
Mr. Heathcliff pleasure ; whatever reason he may have for
ordering Linton to undergo this penance. And, though I'm
glad he's better in health, I'm sorry he's so much less
pleasant, and so much less affectionate to me.'
'You think he is better in health, then ?'I said.
'Yes,'she answered ;'because he always made such a
great deal of his sufferings, you know. He is not tolerably
well, as he told me to tell papa; but he's better, very
likely.'
'There you di & r with me. Miss Cathy,'I remarked ; * I
should conjecture him to be far worse.'
Linton here started from his slumber in bewildered
terror, and asked if any one had called his name.
'No,'said Catherine ; * unless in dreams. I cannot
conceive how you manage to doze out of doors, in the
morning.'
'I thought I heard my father,'he gasped, glancing up to
the frowning nab above us. * You are sure nobody spoke ?'
'Quite sure,'replied his cousin.'Only Ellen and I were
disputing concerning your health. Are you truly stronger,
Linton, than when we separated in winter ? If you be, I'm
certain one thing is not stronger — ^your regard for me:
speak, — are you ?'
The tears gushed from Linton's eyes as he answered,
'Yes, yes, I am 1'And, still under the spell of the imaginary
voice, his gaze wandered up and down to detect its owner.
374 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Cathy rose.'For to-day we most part,'she said. * And I
won't conceal that I have been sadly disappointed with our
meeting ; though I'll mention it to nobody but yon : not
that I stand in awe of Mr. Heathcli£'
'Hush/ murmnred Linton ;'for God's sake, hush I He's
coming.'And he clung to Catherine's arm, striving to
detain her; but at that announcement she hastUy dis-
engaged herself, and whistled to Minny, who obeyed her like
a dog.
'I'll be here next Thursday,'she cried, springing to the
saddle.'Good-bye. Quick, Ellen I'
And so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure,
so absorbed was he in anticipating his father's approach.
Before we reached home, Catherine's displeasure softened
into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended
with vague, uneasy doubts about Linton's actual circum-
stances, physical and social : in which I partook, though I
counselled her not to say much ; for a second journey would
make us better judges. My master requested an account of
our ongoings. His nephew's offering of thanks was duly
delivered, Miss Cathy gently touching on the rest : I also threw
little light on his inquiries, for I hardly knew what to hide
and what to reveaL
OHAPTEB XXVn
Sbvsm days glided away, every one marking its oonrse by the
henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton's state. The
havoc that months had previously wrought was now emulated
by the inroads of hours. Catherine we would fain have
deluded yet ; but her own quick spirit refused to delude her :
it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful probability,
gradually ripening into certainty. She had not the heart to
mention her ride, when Thursday came round ; I mentioned
it for^her, and obtained permission to order her out of doors :
for the library, where her father stopped a short time daily
— ^the brief period he could bear to sit up — and his chamber,
had become her whole world. She grudged each moment
that did not find her bending over his pillow, or seated by his
side. Her countenance gfsw wan with watching and sorrow,
and my master gladly dismissed her to what he flattered
himself would be a happy change of scene and society;
drawing comfort from the hope that she would not now be
left entbrely alone after his death.
He had a fixed idea, I guessed by several observations he
let fall, that, as his nephew resembled him in person, he
would resemble him in mind ; for Linton's letters bore few
or no indications of his defective character. And I, through
pardonable weakness, refrained from correcting the error;
asking myself what good there would be in disturbing his
last moments with information that he had neither power nor
opportunity to turn to account.
We deferred our excursion till the afternoon ; a golden
}
276 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
afternoon of Angiust : every fareath from the hills ao fall oC
life, that it seemed whoever respired it, though dying, might
revive. Catherine's face was jnst like the landscape —
shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid suocession ;
but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
transient ; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even
that passing forgetfulness of its cares.
We discerned linton watching at the same spot he had
selected before. My yoimg mistress alighted, and told me
that, as she was resolved to stay a very little while, I had
better hold the pony and remain on horseback; but I
dissented : I wouldn't risk losing sight of the charge com-
mitted to me a minute ; so we climbed the slope of heath
together. Master Heathcliff received us with greater
animation on this occasion : not the animation of high spirits
though, nor yet of joy ; it looked more like fear.
* It is late !'he said, speaking short and with difficulty.
'Is not your father very ill ? I thought you wouldn't come.'
'Why won't you be candid ?'cried Catherine, swallowing
her greeting.'Why cannot you say at once you don't want
me ? It is strange, Linton, that for the second time you have
brought me here on purpose, apparently to distress us both,
and for no reason besides t'
Linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating^
half ashamed ; but his cousin's patience was not sufficient to
endure this enigmatical behaviour.
'My father is very ill,'she said ;'and why am I called
from his bedside ? Why didn't you send to absolve me from
my promise, when you wished I wouldn't keep it ? Come I I
desire an explanation : playing and trifling are completely
banished out of my mind ; and I can't dance attendance on
your affectations now I'
'My affectations I'he murmured ;'what are they ? For
heaven's sake, Catherine, don't look so angry I Despise ma
as much as you please ; I am a worthless, cowardly wretch :
I can't be scorned enough ; but I'm too mean for your anger.
Hate my father, and spare me for contempt'
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 277
* Nonsense I'cried Catherine, in a passion. * Foolish, silly
boy ! And there I he trembles, as if I were really going to
touoh him I You needn't bespeak contempt, Linton : any-
body will have it spontaneously at your service. Get off ! I
shall return home : it is folly dragging you from the hearth-
stone, and pretending — what do we pretend? Let go my
frock! If I pitied you for crying and looking so very
frightened, you should spurn such pity. Ellen, tell him
how disgraceful this conduct is. Bise, and don't degrade
yourself into an abject reptile — don't I *
With streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton
had thrown his nerveless frame along the ground : he seemed
convulsed with exquisite terror.
'Oh I'he sobbed,'I cannot bear it ! Catherine, Catherine,
I'm a traitor, too, and I dare not tell you ! But leave me, and
I shall be killed ! Decvr Catherine, my life is in your hands :
and you have said you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn't
harm you. You'll not go, then ? kind, sweet, good Catherine t
And perhaps you will consent — and he'll let me die with you I'
My young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped
to raise him. The old feeling of indulgent tenderness over-
came her vexation, and she grew thoroughly moved and
alarmed.
'Consent to what ?'she asked.'To stay ! tell me the
meaning of this strange talk, and I will. You contradict
your ovTU words, and distract me 1 Be calm and frank, and
confess at once all that weighs on your heart. You wouldn't
injure me, Linton, would you ? You wouldn't let any enemy
hurt me, if you could prevent it? I'll believe you are a
coward, for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer of your
best friend.*
'But my father threatened me,* gasped the boy, clasping
his attenuated fingers,'and I dread him — I dread him I I
da/re not tell t'
'Oh, well I'said Catherine, with scornful compassion,
'keep your secret : Fm no coward. Save yourself : I'm not
afraidr
278 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS
Her magnanimity provoked his tears : he wept wildly,
Mssing her supporting hands, and yet could not sununon
courage to speak out. I was cogitating what the mystery
might be, and determined Catherine should never suffer
to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
hearing a rustle among the ling, I looked up and saw Mr.
Heathdiff almost close upon us, descending the Heights. He
didn't cast a glance towards my companions, though they
were sufficiently near for Linton's sobs to be audible ; but
hailing me in tibe almost hearty tone he assumed to none
besides, and the sincerity of which I couldn't avoid doubting,
he said —
* It is something to see you so near to my house, Nelly.
How are you at the Grange? Let us hear. The rumour
goes,'he added, in a lower tone,'that Edgar linton is on
his death-bed : perhaps they exaggerate his illness?'
'No ; my master is dying,'I replied :'it is true enough.
A sad thing it will be for us all, but a blessing for him I'
'How long will he last, do you think ?'he asked.
'I don't know,'I said.
* Because,'he continued, looking at the two young people,
who were fixed under his eye — Linton appeared as if he
could not venture to stir or raise his head, and Catherine
could not move, on his account —'because that lad yonder
seems determined to beat me ; and I'd thank his uncle to be
quick, and go before * him ! Hallo 1 has the whelp been
playing that game long ? I did give him some lessons about
snivelling. Is he pretty lively with Miss Linton generally ?'
'lively? no — he has shown the greatest distress,'I
answered. * To see him, I should say, that instead of rambUng
with his sweetheart on the hills, he ought to be in bed, under
the hands of a doctor.'
'He shaU be, in a day or two,'muttered HeathclifiL'But
first — get up, linton I Get up I'he shouted.'Don't grovel
on the ground there : up, this moment !'
linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of
helpless fear, caused by his father's glance towards him, I
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 279
suppose : there was nothing else to produoe such hnmiliation.
He made several efforts to obey, but his little strength was
annihilated for the time, and he fell baok again with a moan.
Mr. Heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean against a
ridge of turf.
* Now/ said he, with curbed ferocity,'I'm getting angry ;
and if you don't conmiand that paltry spirit of yours — dami
you I get up directly ! *
'I will, father,'he panted.'Only, let me alone, or I shall
faint. I've done as you wished, I'm sure. Catherine will
tell you that I — that I — have been cheerful. Ah 1 keep by
me, Catherine ; give me your hand.'
'Take mine,'said his father ; * stand on your feet. There
now — she'll lend you her arm : that's right, look at her. You
would imagine I was the devil himself. Miss Linton, to excite
such horror. Be so kind as to walk home with him, will
you ? He shudders if I touch him.'
'linton dear 1'whispered Catherine,'I can't go to
Wuthering Heights : papa has forbidden me. He'll not harm
you : why are you so afraid ? *
'I can never re-enter that house/ he answered.'I'm
not to re-enter it without you !'
'Stop !'cried his father.'We'll respect Catherine's
filial scruples. Nelly, take him in, and I'll follow your
advice concerning the doctor, without delay.'
'You'll do well,'replied I.'But I must remain with
my mistress : to mind your son is not my business.'
'You are very stiff,'said Heathcliff, * I know that : but
you'll force me to pinch the baby and make it scream befo^
it moves your charity. Come, then, my hero. Are you
willing to return, escorted by me ?'
He approached once more, and made as if he would seize
the fragile being ; but, shrinking back, Linton clung to his
cousin, and implored her to accompany him, with a frantic
importimity that admitted no denial. However I disapproved!
I couldn't hinder her : indeed, how could she have refused him
herself ? What was filling him with dread we had no means
280 WUTHEKINQ HEIGHTS
of discerning ; but there he was, powerless under its gripe, and
any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiotcy.
We reached the threshold ; Catherine walked in, and I stood
waiting till she had conducted the invalid to a chair, expect-
ing her out immediately ; when Mr. HeathcUfF, pushing me
forward, exclaimed —'My house is not stricken with the
plague, Nelly ; and I have a mind to be hospitable to-day :
sit down, and allow me to shut the door.'
He shut and locked it also. I started.
'You shall have tea before you go home,'he added. * I
am by myself. Hareton is gone with some cattle to the
Lees, and Zillah and Joseph are off on a journey of pleasure ;
and, though I'm used to being alone, I'd rather have some
interesting company, if I can get it. Miss Linton, take your
seat by h4m, I give you what I have : the present is hardly
worth accepting; but I have nothing else to offer. It is
Linton, I mean. How she does stare ! It's odd what a
savage feeling I have to anything that seems afraid of me t
Had I been bom where laws are less strict and tastes less
dainty, I should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those
two, as an evening's amusement.'
He drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to him-
self, < By hell ! I hate them.'
'I am not afraid of you!'exclaimed Catherine, who
could not hear the latter part of his speech. She stepped
close up ; her black eyes flashing with passion and resolu-
tion.'Give me that key : I will have it I'she said.'I
wouldn't eat or drink here, if I were starving.'
Heathchff had the key in his hand that remained on the
table. He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at her
boldness ; or, possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance,
of the person from whom she inherited it. She snatched at
the instrument, and half succeeded in getting it out of his
loosened fingers : but her action recalled him to the present;
he recovered it speedily.
'Now, Catherine Linton,'he said,'stand off, or I shall
knock you down ; and that will make Mrs. Dean mad.'

WUTHERING HEIGHTS 281
Begardless of this warning, she oaptored his dosed hand
and its contents again.'We wUl go I'she repeated, exerting
her utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax ; and
finding that her nails made no impression, she applied her
teeth pretty sharply. Heathdiff glanced at me a glance that
kept me from interfering a moment. Catherine was too
intent on his fingers to notice his face. He opened them
suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute ; but, ere she
had well secured it, he seized her with the liberated hand,
and, pulling her on his knee, administered with the other
a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head, each
sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to
faU.'
At this diaboUcal violence I rushed on him furiously.
'You villain !'I began to cry, * you villain !'A touch on
the chest silenced me : I am stout, and soon put out of
breath ; and, what with that and the rage, I staggered dizzily
back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a blood-vessel.
The scene was over in two minutes ; Catherine, released, put
her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were
not sure whether her ears were off or on. She trembled like
a reed, poor thing, and leant against the table perfectly
bewildered.
'I know how to chastise children, you see,'said the
scoundrel, grimly, as he stooped to repossess himself of the
key, which had dropped to the floor.'Go to Linton now,
as I told you ; and cry at your ease ! I shall be your father,
to-morrow — all the father you'll have in a few days — and
you shall have plenty of that. You can bear plenty ; you're
no weakling : you shall have a daily taste, if I catch such a
devil of a temper in your eyes again !'
Cathy ran to me instead of linton, and knelt down and
put her burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. Her
cousin had shrunk into a comer of the settle, as quiet as a
mouse, congratulating himself, I dare say, that the correction
had alighted on another than him. Mr. HeathcUff, perceiv-
ing us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
983 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
himself. The oups and saucers were laid ready. He poured
it out, and handed me a cup.
'Wash away your spleen/ he said.'And help your own
naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned, though I pre-
pared it. I'm going out to seek your horses.'
Our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit
somewhere. We tried the kitchen door, but that was
fastened outside : we looked at the windows — ^they were too
narrow for even Cathy's little figure.
'Master Linton,'I cried, seeing we were regularly im-
prisoned,'you know what your diabolical father is after, and
you shall tell us, or I'll box your ears, as he has done your
cousin's.'
* Yes, Linton, you must tell,'said Catherine.'It was for
your sake I came ; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you
refuse.'
'Give me some tea, I'm thirsty, and then I'll tell you,'
he answered.'Mrs. Dean, go away. I don't like you
standing over me. Now, Catherine, you are letting your
tears fall into my cup. I won't drink that. Give me anotiier.'
Catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. I
felt disgusted at the Uttle wretch's composure, since he
was no longer in terror for himself. The anguish he had
exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as ever he entered
Wuthering Heights ; so I guessed he had been menaced with
an awful visitation of wrath if he failed in decoying us there ;
and, tbat accompHshed, he had no further immediate fears.
'Papa wants us to be married,'he continued, after sipping
some of the liquid.'And he knows your papa wouldn't let
us marry now ; and he's afraid of my dying if we wait ; so we
are to be married in the morning, and you are to stay here
all night ; and, if you do as he wishes, you shall return home
next day, and take me with you.'
'Take you with her, pitiful changeling I'I exclaimed.
* You marry ? Why, the man is mad ! or he thinks us fools,
every one. And do you imagine that beautiful young lady,
that healthy, hearty girl, will tie herself to a little perishing
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS S8S
•monkey like you ? Are you cherishing the notion that anybody,
let alone Miss Catherine Linton, would have you for a hus-
band ? You want whipping for bringing us in here at all,
with your dastardly puling tricks : and — don't look so silly,
now I I've a very good mind to shake you severely, for your
contemptible treachery, and your imbecile conceit/
I did give him a slight shaking ; but it brought on the
cough, and he took to his ordinary resource of moaning and
weeping, and Catherine rebuked me.
'Stay all night? No,'she said, looking slowly round.
'Ellen, I'll bum that door down but I'll get out.'
And she would have conmienced the execution of her
threat directly, but Linton was up in alarm for his dear self
again. He clasped her in his two feeble arms sobbing : —
'Won't you have me, and save me ? not let me come to the
Grange ? Oh, darling Catherine I you mustn't go and leave,
after all. You must obey my father — ^you must I'
* I must obey my own,'she replied,'and relieve him from
this cruel suspense. The whole night I What would he
think? He'll be distressed already. I'll either break or
bum a way out of the house. Be quiet I You're in no danger ;
but if you hinder me — Linton, I love papa better than you I'
The mortal terror he felt of Mr. Heathcliff's anger
restored to the boy his coward's eloquence. Catherine was
near distraught : still, she persisted that she must go home,
and tried entreaty in her turn, persuading him to subdue his
selfish agony. While they were thus occupied, our jailor
re-entered.
'Your beasts have trotted off,'he said,'and — now Lin-
ton ! snivelling again? What has she been doing to you?
Come, come — have done, and get to bed. In a month or
two, my lad, you'll be able to pay her back her present
tyrannies with a vigorous hand. You're pining for pure love,
are you not ? nothing else in the world : and she shall have
you ! There, to bed ! Zillah won't be here to-night ; you
must undress yourself. Hush I hold your noise ! Once
in your own room, I'll not come near you: you needn't
^8i WUTHERING HEIGHTS
fear. By ohanoe, you've managed tolerably. Ill look to
the rest.'
He spoke these words, holding the door open for his son
to pass, and the latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel
might which suspected the person, who atteoided on it of
designing a spitefol squeeze. The lock was re-secured.
HeathdifiF approached the fire, where my mistress and I
stood silent. Catherine looked up, and instinctively raised
her hand to her cheek : his neighbourhood revived a painful
sensation. Anybody else would have been incapable of
regarding the childish act vrith sternness, but he scowled on
her and muttered —'Oh ! you are not afraid of me ? Your
courage is well disguised : you seem danmably afraid I'
'I am afraid now,'she replied,'because, if I stay, papa
will be miserable : and how can I endure making him
miserable — ^when he — when he — Mr. Heathdiff, let me go
home ! I promise to marry Linton : papa would like me to :
and I love him. Why should you vrish to force me to do
what I'll vnllingly do of myself ?'
'Let him dare to force you,'I cried.'There's law in
the land, thank God ! there is ; though we be in an out-of-
the-way place. I'd inform if he were my own son : and it's
felony without benefit of clergy I'
'Silence !'said the rufSan. * To the devil vrith your
clamour ! I don't want you to speak. Miss Ldnton, I shall
enjoy myself remarkably in thinking your father will be
miserable : I shall not sleep for satisfaction. You could have
hit on no surer way of fixing your residence under my roof
for the next twenty-four hours than informing me that such
an event would follow. As to your promise to marry Linton,
I'll take care you shall keep it ; for you shall not quit this
plaoe till it is fulfilled.'
'Send Ellen, then, to let papa know I'm safe 1'exclaimed
Catherine, weeping bitterly.'Or marry me now. Poor
papa t Ellen, he'll think we're lost. What shall we do ?'
'Not he ! He'll think you are tired of waiting on him,
and run ofif for a little amusement/ answered Heatholift
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 286
'Yoa oaxinot deny that you entered my house of your own
accord, in contempt of his injunctions to the contrary. And it is
quite natural that you shotlld desire amusement at your age ;
and that you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that
man only your father. Catherine, his happiest days were
over when your days began. He cursed you, I dare say, for
coming into the world (I did, at least) ; and it would just do
if he cursed you as he went out of it. I'd join him. I don't
love you ! How should I ? Weep away. As far as I can
see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter ; imless Linton
make amends for other losses : and your provident parent
appears to fancy he may. His letters of advice and conso-
lation entertained me vastly. In his last he recommended
my jewel to be careful of his ; and kind to her when he got
her. Careful and kind — that's patemaL But Linton requires
his whole stock of care and kindness for himself. Linton
can play the Uttle tyrant well. He'll undertake to torture any
number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared.
You'll be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his kindness, when
you get home again, I assure you.'
'You're right there I'I said ; * explain your son's character.
Show his resemblance to yourself : and then, I hope. Miss
Cathy will think twice before she takes the cockatrice !'
'I don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualities
now,'he answered ;'because she must either accept him or
remain a prisoner, and you along with her, till your master
dies. I can detain you both, quite concealed, here. If you
doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and you'll have an
opportunity of judging !'
'I'll not retract my word,'said Catherine.'I'll marry
him within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange
afterwards. Mr. Heathcliff, you're a cruel man, but you're
not a fiend; and you won't, from mere malice, destroy
irrevocably all my happiness. If papa thought I had left
him on purpose, and if he died before I returned, could I
bear to live ? I've given over crying : but I'm going to kneel
here, at your knee ; and I'll not get up, and I'll not take my
286 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
eyes from your face till you look back at me I No» don't torn
away I do look I you'll see nothing to provoke you. I don't
hate you. I'm not angry that you struck me. Have you
never loved cm^ & od^ in all your life, uncle? never f Ah I yon
must look onoe. I'm so wretched, you can't help being sorry
and pitying me.'
'Keep your eft's fingers off ; and move, or I'll kick you !'
cried Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.'I'd rather be
hugged by a snake. How the devil can you dream of fawn-
ing on me ? I detest you 1'
He shrugged his shoulders : shook himself, indeed, as if
his flesh crept with aversion; and thrust back his chair;
while I got up, and opened my mouth, to commence a
downright torrent of abuse. But I was rendered dumb in
the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that I should be
shown into a room by myself the very next syllable I uttered.
It was growing dark — we heard a sound of voices at the
garden-gate. Our host hurried out instantly: he had his
wits about him ; we had not. There was a talk of two or
three minutes, and he returned alone.
* I thought it had been your cousin Hareton,'I observed
to Catherine.'I wish he would arrive! Who knows but
he might take our part ?'
'It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange,'
said Heathcliff, overhearing me.'You should have opened
a lattice and called out : but I could swear that chit is glad
you didn't. She's glad to be obliged to stay, I'm certain.'
At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent
to our grief without control ; and he allowed us to wail on
till nine o'clock. Then he bid us go upstairs, through the
kitchen, to Zillah's chamber ; and I whispered my companion
to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get through the
window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight. The
window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the
garret trap was safe from our attempts ; for we were fastened
in as before. We neither of us lay down : Catherine took
her station by the lattice, and watched anxiously for morning ;
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 287
a deep sigh being the only answer I could obtain to my
frequent entreaties that she would try to rest. I seated
myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh
judgment on my many derelictions of duty ; from which, it
struck me then, all the misfortunes of my employers sprang.
It was not the case, in reality, I am aware ; but it was, in
my imagination, that dismal night ; and I thought Heathdiflf
himself less guilty than I.
At seven o'clock he came, and inquired if Miss Linton
had risen. She ran to the door immediately, and answered,
'Yes.''Here, then,'he said, opening it, and pulling her
out. I rose to follow, but he turned the lock again. I
demanded my release.
'Be patient,'he replied ;'I'll send up your breakfast in
a while.'
I thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily ;
and Catherine asked why I was still shut up ? He answered,
I must try to endure it another hour, and they went away.
I endured it two or three hours ; at length, I heard a footstep :
not HeathclifiTs.
'I've brought you something to eat,'said a voice ;'oppen
t'door!'
Complying eagerly, I beheld Hareton, laden with food
enough to last me all day.
* Tak'it,'he added, thrusting the tray into my hand,
'Stay one minute,'I began.
'Nay,'cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers 1
could pour forth to detain him.
And there I remained enclosed the whole day, and the
whole of the next night ; and another, and another. Five
nights and four days I remained, altogether, seeing nobody but
Hareton once every morning; and he was a model of a jailor :
surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving his
sense of justice or compassion.
CHAPTER xxrvm
On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approached — lighter and shorter ; and, this time, the person
entered the room. It was Zillah; donned in her scarlet
shawl, with a black silk bonnet on her head, and a willow-
basket swung to her arm.
'Eh, dear ! Mrs. Dean I'she exclaimed.'Well I there
is a talk about you at Oimmerton. I never thought but you
were stmk in the Blackhorse marsh, and missy with you, till
master told me you'd been found, and he'd lodged you here t
What ! and you must have got on an island, sure ? And
how long were you in the hole ? Did master save you, Mrs.
Dean? But you're not so thin — you've not been so poorly,
have you ?'
'Your master is a true scoundrel I'I replied.'But he
shall answer for it. He needn't have raised that tale: it
shall all be laid bare I'
'What do you mean ?'asked ZillaJi.'It's not his tale:
they tell that in the village — about your being lost in the
marsh; and I calls to Eamshaw, when I come in —''Eh,
they's queer things, Mr. Hareton, happened since I went off.
It's a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant Nelly
Dean. " He stared. I thought he had not heard aught, so I
told him the rumour. The master listened, and he just
smiled to himself, and said, " If they have been in the marsh,
they are out now, Zillah. Nelly Dean is lodged, at this
minute, in your room. You can tell her to flit, when you go
up ; here is the key. The bog-water got into her head, and
she would have run home quite flighty ; but I fixed her till
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 289
she came round to her senses. Yon can bid her go to the
Grange at once, if she be able, and carry a message from me,
that her young lady will follow in time to attend the squire's
funeral. "'
'Mr. Edgar is not dead?'I gasped.'Oh I ZiUah,
Zillah!'
* No, no ; sit you down, my good mistress/ she replied ;
'you're right sickly yet. He's not dead; Doctor Kenneth
thinks he may last another day. I met him on the road and
asked.'
Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things,
and hastened below, for the way was free. On entering the
house, I looked about for some one to give information of
Catherine. The plaoe was filled with sunshine, and the door
stood wide open ; but nobody seemed at hand. As I
hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my
mistress, a sUght cough drew my attention to the hearth.
Linton lay on the settle, sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-
candy, and pursuing my movements with apathetic eyes.
'Where is Miss Catherine ?'I demanded sternly, supposing
(I could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching
him thus, alone. He sucked on like an innocent.
'Is she gone ?'I said.
'No,'he repUed;'she's upstairs: she's not to go; we
won't let her.'
'You won't let her, Uttle idiot !'I exclaimed.'Direct
me to her room immediately, or I'll make you sing out
sharply.'
'Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to
get there,'he answered.'He says I'm not to be soft with
Catherine : she's my wife, and it's shameful that she should
wish to leave me. He sa3rs she hates me and wants me to
die, that she may have my money ; but she shan't have it :
and she shan't go home 1 She never shall I —she may cry,
and be sick as much as she pleases I'
He resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if
he meant to drop asleep.
290 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
'Master HeatholifiF,'I resmned,'have you forgotten all
Catherine's kindness to yon last winter, when you affirmed
you loved her, and when she brought you books and sung
you songs, and came many a time through wind and snow
to see you? She wept to miss one evening, because you
would be disappointed ; and you felt then that she was a
hundred times too good to you : and now you believe the lies
your father tells, though you know he detests you both.
And you join him against her. That's fine gratitude, is
it not?'
The comer of Linton's mouth fell, and he took the sugar-
candy from his Ups.
'Did she come to Wuthering Heights because she
hated you ?'I continued.'Think for yourself ! As to
your money, she does not even know that you will have any.
And you say she's sick; and yet you leave her alone, up
there in a strange house I You who have felt what it is to
be so neglected ! You could pity your own sufferings ; and
she pitied them, too ; but you won't pity hers ! I shed tears,
Master Heathcliff, you see — ^an elderly woman, and a
servant merely — and you, after pretending such afiEection,
and having reason to worship her almost, store every tear
you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. Ah I
you're a heartless, selfish boy I'
'I can't stay with her,'he answered crossly.'I'll not
stay by myself. She cries so I can't bear it. And she won't
give over, though I say I'll call my father. I did call him
once, and he threatened to strangle her if she was not quiet ;
but she began again the instant he left the room, moaning
and grieving all night long, though I screamed for vexation
that I couldn't sleep.'
'Is Mr. Heathcliff out ?'I inquired, perceiving that the
wretched creature had no power to sympathize with his
cousin's mental tortures.
'He's in the court/ he replied,'talking to Doctor
Kenneth ; who says uncle is dying, truly, at last I'm glad,
for I shall be master of the Grange skfter him. Catherine
WUTHESING HEIGHTS 291
always spoke of it as her house. It isn't hers I It's mine :
papa sajrs everything she has is mine. All her nice books
are mine ; she offered to give me them, and her pretty birds,
and her pony Minny, if I would get the key of our room, and
let her out ; but I told her she had nothing to give, they were
all, all mine. And then she cried, and took a little picture
from her neck, and said I should have that ; two pictures in
a gold case, on one side her mother, and on the other uncle,
when they were young. That was yesterday — I said they
were mine, too; and tried to get them from her. The
spiteful thing wouldn't let me : she pushed me off, and hurt
me. I shrieked out — ^that frightens her — she heard papa
coming, and she broke the hinges and divided the case, and
gave me her mother's portrait ; the other she attempted to
hide : but papa asked what was the matter, and I explained
it. He took the one I had away, and ordered her to resign
hers to me ; she refused, and he — he struck her down, and
wrenched it off the chain, and crushed it with his foot.'
'And were you pleased to see her struck ?'I asked :
having my designs in encouraging his talk.
'I winked,'he answered :'I wink to see my father strike
a dog or a horse, he does it so hard. Yet I was glad at
first — she deserved punishing for pushing me: but when
papa was gone, she made me come to the window and
showed me her cheek out on the inside, against her teeth,
and her mouth filling with blood ; and then she gathered up
the bits of the picture, and went and sat down with her face
to the wall, and she has never spoken to me since : and I
sometimes think she can't speak for pain. I don't like to
think so ; but she's a naughty thing for crying continually ;
and she looks so pale and wild, I'm afraid of her/
* And you can get the key if you choose ?'I said.
'Yes, when I am up-stairs,'he answered ;'but I can't
walk up-stairs now.'
* In what apartment is it ?'I asked.
'Oh,'he cried,'I shan't tell you where it is. It is our
seeret Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, is to know.
293 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
There I you've tired me — go away, go away I'And he
tamed his face on to his arm, and shut his eyes again.
I considered it best to depart without seeing Mr.
Heathcliff, and bring a rescue for my young lady from the
Orange. On reaching it, the astonishment of my fellow-
servants to see me, and their joy also, was intense ; and
when they heard that their Uttle mistress was safe, two or
three were about to hurry up and shout the news at Mr.
Edgar's door : but I bespoke the announcement of it myself.
How changed I found him, even in those few days ! He
lay an image of sadness and resignation awaiting his death.
Very young he looked : though his actual age was thirty-nine,
one would have called him ten years younger, at least. He
thought of Catherine ; for he murmured her name. I
touched his hand, and spoke.
'Catherine is coming, dear master !'I whispered ;'she
is alive and well ; and will be here, I hope, to-night.'
I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence : he half
rose up, looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank
back in a swoon. As soon as he recovered, I related our
compulsory visit, and detention at the Heights. I said
Heathcliff forced me to go in : which was not quite true. I
uttered as Uttle as possible against Linton ; nor did I
describe aU his father's brutal conduct — my intentions being
to add no bitterness, if I could help it, to his already over-
flowing cup.
He divined that one of his enemy's purposes was to
secure the personal property, as well as the estate, to his son :
or rather himself ; yet why he did not wait till his decease
was a puzzle to my master, because ignorant how nearly he
and his nephew would quit the world together. However,
he felt that his will had better be altered : instead of leaving
Gatherime's fortune at her own disposal, he determined to
put it in the hands of trustees for her use during life,
and for her children, if she had any, after her. By that
means, it could not fall to Mr. Heathcliff should Linton
die*
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 398
Having reoeived his orders, I despatched a man to fetch
the attorney, and four more, provided with serviceable
weapons, to demand my young lady of her jailor. Both
parties were delayed very late. The single servant retomed
first. He said Mr. Green, the lawyer, was out when he
arrived at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his
re-entrance ; and then Mr. Green told him he had a Uttle
business in the village that must be done ; but he would be
at Thrushcross Grange before morning. The four men came
back unaccompanied also. They brought word that Catherine
was ill : too ill to quit her room ; and Heathcliff would not
suffer them to see her. I scolded the stupid fellows well for
listening to that tale, which I would not carry to my master ;
resolving to take a whole bevy up to the Heights, at day-
light, and storm it literally, unless the prisoner were quietly
surrendered to us. Her father shall see her, I vowed, and
vowed again, if that devil be killed on his own doorstones in
trying to prevent it !
Happily, I was spared the journey and the trouble. I
had gone down-stairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water ;
and was passing through the hall with it in my hand, when
a sharp knock at the front door made me jump.'Oh 1 it is
Green,'I said, recollecting myself —'only Green,'and I went
on, intending to send somebody else to open it ; but the
knock was repeated : not loud, and still importunately. I
put the jug on the banister and hastened to admit him
myself. The harvest moon shone clear outside. It was not
the attorney. My own sweet Uttle mistress sprang on my
neck sobbing,'Ellen, Ellen ! Is papa alive ?'
'Yes,'I cried :'yes, my angel, he is, God be thanked,
you are safe with us again 1'
She wanted to run, breathless as she was, up-siairs to
Mr. Linton's room ; but I compelled her to sit down on a
chair, and made her drink, and washed her pale face, chafing
it into a faint colour with my apron. Then I said I must go
first, and tell of her arrival ; imploring her to say, she should
be happy with young Heathcliff. She stared, but soon
294 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
oomprehending why I oounselled her to utter the falsehood,
she assured me she would not complain.
I oouldn't abide to be present at their meeting. I stood
outside the chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly
ventured near the bed, then. All was composed, however :
Catherine's despair was as silent as her father's joy. She
supported him calmly, in appearance ; and he fixed on her
features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.
He died blissfully, Mr. Lockwood : he died so. Edssing
her cheek, he murmured, —'I am going to her; and you,
darling child, shall come to us !'and never stirred or spoke
again ; but continued that rapt, radiant gaze, till his pulse
imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed. None could
have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely
without a struggle.
Whether Catherine had spent her tears, or whether the
grief were too weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-
eyed till the sun rose : she sat till noon, and would still have
remained brooding over that deathbed, but I insisted on her
coming away and taking some repose. It was well I
succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the
lawyer, having called at Wuthering Heights to get his
instructions how to behave. He had sold himself to
Mr. Heathcliff : that was the cause of his delay in obeying
my master's summons. Fortunately, no thought of worldly
afifairs crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him, after his
daughter's arrival.
Mr. Qreen took upon himself to order everything and
everybody about the place. He gave all the servants but
me, notice to quit. He would have carried his delegated
authority to the point of insisting that Edgar Linton should
not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his
family. There was the will, however, to hinder that, and
my loud protestations against any infringement of its
directions. The funeral was hurried over ; Catherine, Mrs.
Linton Heathcliff now, was suffered to stay at the Grange
till her father's corpse had quitted it
WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS 296
She told me that her angaiah had at last sparred Lmton
to incur the risk of liberating her. She heard the men I
sent disputing at the door, and she gathered the sense of
HeathcUfiTs answer. It drove her desperate. linton who
had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after I
left, was terrified into fetching the key before his father
re-ascended. He had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the
door, without shutting it ; and when he should have gone to
bed, he begged to sleep with Hareton, and his petition was
granted for once. Catherine stole out before break of day.
She dared not try the doors lest the dogs should raise an
alarm ; she visited the empty chambers and examined their
windows; and, luckily, Ughting on her mother's, she got
easily out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the
fir-troe close by. Her accomplice suffered for his share in
the escape, notwithstanding his timid contrivances.
OHAPTEB XXIX
The evening after the funeral, my young lady and I were
seated in the library ; now musing mournfully — one of us
despairingly — on our loss, now venturing conjectures as
to the gloomy future.
We had just agreed the best destiny which could
await Catherine would be a permission to continue resident
at the Grange; at least during Linton's life: he being
allowed to join her there, and I to remain as housekeeper.
That seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be
hoped for ; and yet I did hope, and began to cheer up under
the prospect of retaining my home and my employment, and,
above all, my beloved young mistress ; when a servant — one
of the discarded ones, not yet departed — ^rushed hastily in,
and said'that devil Heathcliff'was coming through the
court : should he fasten the door in his face ?
If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding,
we had not time. He made no ceremony of knocking or
annoimcing his name : he was master, and availed himself
of the master's privilege to walk straight in, without saying
a word. The sound of our informant's voice directed him
to the library ; he entered and motioning him out, shut the
door.
It was the same room into which he had been ushered,
as a guest, eighteen years before : the same moon shone
through the window ; and the same autumn landscape lay
outside. We had not yet lighted a candle, but all the apart-
ment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall : the
splendid head of Mrs. Linton, and the graceful one of her
husband. Heathcliff advanced to the hearth. Time had
WUTHBBING HEIGHTS 297
little altered his person either. There was the same man :
his dark face rather sallower and more composed, his frame
a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other difference.
Catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she
saw him.
'Stop 1'he said, aaresting her by the arm.'No more
runnings away ! Where would you go ? I'm come to fetch
you home ; and I hope you'U be a dutiful daughter and not
encourage my son to further disobedience. I was embar-
rassed how to punish him when I discovered his part in the
business : he's such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him ;
but you'll see by his look that he has received his due ! I
brought him down one evening, the day before yesterday,
and just set him in a chair, and never touched him after-
wards. I sent Hareton out, and we had the room to our-
selves. In two hours, I called Joseph to carry him up again ;
and since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as a
ghost ; and I fancy he sees me often, though I am not near.
Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night by the hour
together, and calls you to protect him from me ; and, whether
you like your precious mate, or not, you must come : he's
your concern now ; I yield all my interest in him to you.'
'Why not let Catherine continue here,'I pleaded,'and
send Master Linton to her ? As you hate them both, you'd
not miss them : they can only be a daily plague to your un-
natural heart.'
'I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange,'he answered ;'and
I want my children about me, to be sure. Besides, that
lass owes me her services for her bread. I'm not going to
nurture her in luxury and idleness after Linton is gone.
Make haste and get ready, now ; and don't oblige me to
compel you.'
'I shall,'said Catherine.'Linton is aU I have to love
in the world, and though you have done what you could to
make him hateful to me, and me to him, you cannot make
us hate each other. And I defy you to hurt him when I am
by, and I defy you to frighten me !'
298 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
'You are a boastful champion/ replied Heathcliff ;'but I
don't like you well enough to hurt him : you shall get the
full benefit of the torment, as long as it lasts. It is not I
who will make him hateful to you — it is his own sweet
spirit. He's as bitter as gall at your desertion and its con-
sequenoes : don't expect thanks for this noble devotion. I
heard him draw a pleasant picture to Zillah of what he
would do if he were as strong as I : the incUnation is there,
and his very weakness vdll sharpen his wits to find a substi-
tute for strength.'
'I know he has a bad nature,'said Catherine :'he's your
son. But I'm glad I've a better, to forgive it ; and I Imow
he loves me, and for that reason I love him. Mr. Heathcliff
ycu have nobody to love you ; and, however miserable you
make us, we shall still have the revenge of thinking ^at
your cruelty arises from your greatei; misery. You are
miserable, are you not ? Lonely, like the devil, and envious
like him ? Nobody loves you — nobody will cry for you when
you die ! I wouldn't be you t'
Catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph : she
seemed to have made up her mind to enter into the spirit of
her future family, and draw pleasure from the griefs of her
enemies.
'You shall be sorry to be yourself presently,'said her
father-in-law, * if you stand there another minute. Begone,
witch, and get your things I'
She scornfully withdrew. In her absence I began to
beg for Zillah's place at the Heights, offering to resign mine
to her ; but he would suffer it on no account. He bid me
be silent ; and then, for the first time, allowed himself a
glance round the room and a look at the pictures. Having
studied Mrs. Linton's, he said —'I shall have that home.
Not because I need it, but'He turned abruptly to the
fire, and continued, with what, for lack of a better word, I
must call a smile —'I'll tell you what I did yesterday I I got
the sexton, who was digging Linton's grave, to remove the
earth off her cofBn lid, and I opened it. I thought, once, I
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 299
would have stayed there : when I saw her face again — it is
hers yet I — he had hard work to stir me; but he said it would
change if the air blew on it, and so I struck one side of the
ooffin loose, and oovered it up: not Linton's side, damn
him I I wish he'd been soldered in lead. And I bribed the
sexton to pull it away when I'm laid there, and slide mine
out too ; I'll have it made so : and then by the time Linton
gets to us he'll not know which is which !'
'You were very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff I'I exclaimed ;
'were you not ashamed to disturb the dead ?'
'I disturbed nobody, Nelly,'he replied ;'and I gave some
ease to myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable
now ; and you'U have a better chance of keeping me under-
groxmd, when I get there. Disturbed her ? No I she has
disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen years — ^in-
oessantly — ^remorselessly — till yesternight ; and yesternight I
was tranquil. I dreamt I was sleeping the last sleep by
that sleeper, with my heart stopped and my cheek frozen
against hers.'
'And if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what
would you have dreamt of then ?'I said.
'Of dissolving with her, and being more happy still 1'he
answered.'Do you suppose I dread any change of that
sort ? I expected such a transformation on raising the lid :
but I'm better pleased that it should not commence till I
share it. Besides, unless I had received a distinct impres-
sion of her passionless features, that strange feeling would
hardly have been removed. It began oddly. You know I
was wild after she died ; and eternally, from dawn to dawn,
praying her to return to me her spirit I I have a strong
faith in ghosts : I have a conviction that they can, and do,
exist among us ! The day she was buried, there came a
fall of snow. In the evening I went to the churchyard. It
blew bleak as winter — all round was solitary. I didn't fear
that her fool of a husband would wander up the glen so late ;
and no one else had business to bring them there. Being
alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the sole
.300 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
barrier between us, I said to myself — " I'll have her in my
arms again ! If she be cold, I'll think it is this north wind
that chills me ; and if she be motionless, it is sleep. " I got
a spade from the tool-honse, and began to delve with all my
might — it scraped the cofiSn ; I fell to work with my hands ;
the wood commenced cracking about the screws ; I was on
the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that I heard
a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave,
and bending down.''If I can only get this off, " I muttered,
" I wish they may shovel in the earth over us both ! " and I
wrenched at it more desperately still. There was another
sigh, close at my ear. I appeared to feel the warm breath of
Jt displacing the sleet-laden wind. I knew no living thing
in flesh and blood was by ; but, as certainly as you perceive
the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though
it cannot be discerned, so certainly I felt that Cathy was
there : not under me, but on the earth. A sudden sense of
relief flowed from my heart through every limb. I relin-
quished my labour of agony, and turned consoled at once :
unspeakably consoled. Her presence was with me : it re-
mained while I re-filled the grave, and led me home. You may
laugh, if you will ; but I was sure I should see her there. I
was sure she was with me, and I could not help talking to
her. Having reached the Heights, I rushed eagerly to the
door. It was fastened ; and, I remember, that accursed
Eamshaw and my wife opposed my entrance. I remember
stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurrying
up-stairs, to my room and hers. I looked roimd impatiently
— I felt her by me — I could almost see her, and yet I coiUd
not I I ought to have sweat blood then, from the anguish of
my yearning — from the fervour of my supplications to have
but one glimpse ! I had not one. She showed herself, as
she often was in life, a devil to me I And, since then, some-
times more and sometimes less, I've been the sport of that
intolerable torture 1 Infernal I keeping my nerves at such a
stretch that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would
long ago have relaxed to the feebleness of Linton's. When
WUTHBRINQ HEIGHTS 801
I sat in the house with Horeton, it seemed that on going oat
I should meet her ; when I walked on the moors I should
meet her ooming in. When I went from home I hastened to
return; she must be somewhere at the Heights, I was
certain I And when I slept in her chamber — I was beaten
out of that. I couldn't lie there ; for the moment I dosed
my eyes, she was either outeide the window, or sUding back
the panels, or entering the room, or even resting her darling
head on the same pillow as she did when a child ; and I
must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed them
a hundred times a night — to be always disappointed I It
racked me I I've often groaned aloud, till that old rascal
Joseph no doubt believed that my conscience was playing
the fiend inside of me. Now, since I've s^en her, I'm
pacified — a little. It was a strange way of killing : not by
inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile me with
the spectre of a hope through eighteen years !'
Mr. Heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead ; his hair
clung to it, wet with perspiration ; his eyes were fixed on
the red embers of the fire, the brows not contracted, but
raised next the temples ; diminishing the grim aspect of his
coxmtenance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and
a painful appearance of mental tension towards one
absorbing subject. He only half addressed me, and I
maintained silence. I didn't like to hear him talk ! After a
short period he resumed his meditation on the picture, took
it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at
better advantage ; and while so occupied Catherine entered,
announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be
saddled.
'Send that over to-morrow,'said HeathcUff to me ; then
turning to her, he added :'You may do without your pony :
it is a fine evening, and you'll need no ponies at Wuthering
Heights ; for what journeys you take, your own feet will
serve you. CJome along.'
'Good-bye, Ellen t'whispered my dear little mistress.
r
302 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
As she kissed me, her lips felt like ioe.'Gome and see me,
EUen; don't forget.'
'Take oare you do no snch thing, Mrs. Dean 1'said her
new father.'When I wish to speak to you I'll come here.
I want none of your prying at my house 1'
He signed her to precede him ; and casting back a look
that cut my heart, she obeyed. I watched them, from the
window, walk down the gaiden. Heathcliff fixed Catherine's
arm under his : though she disputed the act at first evidently ;
and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley, whose
vrees concealed them.
CHAPTER XXX
I HAVE paia a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen her
since she left : Joseph held the door in his hand when I
called to ask after her, and wouldn't let me pass. He said
Mrs. Linton was'thrang,'and the master was not in. Zillah
has told me something of the way they go on, otherwise I
should hardly know who was dead and who living. She thinks
Catherine haughty, and does not like her, I can guess by her
talk. My young lady asked some aid of her when she first
came ; but Mr. Heathdiff told her to follow her own business,
and let his daughter-in-law look after herself; and Zillah
willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded, selfish woman.
Catherine evinced a child'e annoyance at this neglect ; repaid
it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among
her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great
wrong. I had a long talk with Zillah about six weeks ago,
a little before you came, one day when we foregathered on
the moor ; and this is what she told me.
'The first thing Mrs. Linton did,'she said,'on her
arrival at the Heights, was to run up-stairs, without even
vnshing good-evening to me and Joseph ; she shut herself
into Linton's room, and remained till morning. Then, while
the master and Eamshaw were at breakfast, she entered the
house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent
for ? her cousin was very ill.
'" We know that ! " answered Heathcliff ; " but his life
is not worth a farthing, and I won't spend a farthing on
him.'*
'" But I cannot tell how to do, " she said; " and if nobody
will help me, he'll die ! "
304 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS
< " Walk out of the room/'cried the master, " and let me
never hear a word more about him ! None here care what
becomes of him ; if you do, act the nurse ; if you do not,
lock him up and leave him. "
'Then she began to bother me, and I said I'd had enough
plague with the tiresome thing ; we each had our tasks, and
hers was to wait on Linton : Mr. Heathcliff bid me leave that
labour to her.
'How they managed together, I can't telL I fancy he
fretted a great deal, and moaned hisseln night and day ; and
she had precious little rest : one could guess by her white
face and heavy eyes. She sometimes came into the kitchen
all wildered like, and looked as if she would fain beg assis-
tance ; but I was not going to disobey the master : I never
dare disobey him, Mrs. Dean ; and, though I thought it
wrong that Kenneth should not be sent for, it was no concern
of mine either to advise or complain, and I always refused
to meddle. Once or twice, after we had gone to bed, I've
happened to open my door again and seen her sitting crying
on the stairs'-top ; and then I've shut myself in quick, for
fear of being moved to interfere. I did pity her then,
I'm sure : still I didn't wish to lose my place, you
know.
'At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and
frightened me out of my wits, by saying,''Tell Mr. Heathcliff
that his son is dying — I'm sure he is, this time. Get up,
instantly, and tell him. "
'Having uttered this speech, she vanished again. I lay
a quarter of an hour listening and trembling. Nothing
stiired — the house was quiet.
* She's mistaken, I said to myself. He's got over it. I
needn't disturb them ; and I began to doze. But my sleep
was marred a second time by a sharp ringing of the bell —
the only bell we have, put up on purpose for Linton ; and
the master called to me to see what was the matter, and in-
form them that he wouldn't have that noise repeated.
* I delivered Catherine's message. He cursed to himself,
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 306
and in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle, and
proceeded to their room. I followed. Mrs. Heathcliff was
seated by the bedside, with her hands folded on her knees.
Her father-in-law went up, held the light to Linton's face,
looked at him, and touched him ; afterwards he turned to
her.
'" Now— Catherine, " he said, " how do you feel ? "
'She was dumb.
'" How do you feel, Catherine ? " he repeated.
'" He's safe, and I'm free, " she answered : " I should feel
well — but, " she continued, with a bitterness she couldn't
conceal,''you have left me so long to struggle against death
alone, that I feel and see only death I I feel like death ! "
'And she looked like it, too t I gave her a little wine.
Hareton and Joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing
and the sound of feet, and heard our talk from outside, now
entered. Joseph was fain, I believe, of the lad's removal ;
Hareton seemed a thought bothered : though he was more
taken up with staring at Catherine than thinking of Linton.
But the master bid him get off to bed again : we didn't want
his help. He afterwards made Joseph remove the body to
his chamber, and told me to return to mine, and Mrs. Heath-
cUff remained by herself.
'In the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come
down to breakfast : she had undressed, and appeared going
to sleep, and said she was ill ; at which I hardly wondered.
I informed Mr. Heathcliff, and he replied, — " Well, let her be
till after the funeral ; and go up now and then to get her
what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
me.
Cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to ZiUah ;
who visited her twice a day, and would have been rather
more friendly, but her attempts at increasing kindness were
proudly and promptly repelled.
Heathcliff went up once, to show her Linton's will. He
had bequeathed the whole of his, and what had been her,
moveable property, to his father: the poor creature was
306 WUTHESING HEIGHTS
threatened, or coaxed, into that act during her week's absenoe,
when his unole died. The lands, being a minor, he could
not meddle with. However, Mr. Heathcliff has claimed and
kept them in his wife's right and his also : I suppose legally ;
at any rate, Catherine, destitute of cash and Mends, cannot
disturb his possession.
'Nobody,'said Zillah,'ever approached her door, except
that once, but I; and nobody asked anything about her.
The first occasion of her coming down into the house was on
a Sunday afternoon. She had cried out, when I carried up
her dinner, that she couldn't bear any longer being in the
cold ; and I told her the master was going to Thrushcross
Grange, and Eamshaw and I needn't hinder her from
descending ; so, as soon as she heard HeatholifiTs horse trot
off, she made her appearance, donned in black, and her
yellow curls combed back behind her ears as plain as a
Quaker : she couldn't comb them out.
* Joseph and I generally go to chapel on Sundays :'the
kirk, you know, has no minister now, explained Mrs. Dean ;
and they call the Methodists'or Baptists'place (I can't say
which it is) at Gimmerton, a chapel.'Joseph had gone,'she
continued,'but I thought proper to bide at home. Young
folks are always the better for an elder's over-looking ; and
Hareton, with all his bashfulness, isn't a model of nice
behaviour. I let him know that his cousin would very likely
sit with us, and she had been always used to see the Sabbath
respected ; so he had as good leave his guns and bits of in-
door work alone, while she stayed. He coloured up at the
news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes. The
train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a
minute. I saw he meant to give her his company ; and I
guessed, by his way, he wanted to be presentable; so,
laughing, as I durst not laugh when the master is by, I
offered to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion.
He grew sullen, and began to swear.
* Now, Mrs. Dean,'Zillah went on, seeing me not pleased
by her manner,'you happen think your young lady too fine
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 307
for Mr. Hareton; and happen you're right: bnt I own I
should love well to bring her pride a peg lower. And what
will all her learning and her daintiness do for her, now?
She*s as poor as you or I: poorer. Til be bound: you're
saving, and I'm doing my httle all that road.'
Hareton allowed ZiUah to give him her aid; and she
flattered him into a good humour ; so, when Catherine came,
half forgetting her former insults, he tried to make himself
agreeable, by the housekeeper's account.
'Missis walked in,'she said,'as chill as an icicle, and as
high as a princess. -I got up and offered her my seat in the
arm-chair. No, she turned up her nose at my civility.
Eamshaw rose, too, and bid her come to the settle, and sit
close by the fire : he was sure she was starved.
'" I've been starved a month and more, " she answered,
resting on the word as scornful as she could.
'And she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a dis-
tance from both of us. Having sat till she was warm, she
began to look round, and discovered a number of books on
the dresser ; she was instantly upon her feet again, stretching
to reach them : but they were too high up. Her cousin,
after watching her endeavours a while, at last summoned
courage to help her ; she held her frock, and he filled it with
the first that came to hand.
'That was a great advance for the lad. She didn't thank
him ; still, he felt gratified that she had accepted his assis-
tance, and ventured to stand behind as she examined them,
and even to stoop and point out what struck his fancy in
certain old pictures which they contained; nor was he
daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from
his finger : he contented himself with going a bit farther back
and looking at her instead of the book. She continued
reading, or seeking for something to read. His attention
became, by degrees, quite centred in the study of her thick
silky curls : her face he couldn't see, and she couldn't see
him. And, perhaps, not quite awake to what he did, but
attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded from
308 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
staring to touohing ; he pat oat his hand and stroked one
oorl, as gently as if it were a bird. He might have stack
a knife into her neok, she started roond in sach a taking.
'" Get away this moment ! How dare yon toach me ?
Why are yon stopping there ? " she cried, in a tone of disgust.
** I can't endure you ! I'll go upstairs again, if you come
near me. "
'Mr. Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do :
he sat down in the settle very quiet, and she continued
turning over her volumes another half hour ; finally, Eam-
shaw crossed over, and whispered to me.
'" Will you ask her to read to us, Zillah ? I'm stalled
of doing naught ; and I do like — ^I could like to hear her !
Dunnot say I wanted it, but ask of yourseln. "
'''Mr. Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am, " I
said, immediately. " He'd take it very kind — he'd be much
obliged. "
'She frowned ; and looking up, answered —
''* Mr. Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good
enough to understand that I reject any pretence at kindness
you have the hypocrisy to offer ! I despise you, and will
have nothing to say to any of you ! When I would have
given my Uf e for one kind word, even to see one of your faces,
you all kept off. But I won't complain to you ! I'm driven
down here by the cold ; not either to amuse you or enjoy
your society. "
* " What could I ha'done ? " began Eamshaw. " How
was I to blame ? "
^ " Oh I you are an exception, " answered Mrs. Heathcliff.
** I never missed such a concern as you. "
"'But I offered more than once, and asked, " he said,
kindling up at her pertness,''I asked Mr. HeathcUff to let
me wake for you "
'" Be silent ! I'll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather
than have your disagreeable voice in my ear 1 " said my
lady.
'Hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him 1 and
t
•«
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS 809
nnslinging his gun, restrained himself from his Sunday
oocapations no longer. He talked now, freely enough ; and
she presently saw fit to retreat to her solitude : but the frost
had set in, and, in spite of her pride, she was foroed to con-
descend to our company, more and more. However, I took
care there should be no further scorning at my good nature :
ever since, I've been as stiff as herself ; and she has no
lover or liker among us : and she does not deserve one ; for,
let them say the least word to her, and she'll curl back with-
out respect of any one. She'll snap at the master himself,
and as good as dares him to thrash her ; and the more hurt
she gets, the more venomous she grows.'
At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined
to leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to
come and live with me : but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon
permit that as he would set up Hareton in an independent
house; and I can see no remedy, at present, unless she
cotdd marry again ; and that scheme it does not come within
my province to arrange.
Thus ended Mrs. Dean's story. Notwithstanding the
doctor's prophecy, I am rapidly recovering strength; and
though it be only the second week in January, I propose
getting out on horseback in a day or two, and riding over to
Wuthering Heights, to inform my landlord that I shall spend
the next six months in London ; and, if he likes, he may
look out for another tenant to take the place after October.
I would not pass another winter here for much.
CHAPTEB XXXI
Ybbtbbdat was bright, calm, and frosty. I went to th^^
Heights as I proposed: my housekeeper entreated me to
bear a little note from her to her young lady, and I did
not refuse, for the worthy woman was not conscious of
anything odd in her request. The front door stood open, but
the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit ; I knocked
and invoked Eamshaw from among the garden-beds ; he
unchained it, and I entered. The fellow is as handsome a
rustic as need be seen. I took particular notice of him this
time ; but then he does his best apparently to make the least
of his advantages.
I asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home ? He answered*
No; but he would be in at dinner-time. It was eleven
o'clock, and I announced my intention of going in and wait-
ing for him ; at which he immediately flung doWn his tools
and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not as a
substitute for the host.
We entered together ; Catherine was there, making herself
useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching
meal ; she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I
had seen her first. She hardly raised her eyes to notice me,
and continued her employment with the same disregard to
common forms of poUteness as before ; never returning my
bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
'She does not seem so amiable,'I thought,'as Mrs.
Dean wotdd persuade me to believe. She's a beauty, it is
true ; but not an angel.'
Eamshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the
kitchen. * Eemove them yourself,'she said, pushing them
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS 311
from her as soon as she had done ; and retiring to a stool by
the window, where she began to carve figures of birds and
beasts out of the turnip-parings in her lap. I approached
her, pretending to desire a view of the garden; and, as I
fancied, adroitly dropped Mrs. Dean's note on to her knee,
unnoticed by Hareton — but she asked aloud,'What is
that ?'And chucked it off.
* A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at
the Grange,'I answered ; annoyed at her exposing my kind
deed, and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my
own. She would gladly have gathered it up at this informa-
tion, but Hareton beat her; he seized and put it in his
waistcoat, saying Mr. HeathcUff should look at it first.
Thereat, Catherine silently turned her face from us, and,
very stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied
it to her eyes; and her cousin, after struggling awhile to
keep down his softer feelings, pulled out the letter and flung
it on the floor beside her, as ungraciously as he could.
Catherine caught and perused it eagerly ; then she put a few
questions to me concerning the inmates, rational and
irrational, of her former home ; and gazing towards the hills,
murmured in soliloquy :
* I should like to be riding Minny down there ! I should
like to be climbing up there ! Ohl I'm tired — I'm stalled,
Hareton !'And she leant her pretty head back against the
sill, with half a yawn and half a sigh, and lapsed into an
aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring nor knowing
whether we remarked her.
'Mrs. Heathchff,'I said, after sitting some time mute,
< you are not aware that I am an acquaintance of yours ? so
intimate that I think it strange you won't come and speak to
me. My housekeeper never wearies of talking about and
praising you ; and she'll be greatly disappointed if I return
with no news of or from you, except that you received her
letter and said nothing 1'
She appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked, —
* Does Ellen like you ?'
312 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS
'Yes, very well/ I replied, hesitatingly.
'You must tell her/ she continued,'that I would answer
her letter, but I have no materials for writing : not even a
book from which I might tear a leaf/
'No books t'I exclaimed.'How do you contrive to live
here without them? if I may take the liberty to inquire.
Though provided with a large library, I'm frequently very
dull at the Grange ; take my books away, and I should be
desperate 1'
'I was always reading, when I had them,'said Catherine ;
'and Mr. Heathchff never reads ; so he took it into his head
to destroy my books. I have not had a glimpse of one for
weeks. Only once, I searched through Joseph's store of
theology, to his great irritation ; and once, Hareton, I came
upon a secret stock in your room — some Latin and Greek,
and some tales and poetry : all old friends. I brought the
last here — and you gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver
spoons, for the mere love of stealing ! They are of no use
to you ; or else you concealed them in the bad spirit that, as
you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall. Perhaps your
envy counselled Mr. Heathcliff to rob me of my treasures?
But I've most of them written on my brain and printed in
my heart, and you cannot deprive me of those 1'
Eamshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this
revelation of his private literary accumulations, and
stammered an indignant denial of her accusations.
< Mr. Hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of
knowledge,'I said, coming to his rescue. * He is not envious^
but emuUms of your attainments. He'll be a clever scholar
in a few years.'
'And he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime,'
answered Catherine.'Yes, I hear him trying to spell and
read to himself, and pretty blunders he makes ! I wish you
would repeat Chevy Chase as you did yesterday : it was
extremely funny. I heard you ; and I heard you turning
over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then
cursing because you couldn't read their explanations I'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 818
The young man evidently thought it too bad that he
should be laughed at for his ignorance, and then laughed at
for trying to remove it. I had a similar notion ; and,
remembering Mrs. Dean's anecdote of his first attempt at
enlightening the darkness in which he had been reared, I
observed, — * But, Mrs. Heathcliff, we have each had a
commencement, and each stumbled and tottered on the
threshold ; had our teachers scorned instead of aiding us, we
should stumble and totter yet.'
'Oh t'she replied, * I don't wish to limit his acquire-
ments : still, he has no right to appropriate what is mine,
and make it ridiculous to me with his vile mistakes and mis-
pronunciations ! Those books, both prose and verse, are
consecrated to me by other associations ; and I hate to have
them debased and profaned in his mouth I Besides, of all,
he has selected my favourite pieces that I love the most to
repeat, as if out of deliberate malice.'
Hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute : he laboured
under a severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it was
no easy task to suppress. I rose, and, from a gentlemanly
idea of relieving his embarrassment, took up my station in
the doorway, surveying the external prospect as I stood.
He followed my example, and left the room ; but presently
reappeared, bearing half a dozen volumes in his hands, which
he threw into Catherine's lap, exclaiming, —'Take them ! I
never want to hear, or read, or think of them again !'
'I won't have them now,'she answered.'I shall
connect them with you, and hate them.'
She opened one that had obviously been often turned
over, and read a portion in the drawling tone of a beginner ;
then laughed, and threw it from her. * And listen,'she con-
tinued, provokingly, commencing a verse of an old ballad in
the same fashion.
But his self-love would endure no further torment: I
heard, and not altogether disapprovingly, a manual check
given to her saucy tongue. The little wretch had done her
utmost to hurt her cousin's sensitive though uncultivated
814 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
feelings, and a physical argument was the only mode he had
of balancing the account, and repaying its efifeoxis on the
inflictor. He afterwards gathered the books and hurled them
on the fire. I read in his countenance what anguish it was
to offer that sacrifice to. spleen. I fancied that as they
consumed, he recalled the pleasure they had already
imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing pleasure he
had anticipated from them ; and I fancied I guessed the
incitement to his secret studies also. He had been content
with daily labour and rough animal enjoyments, till Catherine
crossed his path. Shame at her scorn, and hope of her
approval, were his first prompters to higher pursuits ; and
instead of guarding him from one and winning him to the
other, his endeavours to raise himself had produced just
the contrary result.
* Yes ; tfiat's all the good that such a brute as you can
get from them !'cried Catherine, sucking her damaged Up,
and watching the conflagration with indignant eyes.
'You'd better holA your tongue, now,'he answered fiercely.
And his agitation precluded further speech ; he advanced
hastily to the entrance, where I made way for him to pass.
But ere he had crossed the door-stones, Mr. Heathcliff,
coming up the causeway, encountered him, and laying hold
of his shoulder asked, —'What's to do now, my lad ?'
'Naught, naught,'he said, and broke away to enjoy his
grief and anger in solitude.
Heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.
'It will be odd if I thwart myself,* he muttered, uncon-
scious that I was behind him. * But when I look for his
father in his face, I find her every day more 1 How the devil
is he so like ? I can hardly bear to see him.'
He bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in.
There was a restless, anxious expression in his countenance
I had never remarked there before ; and he looked sparer in
person. His daughter-in-law, on perceiving him through the
window, immediately escaped to the kitchen, so that I
remained alone.
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 816
'I'm glad to see you out of doors again, Mr. Lookwood/
he said, in reply to my greeting ;'from selfish motives partly :
I don't think I could readily supply your loss in this deso-
lation. I've wondered more than onoe what brought you
here.*
'An idle whim, I fear, sir,'was my answer ;'or else on
idle whim is going to spirit me away. I shall set out for
London next week ; and I must give you warning that I feel
no disposition to retain Thrushcross Orange beyond the
twelve months I agreed to rent it. I believe I shall not live
there any more.'
'Oh, indeed; you're tired of being banished from the
world, are you?'he said.'But if you be coming to plead
off paying for a place you won't occupy, your journey is use-
less : I never relent in exacting my due from any one.'
'I'm coming to plead off nothing about it,'I exclaimed,
considerably irritated.'Should you wish it, I'll settle with
you now,'and I drew my note-book from my pocket.
'No, no,'he replied, coolly;'you'll leave sufSoient
behind to cover your debts, if you fail to return : I'm not in
such a hurry. Sit down and take your dinner with us ; a
guest that is safe from repeating his visit can generally be
made welcome. Catherine bring the things in: where are
you?'
Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and
forks.
'You may get your dinner with Joseph,'muttered
HeathcHff, aside,'and remain in the kitchen till he is
gone.'
She obeyed his directions very punctually : perhaps she
had no temptation to transgress. Living among clowns and
misanthropists, she probably cannot appreciate a better class
of people when she meets them.
With Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one
hand, and Hareton, absolutely dumb, on the other, I made a
somewhat cheerless meal, and bade adieu early. I would
have departed by the back way, to get a last glimpse of
316 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Catherine and annoy old Joseph; but Hareton reoeiyed
orders to lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted
me to the door, so I oould not fulfil my wish.
'How dreary life gets over in that house I'I reflected,
while riding down the road.'What a realisation of some-
thing more romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for
Mrs. Linton Heathdiff, had she and I struck up an attach-
ment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into
the stirring atmosphere of the town 1'
\
CHAPTEB XXXn
1802. — ^This September I was invited to deyastate the moon
of a friend in the north, and on my journey to his abode, I
unexpectedly came within fifteen miles of Gimmerton. The
ostler at a roadside public-house was holding a pail of water
to refresh my horses, when a cart of very green oats, newly
reaped, passed by, and he remarked, —'Yon's frough Gim-
merton, nah 1 They're alias three wick'after other folk wi'
ther harvest.'
'Gimmerton ?'I repeated — my residence in that locality
had already grown dim and dreamy.'Ah I I know. How
far is it from this ?'
< Happen fourteen mile o'er th'hills ; and a rough road,'
he answered.
A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushoross Grange.
It was scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as well
pass the night under my own roof as in an inn. Besides, I
could spare a day easily to arrange matters with my land-
lord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading the
neighbourhood again. Having rested awhile, I directed my
servant to inquire (he way to the village ; and, with great
fatigue to our beasts, we managed the distance in some three
hours.
I left him there, and proceeded down the valley alone.
The grey church looked greyer, and the lonely churchjrard
lonelier. I distinguished a moor-sheep cropping the short
turf on the graves. It was sweet, warm weather — too warm
for travelling ; but the heat did not hinder me from enjoying
the delightful scenery above and below : had I seen it nearer
August, I'm sure it would have tempted me to waste a
818 WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS
month among its Bolitades. In winter nothing more dreary,
in summer nothing more divine, than those glens shut in by
hiUs, and those blufif, bold swells of heath.
I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for
admittance; but the family had retreated into the back
premises, I judged, by one thin, blue wreath, curling from
the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear. I rode into the
court. Under the porch, a girl of nine or ten sat knitting,
and an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a
meditative pipe.
'Is Mrs. Dean within ?'I demanded of the dame.
'Mistress Dean ? Nay 1'she answered,'she doesn't
hide here : ahoo's up at th'Heights.'
'Are you the housekeeper, then ?'I continued.
'Eea, aw keep th'hause,'she replied.
'Well, I'm Mr. Lockwood, the master. Are there
any rooms to lodge me in, I wonder? I wish to stay all
night.'
'T'maister I'she cried in astonishment.'Whet,
whoiver knew yah wur coming ? Yah sud ha'send word.
They's nowt norther dry nor mensful abaht t'place : nowt
there isn't I'
She threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl
followed, and I entered too ; soon perceiving that her report
was true, and, moreover, that I had almost upset her wits by
my unwelcome apparition, I bade her be composed. I would
go out for a walk ; and, meantime she must try to prepare a
comer of a sitting-room for me to sup in, and a bedroom to
sleep in. No sweeping and dusting, only good fire and
dry sheets were necessary. She seemed willing to do her
best; though she thrust the hearth-brush into the grates in
mistake for the poker, and malappropriated several other
articles of her craft : but I retired, confiding in her energy
for a resting-place against my return. Wuthering Heights
was the goal of my proposed excursion. An after-thought
brought me back, when I had quitted the court.
'All well at the Heights ?'I inquired of the woman.
WDTHEBING HEIGHTS 319
^ Eea, Tr owt ee knaw I'she answered, skorrying away
^ih a pan of hot dnders.
I would have asked why Mrs. Dean had deserted the
Grange, bat it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis,
so I tamed away and made my exit, rambling leisarely
along, with the glow of a sinking son behind, and the mild
glory of a rising moon in front — one fading, and the other
brightening — as I quitted the park, and climbed the stony
by-road branching off to Mr. HeathdifTs dwelling. Before
I arrived in sight of it, all that remained of day was a beam-
less amber light along the west : but I could see every pebble
on the path, and every blade of grass, by that splendid moon.
I had neither to climb the gate nor to knock — it yielded to my
hand. That is an improvement, I thought. And I noticed
another, by the aid of my nostrils ; a fragrance of stocks and
wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely
fruit-trees.
Both doors and lattices were open ; and yet, as is usually
the case in a coal-district, a fine red fire illumined the
chimney : the comfort which the eye derives from it renders
the extra heat endurable. But the house of Wuthering
Heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of
space for withdrawing out of its influence ; and accordingly
what inmates there were had stationed themselves not far
from one of the windows. I could both see them and hear
them talk before I entered, and looked and listened in con-
sequence ; being moved thereto by a mingled sense of
curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.
'Con-trary ! * said a voice as sweet as a silver bell.'That
for the third time, you dunce ! I'm not going to tell you
again. Recollect, or I'll pull your hair !'
'Contrary, then,'answered another, in deep but softened
tones.'And now, kiss me, for minding so well.'
'No, read it over first correctly, without a single mis-
take.'
The m & de speaker began to read : he was a young man,
respectably dressed and seated at a table, having a book
320 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
before him. His handsome featnree glowed with pleasure,
and his eyes kept impatiently wandering from the page
to a small white hand over his shoulder, which recalled him
by a smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected
such signs of inattention. Its owner stood behind ; her light,
shining ringlets blending, at intervals, with his brown locks,
as she bent to superintend his studies ; and her face — ^it was
lucky he could not see her face, or he would never have been
so steady. I could ; and I bit my lip in spite, at having
thrown away the chance I might have had of doing something
besides staring at its smiting beauty.
The task was done, not free from further blunders ; but
the pupil claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses ;
which, however, he generously returned. Then they came
to the door, and from their conversation I judged they were
about to issue out and have a walk on the moors. I sup-
posed I should be condemned in Hareton Eamshaw's heart,
if not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions
if I showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood
then; and feeling very mean and malignant, I skulked
round to seek refuge in the kitchen. There was unobstructed
admittance on that ride also ; and at the door sitt my old
friend Nelly Dean, sewing and singing a song ; which was
often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and
intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
'I'd rayther, by th'haulf , hev''em swearing i'my lugs
fro'h mom to neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver t'said the
tenant of the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of
Nelly's.'It's a blazing shame, that I cannot oppen t'
blessed Book, but yah set up them glories to sattan, and all
t'flaysome wickednesses that iver were bom into th'warld I
Oht ye're a raight nowt; and shoo's another; and that
poor lad'U be lost atween ye. Poor lad I'he added, with a
groan ;'he's witched : I'm sartin on't. Oh, Lord, judge'em,
for there's norther law nor justice among wer rullers I'
'No ! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, I sup-
pose,'retorted the singer.'But wisht, old man, and read
WUTHEBINQ HEIGHTS 321
your Bible like a Christianr and never mind me. This is
" Fairy Annie's Wedding " — a bonny tune — ^it goes to a
dance/
Mrs. Dean was about to recommence, when I advanced ;
and recognising me directly, she jumped to her feet, crying
— * Why, bless you, Mr. Lockwood ! How could you think
of returning in this way? All's shut up at Thrushcross
Orange. You should have given us notice !'
'I've fiurranged to be acconmiodated there, for as long
as I shall stay,'I answered.'I depart again to-morrow.
And how are you transplanted here, Mrs. Dean ? tell me
that.'
'Zillah left, and Mr. Heathclifif wished me to come, soon
after you went to London, and stay till you returned. But,
step in, pray I Have you walked from Oimmerton this
evening ?'
'From the Grange,'I replied ; * and while they make me
lodging room there, I want to finish my business with your
master ; because I don't think of having another opportunity
in a hurry.'
'What business, sir ?'said Nelly, conducting me into the
house.'He's gone out at present, and won't return soon.'
'About the rent,'I answered.
'Oh t then it is with Mrs. Heathcliff you must settle,'
she observed ;'or rather with me. She has not learnt to
manage her affairs yet, and I act for her: there's nobody
else.'
I looked surprised.
'Ah I you have not heard of Heathcliff's death, I see/
she continued.
'Heathcliff dead 1'I exclaimed, astonished.'How long
ago?'
'Three months since : but sit down, and let me take your
hat, and I'll teU you all about it. Stop, you have had
nothing to'eat, have you ?'
'I want nothing : t have ordered supper at home. You
git down too. I never dreamt of his dying 1 Let me hear
322 WUTHEBING HEIOHTB
how it came to pass. Ton say yoa don't expect them beek
for 0ome time — ^the yoong people?'
'No — I have to soold them every eyening for their late
rambles : bat they don't care for me. At least, have a drink
of onr old ale ; it will do yon good : yon seem weary.'
She hastened to fetch it before I conld refose, and I
heard Joseph asking whether'it wam't a crying scandal
that she should have followers at her time of life? And
then, to get them jocks out o't'maister's cellar I He fair
shaamed to'bide still and see it.'
She did not stay to retaliate, bat re-entered in a minate,
bearing a reaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with
becoming earnestness. And afterwards she famished me
with the sequel of HeatholifTs history. He had a'queer'
end, as she expressed it.
I was summoned to Wuthering Heights, within a fort-
night of your leaving us, she said ; and I obeyed joyfully, for
Catherine's sake. My first interview with her grieved and
shocked me : she had altered so much since our separation.
Mr. Heathcliff did not explain his reasons for taking a new
mind about my coming here ; he only told me he wanted me,
and he was tiied of seeing Catherine : I must make the little
parlour my sitting-room, and keep her with me. It was
enough if he were obliged to see her once or twice a day.
She seemed pleased at this arrangement ; and, by degrees, I
smuggled over a great number of books, and other articles,
that had formed her amusement at the Grange; and
flattered myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. The
delusion did not last long. Catherine, contented at first, in
a brief space grew irritable and restless. For one thing, she
was forbidden to move out of the garden, and it fretted her
sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ;
for another, in following the house, I was forced to quit her
frequently, and she complained of loneliness : she preferred
quarrelling with Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in
her solitude. I did not mind their skirmishes : but Hareton
was often obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master
WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS 823
wanted to have the house to himself I and though in the
beginning she either left it at his approach, or quietly joined
in my occupations, and shnnned remarking or addressing
him — ^and thoagh he was always as sullen and silent as
possible — filter a while, she changed her behaviour, and
became incapable of letting him alone : talking at > ^im ;
commenting on his stupidity and idleness ; expressing her
wonder how he could endure the life he lived — how he
could sit a whole evening staring into the fire, and
dozing.
'He's just like a dog, is he not, Ellen?'she once
observed,'or a cart-horse? He does his work, eats his
food, and sleeps eternally ! What a blank, dreary mind he
must have I Do you ever dream, Hareton ? And, if you do,
what is it about? But you can't speak to me 1'
Then she looked at him ; but he would neither open his
mouth nor look again.
'He's, perhaps, dreaming now,'she continued.'He
twitched his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him,
Ellen.'
'Mr. Hareton will ask the mast^ to send you up-stairs,
if you don't behave 1'I said. He had not only twitched his
shoulder but clenched his fist, as if tempted to use it.
'I know why Hareton never speaks, when I am in the
kitchen,'she exclaimed, on another occasion.'He is afraid
I shall laugh at him. Ellen, what do you think ? He began
to teach himself to read once ; and, because I laughed, he
burned his books, and dropped it : was he not a fool ?'
'Were not you naughty ?'I said ;'answer me that.'
'Perhaps I was,'she went on ;'but I did not expect > ^im
to be so silly. Hareton, if I gave you a book, would you
take it now? I'll try 1'
She placed one she had been perusing on his hand ; he
flung it off, and muttered, if she did not give over, he would
break her neck.
'Well, I shall put it here,'she said,'in the table-drawer ;
and I'm going to bed.'
324 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
Then she whispered me to watoh whether he touched it,
and departed. But he would not come near it; and so I
informed her in the morning, to her great disappointment. I
saw she was sorry for his persevering suUdness and indolence :
her conscience reproved her for frightening him off improving
himself : she had done it effectually. But her ingenuity
was at work to remedy the injury : while I ironed, or pur-
sued other such stationary employments as I could not well
do in the parlour, she would bring some pleasant volume and
read it aloud to me. When Hareton v^s there, she generally
paused in an interesting part, and left the book lying about :
that she did repeatedly ; but he was as obstinate as a mule,
and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took
to smoking with Joseph ; and they sat like automatons, one
on each side of the fire, the elder happily too deaf to under-
stand her wicked nonsense, as he would have called it, the
younger doing his best to seem to disregard it. On fine
evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and
Catherine yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her,
and ran off into the court or garden the moment I began ;
and, as a last resource, cried, and said she was tired of
living : her life was useless.
Mr. HeathcUff, who grew more and more disinclined to
society, had almost banished Eamshaw from his apartment.
Owing to an accident at the commencement of March, he
became for some dajrs a fixture in the kitchen. His gun
burst while out on the hills by himself ; a splinter out his
arm, and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach
home. The consequence was that, perforce, he was con-
demned to the fireside and tranquilhty, till he made it up
again. It suited Catherine to have him there : at any rate,
it made her hate her room up-stairs more than ever : and she
would compel me to find out business below, that she might
accompany me.
On Easter Monday, Joseph went to Oimmerton fair with
some cattle ; and, in the afternoon, I was busy getting up
linen in the kitchen. Eamshaw sat, morose as usual, at the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 326
chimney oomer, and my little mistress was beguiling an idle
hoar with drawing pictures on the window-panes, varying
her amusement by smothered bnrsts of songs, and whispered
ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience
in the direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and
looked into the grate. At a notice that I could do with her
no longer intercepting my light, she removed to the hearth-
stone. I bestowed little attention on her proceedings, but,
presently, I heard her begin —'I've found out, Hareton, that
I want — ^that I'm glad — that I should like you to be my
cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so
rough.'
Hareton returned no answer.
'Hareton, Hareton, Hareton t do you hear ?'she con-
tinued.
'Get off wi'ye I'he growled, with uncompromising
grufiEness.
'Let me take that pipe,'she said, cautiously advancing
her hand and abstracting it from his mouth.
Before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and
behind the fire. He swore at her and seized another.
'Stop,'she cried,'you must listen to me first; and I
can't speak while those clouds are floating in my face.'
'Will you go to the devil t'he exclaimed, ferociously,
'and let me be t'
'No,'she persisted,'I won't : I can't tell what to do to
make you talk to'me ; and you are determined not to under-
stand. When I call you stupid, I don't mean anything : I
don't mean that I despise you. Gome, you shall take notice
of me, Hareton : you are my cousin, and you shall own- me.'
'I shall have naught to do wi'you and your mucky
pride, and your damned mocking tricks !'he answered.'I'U
go to hell, body and soul, before I look sideways after you
again. Side out o't'gate, now, this minute I'
Catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat
chewing her lip, and endeavouring, by humming an eccen-
tric tune, to conceal a growing tendency to sob.
326 WUTHEBING HEIOHTB
'Tou should be frienda wiih yonr oousin, Mr. Hareton/
I interrupted,'since she repents of her sanoiness. It would
do you a great deal of good : it would make you another
man to have her for a companion.'
'A companion I'he cried ;'when she hates me, and does
not think me fit to wipe her shoon 1 Nay, if it made me a
king, I'd not be soomed for seeking her good-will any
more.'
'It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me I'wept
Cathy, no longer disguising her trouble.'You hate me as
much as Mr. Heathchff does, and more.'
'You're a damned liar,'began Eamshaw :'why have I
made him angry, by taking your part, then, a hundred times?
and that when you sneered at and despised me, and — Oo on
plaguing me, and I'll step in yonder, and say you worried
me out of the kitchen !'
'I didn't know you took my part,'she answered, drying
her eyes ;'and I was miserable and bitter at everybody ; but
now I thank you, and beg you to forgive me : what can I do
besides ?'
She returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her
hand. He blackened and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and
kept his fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze fixed on the
ground. Catherine, by instinct, must have divined it was
obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that prompted this
dogged conduct ; for, after remaining an instant undecided,
she stooped and impressed on his cheek a gentle kiss. The
little rogue thought I had not seen her, and, drawing back,
she took her former station by the window, quite demurely.
I shook my head reprovingly, and then she blushed and
whispered —'Well I what should I have done, Ellen ? He
wouldn't shake hands, and he wouldn't look : I must show
him some way that I like him — that I want to be friends.'
Whether the kiss convinced Hareton, I cannot teU : he
was very careful, for some minutes, that his face should not
be seen, and when he did raise it, he was sadly puzzled
where to turn his eyes.
WUTHEBING HBIGHT8 82?
Catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome
book neatly in white paper, and having tied it with a bit of
ribbon, and addressed it to'Mr. Hareton Eamshaw,'she
desired me to be her ambassadress, and convey the present to
its destined recipient.
'And tell him, if he'll take it, I'll bome and teach him to
read it right,'she said ;'and, if he refuse it, I'll go upstairs,
and never tease him again.'
I carried it, and repeated the message ; anxiously watched
by my employer. Hareton would not open his fingers, so I
laid it on his knee. He did not strike it off, either. I
returned to my work. Catherine leaned her head and arms
on the table, till she heard the slight rustle of the covering
being removed ; then she stole away, and quietly seated her-
self beside her cousin. He trembled, and his face glowed :
all his rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted
him : he could not summon courage, at first, to utter a
syllable in reply to her questioning look, and her murmured
petition.
'Say you forgive me, Hareton, da You can make me
so happy by speaking that httle word.'
He muttered something inaudible.
'And you'll be my friend ?'added Catherine, interroga-
tively.
'Nay, you'll be ashamed of me every day of your life,'he
answered ;'and the more ashamed, the more you know me ;
and I cannot bide it.'
'So you won't be my friend ?'she said, smiling as sweet
as honey, and creeping close up.
I overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on
looking round again, I perceived two such radiant counten-
ances bent over the page of the accepted book, that I did not
doubt the treaty had been ratified on both sides ; and the
enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.
The work they studied was full of costly pictures ; and
those and their position had charm enough to keep them un-
moved till Joseph came home. He, poor man, was perfectly
328 WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS
aghast at the spectacle of Catherine seated on the same bench
with Hareton Eamshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder ;
and conf oanded at his favourite's endurance of her proximity :
it affected him too deeply to sJlow an observation on the
subject that night. His emotion was only revealed by the
immense sighs he drew, as he solenmly spread his large
Bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty bank-notes from
his pocket-book, the produce of the day's transactions. At
length he summoned Hareton from his seat.
'Tak'these in to t'maister, lad,'he said,'and bide there.
I's gang up to my own rahm. This hoile's neither mensfol
nor seemly for us : we mun side out and seearch another.'
'Gome, Catherine,'I said,'we must " side out " too : I've
done my ironing. Are you ready to go?'
'It is not eight o'clock 1'she answered, rising unwillingly.
'Hareton, I'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece,
and I'll bring some more to-morrow.'
'Ony books that yah leave, I shall tak'into th'hahse/
said Joseph,'and it'll be mitch if yah find'em agean ; soa,
yah may plase yerseln I'
Cathy threatened that his Ubrary should pay for hers ;
and, smiling as she passed Hareton, went singing up-stairs :
lighter of heart, I venture to say, than ever she had been
under that roof before ; except, perhaps, during her earliest
visits to Linton.
The intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly ; though it
encountered temporary interruptions. Eamshaw was not to
be civilized with a wish, and my young lady was no philo-
sopher, and no paragon of patience ; but both their minds
tending to the same point — one loving and desiring to esteem^
and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed — they
contrived in the end to reach it.
You see, Mr. Lockwood, it was easy enough to win Mrs.
Heathcliff's heart. But now, I'm glad you did not try. The
crown of all my wishes will be the union of those two. I
shall envy no one on their wedding day : there won't be a
happier woman than myself in England I
CHAPTEB XXXm
On the morrow of that Monday, Eamahaw being still unable
to follow his ordinary employments, and therefore remaining
about the house, I speedily found it would be impracticable
to retain my charge beside me, as heretofore. She got
downstairs before me, and out into the garden, where she
had seen her cousin performing some easy work ; and when
I went to bid them come to breakfast, I saw she had per-
suaded him to clear a large space of ground from currant
and gooseberry bushes, and they were busy planning together
an importation of plants from the Grange.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accom-
plished in a brief half -hour ; the black-currant trees were the
apple of Joseph's eye, and she had ju^t fixed her choice of a
flower-bed in the midst of them.
'There! That will be all shown to the master,'I
exclaimed,'the minute it is discovered. And what excuse
have you to offer for taking such liberties with the garden?
We shall have a fine explosion on the head of it : see if we
don't ! Mr. Hareton, I wonder you should have no more
wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding t'
'I'd forgotten they were Joseph's,'answered Eamshaw,
rather puzzled ;'but I'll tell him I did it.'
We always ate our meals with Mr. Heathcliff. I held the
mistress's post in making tea and carving ; so I was indis-
pensable at table. Catherine usually sat by me, but to-day
she stole nearer to Hareton ; and I presently saw she would
have no more discretion in her friendship than she had in
her hostility.
'NoW| mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin
880 WUTHBRINQ HEIGHTS
too much/ were my whispered instmcldons as we entered the
room.'It will oertainly annoy Mr. Heatholi£F, and he*ll be
mad at you both.'
'I'm not going to/ she answered.
The minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking
primroses in his plate of porridge.
He dared not speak to her there : he dared hardly look ;
and yet she went on teasing, till he was twice on the
point of being provoked to laugh. I frowned, and then she
glanced towards the master : whose mind was occupied on
other subjects than his company, as his countenance evinced ;
and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with
deep gravity. Afterwards she turned, and recommenced her
nonsense ; at last, Hareton uttered a smothered laugh. Mr.
Heathdiff started; his eye rapidly surveyed our faces.
Catherine met it with her accustomed look of nervousness
and yet defiance, which he abhorred.
'It is well you are out of my reach,'he exclaimed.
'What fiend possesses you to stare back at me, continually,
with those infernal eyes? Down with them! and don't
remind me of your existence again. I thought I had cured
you of laughing.'
'It was me,'muttered Hareton.
'What do you say ?'demanded the master.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the con-
fession. Mr. Heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently
resumed his breakfast and his interrupted musing. We had
neaxly finished, and the two young people prudently shifted
wider asunder, so I anticipated no further disturbance
during that sitting : when Joseph appeared at the door,
revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the
outrage committed on his precious shrubs was detected. He
must have seen Cathy and her cousin about the spot before
he examined it, for while his jaws worked like those of a cow
chewing its cud, and rendered his speech difficult to tmder-
stand, he began : —
'I mun hev'my wage, and I mun goa I I hed aimed to
WUTHEBING HEIQHTS 381
dee wheare I'd sarred far sixty year ; and I ihowt I'd lug
my books up into t'garret, and iJl my bits o'stuff, and they
Bud hev't'kitchen to theirsehi ; for t'sake o'quietness. It
war hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but I thowt I oouid
do that I But nah, shoo's taan my garden fro'me, and by th'
heart, maister, I cannot stand it I Yah may bend to th'yoak
an ye will — I noan used to't, and an old man doesn't sooin
get used to new barthens. I'd rayther am my bite an'my
sup wi'a hammer in th'road !'
'Now, now, idiot !'interrupted Heathcliff,'cut it short I
What's your grievance ? I'll interfere in no quarrels between
you and Nelly. She may thrust you into tiie coal-hole for
anything I care.'
'It's noan Nelly 1'answered Joseph. * I sudn't shift for
Nelly — nasty ill nowt as shoo is. Thank God I shoo cannot
stale t'sowl o'nob'dy ! Shoo wer niver soa handsome,
but what a body mud look at her'bout winking. It's yon
flaysome, graceless quean, that's witched our lad, wi'her
bold een and her f orrard ways — till Nay 1 it fair brusts my
heart ! He's forgotten all I've done for him, and made on
him, and goan and riven up a whole row o't'grandest
currant-trees i't'garden t'and here he lamented outright ;
immanned by a sense of his bitter injuries, and Eamshaw's
ingratitude and dangerous condition.
'Is the fool drunk ?'asked Mr. Heathcliff.'Hareton,
is it you he's finding fault with ?'
'I've pulled up two or three bushes,'replied the young
man ;'but I'm going to set'em again.'
'And why have you pulled them up ?'said the master.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
'We wanted to plant some flowers there,'she cried.
'I'm the only person to blame, for I wished him to do it.'
'And who the devil gave you leave to touch a stick about
the place?'demanded her father-in-law, much surprised.
'And who ordered you to obey her ?'he added, turning to
Hareton.
The latter was speechless ; his cousin replied —'You
832 WUTHBBING HEIGHTS
shouldn't grudge a few yards of ear£h for me to ornament,
when you have taken all my land I'
'Your land, insolent slut I You never had any/ said
HeathclifF.
'And my money/ she continued ; returning his angry
glare, and meantime biting a piece of crust, the remnant of
her breakfast.
'Silence I'he exclaimed.'Get done, and begone !'
'And Hareton's land, and his money,'pursued the
reckless thing.'Hareton and I are friends now; and I
shall tell him all about you t'
The master seemed confounded a moment : he grew
pale, and rose up, eyeing her all the while, with an expres-
sion of mortal hate.
'If you strike me, Hareton will strike you,'she said ;'so
you may as well sit down.'
'If Hareton does not turn you out of the room, I'll strike
him to hell,'thundered Heathcliff.'Damnable witch ! dare
you pretend to rouse him against me ? Off with her 1 Do
you hear ? Fling her into the kitchen t I'll kill her, Ellen
Dean, if you let her come into my sight again !'
Hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.
'Drag her away t'he cried, savagely.'Are you staying
to talk?'And he approached to execute his own com-
mand.
'He'll not obey you, wicked man, any more,'said
Catherine ;'and he'll soon detest you as much as I do.'
'Wisht I wisht !'muttered the young man, reproach-
fully ;'I will not hear you speak so to him. Have done.'
* But you won't let him strike me ?'she cried.
'Gome, then,'he whispered earnestly.
It was too late : Heathcliff had caught hold of her.
'Now, you go !'he said to Eamshaw.'Accursed witch !
this time she has provoked me when I could not bear it ; and
I'll make her repent it for ever 1'
He had his hand in her hair; Hareton attempted to
release her locks, entreating him not to hurt her that once.
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 388
Heatholiff s black eyes flashed ; he seemed ready to tear
Catherine in pieces, and I was just worked up to risk coming
to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers relaxed ; he
shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
intently in her face. Then he drew his hand over his eyes,
stood a moment to collect himself apparently, and turning
anew to Catherine, said, with assumed calnmess —'You must
learn to avoid putting me in a passion, or I shall really
murder you some time t Gto with Mrs. Dean, and keep with
her ; and confine your insolence to her ears. As to Hareton
Eamshaw, if I see him listen to you, I'll send him seeking
his bread where he can get it ! Tour love will make him an
outcast and a beggar. Nelly, take her ; and leave me, all
of you ! Leave me !'
I led my yoimg lady out : she was too glad of her escape
to resist; the other followed, and Mr. Heathcliff had the
room to himself till dinner. I had counselled Catherine to
dine up-stairs ; but, as soon as he perceived her vacant seat,
he sent ihe to call her. He spoke to none of us, ate very
little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that he
should not return before evening.
The two new friends estabUshed themselves in the house
during his absence; where I heard Hareton sternly check
his cousin, on her offering a revelation of her father-in-law's
conduct to his father. He said he wouldn't suffer a word to
be uttered in his disparagement : if he were the devil, it
didn't signify ; he would stand by him ; and he'd rather she
would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on Mr.
Heathcliff. Catherine was waxing cross at this; but he
found means to make her hold her tongue, by asking how
she would like him to speak ill of her father ? Then she
comprehended that Eamshaw took the master's reputation
home to himself ; and was attached by ties stronger than
reason could break — chains, forged by habit, which it would be
cruel to attempt to loosen. She showed a good heart, thence-
forth, in avoiding both complaints and expressions of
antipathy concerning Heathcliff; and confessed to me
334 WUTHERING HEIGHTS
her sorrow that she had endeavoured to raise a bad spirit
between him and Hareton : indeed, I don't believe she has
ever breathed a syllable, in the latter's hearing, against her
oppressor since.
When this slight disagreement was over, they were friends
again, and as busy as possible in their several occupations of
pupil and teacher. I came in to sit with them, after I had
done my work ; and I felt so soothed and comforted to watch
them, that I did not notice how time got on. You know,
they both appeared in a measure my children : I had long
been proud of one ; and now, I was sure, the other would be
a source of equal satisfaction. His honest, warm, and
intelligent nature shook off rapidly the clouds of ignorance
and degradation in which it had been bred ; and Catherine's
sincere commendations acted as a spur to his industry. His
brightening mind brightened his features, and added spirit
and nobility to their aspect : I could hardly fancy it the same
individual I had beheld on the day I discovered my little
lady at Wuthering Heights, after her expedition to the Crags.
While I admired and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with
it returned the master. He came upon us quite unexpectedly,
entering by the front way, and had a full view of the whole
three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at him. Well,
I reflected, there was never a pleasanter, or more harmless
sight; and it will be a burning shame to scold them. The
red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed
their faces animated with the eager interest of children ; for,
though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so
much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced
nor evinced, the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Mr. Heath-
cliff : perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are
precisely similar, and they are those of Catherine Eamshaw.
The present Catherine has no other likeness to her, except
a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril that
makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or not.
With Hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS 835
at all times, then it was particularly striking;
beoanse his senses were alert, and his mental faoolties
, wakened to unwonted activity. I suppose this resemblance
disarmed Mr. Heathdiff : he walked to the hearth in evident
agitation ; but it quickly subsided as he looked at the young
man: or, I should say, altered its character; for it was
there yet. He took the book from his hand, and glanced at
the open page, then returned it without any observation ;
merely signing Catherine away : her companion lingered
very little behind her, and I was about to depart also, but he
bid me sit still.
'It is a poor conclusion, is it not ?'he observed, having
brooded a while on the scene he had just witnessed :'an
absurd termination to my violent exertions? I get levers
and mattocks to demolish the two houses, and train myself
to be Capable of working like Hercules, and when everything
is ready and in my power, I find the will to lift a slate off
either roof has vanished ! My old enemies have not beaten
me ; now would be the precise time to revenge myself on
their representatives : I could do it ; and none could hinder
me. But where is the use? I don't care for striking: I
can't take the trouble to raise my hand ! That sounds as if
I had been labouring the whole time only to exhibit a fine
trait of magnanimity. It is far from being the case : I have
lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and I am too
idle to destroy for nothing.
'Nelly, there is a strange change approaching ; I'm in
its shadow at present. I take so little interest in my daily
life that I hardly remember to eat and drink. Those two
who have left the room are the only objects which retain a
distinct material appearance to me ; and that appearance
causes me pain, amounting to agony. About her I won't
speak; and I don't desire to think; but I earnestly wish
she were invisible : her presence invokes only maddening
sensations. He moves me differently : and yet if I could do
it without seeming insane, I'd never see him again I You'll
perhaps think me rather inclined to become so,'he added,
886 WUTHEEING HEIGHTS
making an effort to smile,'if I try to describe the thousand
forms of past associations and ideas he -awakens or em-
bodies. But you'll not talk of what I tell you ; and my
mind is so eternally secluded in itself, it is tempting at last
to turn it out to another.
'Five minutes ago Hareton seemed a personification of
my youth, not a human being; I felt to him in such a
variety of ways, that it would have been impossible to have
accosted him rationally. In the first place, his startling
likeness to Catherine connected him fearfully with her.
That, however, which you may suppose the most potent to
arrest my imagination, is actually the least : for what is not
connected with her to me ? and what does not recall her ?
I cannot look down to this floor, but her features are shaped
in the flags t In every cloud, in every tree — filling the air at
night, and caught by glimpses in every object by day — I am
surrounded with her image! The most ordinary faces of
men and women — my own features — mock me with a
resemblance. The entire world is a dreadful collection of
memoranda that she did exist, and that I have lost herl
Well, Hareton's aspect was the ghost of my immortal love ;
of my wild endeavours to hold my right ; my degradation,
my pride, my happiness, and my anguish —
'But it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you : only it
will let you know why, with a reluctance to be always alone,
his society is no benefit ; rather an aggravation of the con-
stant torment I suffer : and it partly contributes to render
me regardless how he and his cousin go on together. I can
give them no attention any more.'
* But what do you mean by a chq^nge, Mr. Heathdiff ?'I
said, alarmed at his manner : though he was neither in danger
of losing his senses, nor dying, according to my judgment :
he was quite strong and healthy ; and, as to his reason, from
childhood he had a delight in dwelling on dark things, and
entertaining odd fancies. He might have had a monomania
on the subject of his departed idol ; but on every other point
his wits were as sound as mine.
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS 837
'I shall not know that till it comes/ he said ;'I'm only
half oonscions of it now.'
* You have no feeling of illness, have you ?'I asked.
'No, Nelly, I have not,'he answered.
'Then you are not afraid of death ?'I pursued.
'Afraid? No T he replied.'I have neither a fear, nor
a presentiment, nor a hope of death. Why should I ? With
my hard constitution and temperate mode of living, and
unperilous occupations, I ought to, and probably shall^
remain above ground till there is scarcely a black hair on
my head. And yet I cannot continue in this condition ! I
have to remind myself to breathe — almost to remind my
heart to beat 1 And it is like bending back a stiff spring : it
is by compulsion that I do the slightest act not prompted by
one thought ; and by compulsion that I notice anything alive
or dead, which is not associated with one universal idea. I
have a single wish, and my whole being and faculties are
yearning to attain it. They have yearned towards it so long,
and so imwaveringly, that I'm convinced it will be reached
— and soon — because it has devoured my existence: I am
swallowed up in the anticipation of its fulfilment. My
confessions have not relieved me ; but they may account for
some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which I
show. O God ! It is a long fight ; I wish it were over 1'
He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to
himself, till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph did,
that conscience had turned his heart to an earthly hell. 1
wondered greatly how it would end. Though he seldom
before had revealed this state of mind, even by looks, it was
his habitual mood, I had no doubt : he asserted it himself ;
but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have con-
jectured the fact. You did not when you saw him, Mr.
Lockwood : and at the period of which I speak, he was just
the same as then; only fonder of continued solitude, and
perhaps still more laconic in company.
CHAPTBB XXXIV
Fob some days after that evening Mr. Heathdiff shtmned
meeting us at meals ; yet he would not consent formally to
exclude Hareton and Cathy. He had an aversion to yield-
ing so completely to his feelings, choosing rather to absent
himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.
One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him go
downstairs, and out at the front door. I did not hear him
re-enter, and in the morning I found he was still away. We
were in April then : the weather was sweet and warm, the
grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom.
After breakfast, Catherine insisted on my bringing a chair
and sitting with my work under the fir-trees at the end of
the house ; and she beguiled Hareton, who had perfectly
recovered from his accident, to dig and arrange her little
garden, which was shifted to that comer by the influence of
Joseph's complaints. I was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead,
when my young lady, who had run down near the gate to
procure some primrose roots for a border, returned only half
laden, and informed us that Mr. Heathcliff was coming in.
'And he spoke to me,'she added, with a perplexed counte-
nance.
'What did he say ?'asked Hareton.
'He told me to begone as fast as I could,'she answered.
'But he looked so difiEerent from his usual look that I stop-
ped a moment to stare at him.'
'How ?'he inquired.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 389
'Why, almost bright and oheerftd. No» almost nothing
— very much ezoited, and wild, and glad I'she replied.
'Night- walking amuses him, then/ I remarked, affeoting
a careless manner : in reality as surprised as she was, and
anxious to ascertain the truth of her statement ; for to see
the master looking glad would not be an every-day spectacle.
I framed an excuse to go in. Heathcliff stood at the open
door ; he was pale, and he trembled : yet, certainly, he had
a strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of
his whole face.
* Will you have some breakfast ?'I said. * You must be
hungry, rambUng about all night I'I wanted to discover
where he had been, but I did not like to ask directly.
'No, I'm not hungry,'he answered, averting his head,
and speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed I was
trying to divine the occasion of his good humour.
I felt perplexed : I didn't know whether it were not a
proper opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
'I don't think it right to wander out of doors,'I
observed,'instead of being in bed : it is not wise, at any rate
this moist season. I daresay you'll catch a bad cold, or a
fever : you have something the matter with you now I'
'Nothing but what I can bear,'he replied ;'and with
the greatest pleasure, provided you'll leave me alone : get in,
and don't annoy me.'
I obeyed : and, in passing, I noticed he breathed as fast
as a cat.
'Yes t'I reflected to myself,'we shall have a fit of ill-
ness. I cannot conceive what he has been doing.'
That noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received a
# heaped-up plate from my hands, as if he intended to make
amends for previous fasting.
'I've neither cold nor fever, Nelly,'he remarked, in
allusion to my morning's speech ;'and I'm ready to do
justice to the food you give me.'
He took his knife and fork, and was going to commence
eating, when the inclination appeared to become suddenly
340 WUTHEBING HEIQHTS
extinct. ■ He laid them on the table, looked eagerly towards
the window, then rose and went out. We saw him walking
to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal, and
Eamshaw said he'd go and ask why he would not dine : he
thought we had grieved him some way.
'Well, is he coming?'cried Catherine, when her cousin
returned.
'Nay,'he answered;'but he's not angry: he seemed
rarely pleased indeed ; only I made him impatient by speak-
ing to him twice ; and then he bid me be off to you : he
wondered how I could want the company of anybody else.'
I Sethis plate to keep warm on the fender ; and after an
hour or two he re-entered, when the room was clear, in no
degree calmer: the same unnatural — ^it was unnatural —
appearance of joy under his black brows ; the same bloodless
hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of smile ;
his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates — a strong thrilling,
rather than trembling.
I will ask what is the matter, I thought ; or who should ?
And I exclaimed —'Have you heard any good news, Mr.
Heathcliff ? You look uncommonly animated.'
'Where should good news come from to me ?'he said.
'I'm animated with hunger; and, seemingly, I must not
eat.'
* Your dinner is here,'I returned ;'why won't you get
it?'
'I don't want it now,'he muttered, hastily :'I'll wait
tiU supper. And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to
warn Hareton apd the other away from me. I wish to be
troubled by nobody : I wish to have this place to myself.'
'Is there some new reason for this banishment?'I
inquired.'Tell me why you are so queer, Mr. Heathcliff?
Where were you last night ? I'm not putting the question
through idle curiosity, but'
'You are putting the question through very idle curiosity,'
he interrupted, with a laugh.'Yet I'll answer it Last
WXJTHBRINQ HEIGHTS 841
xiight I was on ihe threshold of helL To-day, I am within
sight of my heaven. I have my eyes on it : hardly three
feet to sever me I And now you'd better go ! You'll
neither see nor hear anything to frighten yon, if you refrain
from prying.'
Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I
departed ; more perplexed than ever.
He did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no
one intruded on his solitude ; till, at eight o'clock, I deemed
it proper, though unsummoned, to carry a candle and his
supper to him. He was leaning against the ledge of an open
lattice, but not looking out: his face was turned to the
interior gloom. The fire had smouldered to ashes; the
room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy
evening ; and so still, that not only the murmur of the beck
down Qimmerton was distinguishable, but its ripples and its
gurgling over the pebbles, or through the large stones which
it could not cover. I uttered an ejaculation of discontent
at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shutting the
casements, one after another, till I came to his.
* Must I close this ?'I asked, in order to rouse him ; for
he would not stir.
The light flashed on his features as I spoke. Oh, Mr.
Lookwood, I cannot express what a terrible start I got by
the momentary view 1 Those deep black eyes I That smile,
and ghastly paleness 1 It appeared to me, not Mr. Heath-
ohS, but a goblin ; and, in my terror, I let the candle bend
towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.
'Yes, close it,'he replied, in his familiar voice. * There,
that is pure awkwardness 1 Why did you hold the candle
horizontally? Be quick, and bring another.'
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to
Joseph —'The master wishes you to take him a light and
rekindle the fire.'For I dared not go in myself again just
then.
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went : but
he brought it back immediately, with the supper-tray in his
342 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
other hand, explaining that Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed,
and he wanted nothing to eat till morning. We heard him
mount the stairs directly ; he did not proceed to his ordinary
chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed : its
window, as I mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody
to get through ; and it struck me that he plotted another
midnight excursion, of which he had rather we had no
suspicion.
'Is he a ghoul or a vampire ?'I mused. I had read of
such hideous incarnate demons. And then I set myself to
reflect how I had tended him in infancy, and watched him
grow to youth, and followed him almost through his whole
course ; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to that
sense of horror.'But where did he come from, the Uttle
dark thing, harboured by a good man to his bane?'
muttered Superstition, as I dozed into unconsciousness.
And I began, half dreaming, to weary myself with imagining
some fit parentage for him ; and, repeating my waking
meditations, I tracked his existence over again, with grim
variations ; at last, picturing his death and funeral : of
which, all I can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at
having the task of dictating an inscription for his monument,
and consulting the sexton about it; and, as he had no
surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to
content ourselves with the single word,'Heathcliff.'That
came true : we were. If you enter the kirkyard, you'll read,
on his headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
Dawn restored me to common sense. I rose, and went
into the garden, as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there
were any footmarks under his window. There were none.
'He has stayed at home,'I thought,'and he'll be all right
to-day.'I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told Hareton and Catherine to get theirs
ere the master came down, for he lay late. They preferred
taking it out of doors, under the trees, and I set a little table
to accommodate them.
On my re-entrance, I found Mr. Heathcliff below. He
WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS S4S
and Joseph were conversing about some fanning business ;
he gave clear, minute directions concerning the matter
discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his head
continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even
more exaggerated. When Joseph quitted the room he took
his seat in the place he generally chose, and I put a basin of
cofiEee before him. He drew it nearer, and then rested his
arms on the table, and looked at the opposite wall, as I
supposed, surveying one particular portion, up and down,
with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest
that he stopped breathing during half a minute together.
'Come now,'I exclaimed, pushing some bread against
his hand,'eat and drink that, while it is hot : it has been
waiting near an hour.'
He didn't notice me, and yet he smiled. I'd rather have
seen him gnash his teeth than smile so.
'Mr. Heathcliff I master I'I cried,'don't, for Qoi's
sake, stare as if you saw an unearthly vision.'
'Don't, for God's sake, shout so loud,'he replied.'Turn
round, and tell me, are we by ourselves ?'
'Of course,'was my answer ;'of course we are.'
Still, I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I was not quite
sure. With a sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space
in front among the breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze
more at his ease.
Now, I perceived he was not looking at the wall ; for
when I regarded him alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed
at something within two yards'distance. And whatever it
was, it communicated, apparently, both pleasure and pain in
exquisite extremes : at least the anguished, yet raptured,
expression of his countenance suggested that idea. The
fancied object was not fixed, either : his eyes pursued it with
unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never
weaned away. I vainly reminded him of his protracted
abstinence from food : if he stirred to touch anything in
compliance with my entreaties, if he stretched his hand out
to get a piece of bread, his fingers clenched before they
344 WUTHEEINQ HEIGHTS
reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their
aim.
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed
attention from its engrossing speculation; till he grew
irritable, and got up, asking why I would not allow him to
have his own time in taking his meals ? and saying that on
the next occasion I needn't wait : I might set the things
down and go. Having uttered these words he left the house,
slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared
through the gate.
The hours crept anxiously by : another evening came. I
did not retire to rest till late, and when I did, I could not
sleep. He returned after midnight, and, instead of going to
bed, shut himself into the room beneath. I listened, and
tossed about}, and, finally, dressed and descended. It was
too irksome to Ue there, harassing my brain with a hundred
idle misgivings.
I distinguished Mr. HeathclifiTs step, restlessly measuring
the floor, and he frequently broke the silence by a deep
inspiration, resembling a groan. He muttered detached
words also; the only one I could catch was the name of
Catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person
present ; low and earnest, and wrung from the depth of his
soul. I had not courage to walk straight into the apartment ;
but I desired to divert him from his reverie, and therefore
feU foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and began to scrape the
cinders. It drew him forth sooner than I expected. He
opened the door immediately, and said — * Nelly, come here —
is it morning ? Come in with your light.'
'It is striking four,'I answered.'You want a candle to
take up-stairs : you might have lit one at this fire.'
'No, I don't wish to go up-stairs,'he said.'Come in,
and kindle me a fire, and do anything there is to do about
the room.'
'I must blow the coals red first, before I can carry any/
I replied, getting a chair and the bellows.
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS 846
He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching
distraotion ; his heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick
as to leave no space for common breathing between.
'When day breaks I'll send for Green/ he said ;'I wish
to make some legal inquiries of him while I can bestow a
thought on those matters, and while I can act calmly. I
have not written my will yet ; and how to leave my property
I cannot determine. I wish I could annihilate it from the
face of the earth.'
'I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff,'I interposed.'Let
your will be a while : you'll be spared to repent of your
many injustices yet I I never expected that your nerves would
be disordered : they are, at present, marvellously so, how-
ever; and almost entirely through your own fault. The
way you've passed these three last days might knock
up a Titan. Do take some food, and some repose. You
need only look at yourself in a glass to see how you require
both. Your cheeks are hollow, and your eyes blood-shot,
like a person starving with hunger and going blind with loss
of sleep.'
'It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest,'he replied.
'I assure you it is through no settled designs. I'll do both,
as soon as I possibly can. But you might as well bid a man
struggling in the water rest withbi arms'length of the shore !
I must reach it first, and then I'll rest. Well, never mind
Mr. Green : as to repenting of my injustices, I've done no
injustice, and I repent of nothing. I'm too happy ; and yet
I'm not happy enough. My soul's bliss kills my body, but
does not satisfy itself.'
'Happy, master ?'I cried.'Strange happiness t If you
would hear me without being angry, I might offer some
advice that would make you happier.'
'What is that ?'he asked.'Give it.'
'You are aware, Mr. Heathcliff,'I said,'that from the
time you were thirteen years old you have lived a selfish,
unchristian life ; and probably hardly had a Bible in your
hands during all that period. You must have forgotten the
SM WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
oontente of the book, aod yon may not have space to Bearoh
it now. Coold it be burtful to send for some one — some
minister of any denomination, it does not matter which — to
explain it, and show you how very far you have erred from
its preoepts ; and how unfit you will be for its heaven, nnlasH
a change takes place before you die ?'
'I'm rather obliged than angry, Nelly,'he said,'for yon
remind me of the manner in wUoh I desire to be buried. It
is to be carried to the ohuTobyord in the evening. You and
HaretOD may, if you please, accompany me : and mind,
particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys my directionB
concerning the two coffins I No minister need oome; nor
need anything be saJd over roe. — I tell you I have nearty
attained my heaven ; and that of others is altogether
unvalued and unooveted by me.'
'And supposing you persevered in your obstinate faet,
and died by that means, and they refused to bnry you in
the precincts of tiie kirk ?'I said, shocked at his godless in-
difference.'How would yon like it ?'
'They won't do that,'he replied :'if they did, yon must
have me removed secretly ; and if you neglect it yon shall
prove, practically, that the dead are not annihilated I'
As soon as he heard the other members of the family
stirring he retired to his den, and I breathed freer. Bat in
the afternoon, while Joseph and Hareton were at their work,
he came into the kitchen again, and, with a wild look, bid
me oome and sit in tiie house : he wanted somebody with
him. I declined ; telling him plainly that his strange talk
and manner frightened me, and I had neither ttie nerve nor
the wilt to be his companion alone.
'I believe you think me a fiend,'he said, with his dismal
laugh :'something too horrible to live under a decent roof.'
Then turning to Catherine, who was there, and who drew
behind me at his approach, he added, half sneeringly, —
'Will you come, chuck ? I'll not hurt you. No t to you
I've made myself worse than the devil. Weil, there is one
who won't shrink from my company 1 By God t she's
WUTHEBINa HEiaHTS MT
relentless. Oh, damn iil It's unutterably too much for
flesh and blood to bear — even mine.'
He solicited the society of no one mora. At dnak he
went into his chamber. Through the whole night, and far
into the morning, we heard him groaning and murmuring to
himself. Hareton was anxious to enter; but I bid
fetch Mr. Kenneth, and he should go in and see
When he came, and I requested admittance and tried to open
the door, I found it locked; and HeathoUff bid us be damned.
He was bettor, and would be left alone ; so the doctor went
away. >
The following evening was very wet : indeed, it poured
down till day-dawn ; and, as I took my morning walk round
the house, I obsenred the master's window swinging open,
and the rain driving straight in. He cannot be in bed, I
thought: those showers would drench him through. He
must either be up or out. But I'll make no more ado, I'll
go boldly and look.'
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another
key, I ran to unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant ;
quickly pushing them aside, I peeped in. Mr. Heathdiff
was there — laid on his back. His eyes met mine so keen
and fierce, I started ; and then he seemed to smile. I could
not think him dead : but his face and throat were washed
with rain ; the bed-clothes dripped, and he was perfectly
still. The lattice, flapping to and fro, had graced one hand
that rested on the sill ; no blood trickled from the broken
skin, and when I put my fingers to it, I could doubt no
more : he was dead and stark !
I hasped the window ; I combed his black long hair from
his forehead ; I tried to close his eyes : to extinguish, if
possible, that frightful, life-like gaze of exultation before any
one else beheld it. They would not shut : they seemed to
sneer at my attempts ; and his parted lips and sharp white
teeth sneered too ! Taken with another fit of cowardice, I
cried out for Joseph. Joseph shufSed up and made a noise^
but resolutely refused to meddle with him«
\
348 WUTHEBING HEIGHTS
'Th'divil's harried off his soul/ he cried* * and he may
hev'his carcass into t'bargin, for aught I care I EchI
what a wicked'on he looks, giming at death !'and the old
sinner grinned in mockery. I thought he intended to cut a
caper round the bed ; but suddenly composing himself, he
fell on his knees, and raiaed his hands, and returned thanks
that the lawful master and the ancient stock were restored
to their rights.
I felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory
unavoidably recurred to former times with a sort of oppres-
sive sadness. But poor Hareton, the most wronged, was
the only one who really suffered much. He sat by the
corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. He pressed its
hand, and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one
else shrank from contemplating; and bemoaned him with
that strong grief which springs naturally from a generous
heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.
Mr. Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what dis-
order the master died. I concealed the fact of his having
swallowed nothing for four days, fearing it might lead to
trouble, and then, I am persuaded, he did not abstain on
purpose : it was the consequence of his strange illness, not
the cause.
We buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbour-
hood, as he wished. Eamshaw and I, the sexton, and six
men to carry the cofSn, comprehended the whole attendance.
The six men departed when they had let it down into the
grave: we stayed to see it covered. Hareton, with a
streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the
brown mould himself : at present it is as smooth and
verdant as its companion mounds — and I hope its tenant
sleeps as soundly. But the country folks, if you ask them,
would swear on the Bible that he walks : there are those
who speak to having met him near the church, and on the
moor, and even within this bouse. Idle tales, you'll say, and
so say I. Yet that old man by the kitchen fire aflSrms he
has seen two on'em, looking out of his chamber window on
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 849
every rainy night since his death : — and an odd thing
happened to me about a month ago. I was going to the
Grange one evening — a dark evening, threatening thunder
— and, just at the turn of the Heights, I encountered a little
boy with a sheep and two lambs before him ; he was crying
tenibly ; and I supposed the lambs were skittish, and would
not be guided.
'What is the matter, my little man ?'I asked.
'There's Heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t'nab,'
he blubbered,'un'I damut pass'em.'
I saw nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would go on ;
so I bid him take the road lower down. He probably raised
the phantoms from thinking, as he traversed the moors alone,
on the nonsense he had heard his parents and companions
repeat. Yet, still, I don't like being out in the dark now ;
and I don't like being left by myself in this grim house : I
cannot help it ; I shall be glad when they leave it, and shift
to the Grange.
'They are going to the Grange, then ?'I said.
'Yes,'answered Mrs. Dean,'as soon as they are married,
and that will be on New Year's Day.'
'And who will live here then ? *
'Why, Joseph will take care of the house, and, perhape,
a lad to keep him company. They will live in the kitchen,
and the rest will be shut up.'
'For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it ?'I
observed.
'No, Mr. Lockwood,'said Nelly, shaking her head.'I
believe the dead are at peace : but it is not right to speak of
them with levity. "
At that moment the garden gate swung to ; the ramblers
were returning.
'They are afraid of nothing,'I grumbled, watching their
approach through the window.'Together, they would brave
Satan and all his legions.'
As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take
a last look at the moon — or, more correctly, at each other by
3fiO WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS
her light — ^I felt irresistibly impelled to escape them again ;
and, pressing a remembranoe into the hand of Mrs. Dean,
and disregarding'her expostulations at my rudeness, I
vanished through the kitohen as they opened the house-door ;
and so should have confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his
fellow-servant's gay indiscretions, had he not fortunately
recognised me for a respectable character by the sweet ring
of a sovereign at his feet.
My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the
direction of the kirk. When beneath its walls, I perceived
decay had made progress, even in seven months: many a
window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and slates
jutted off| here and there, beyond the right line of the roof,
to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.
I sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on
the slope next the moor: the middle one grey, and half
buried in heath; Edgar Linton's only harmonized by the
turf and moss creeping up its foot ; Heathdiff's still bare.
I lingered round them, under that benign sky : watched
the moths fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened
to the soft wind breathing through the grass, and wondered
how any one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers for tbf
sleepers in that quiet earth.
BND OF'WUTHBEXNG HEIGHTS*
AGNES GEEY
BT
ACTON BELL
AGNES GREY
CHAPTBB I
THB PABSOKAGE
All trae histories contain instraotion ; though, in some, the
treasure may be hard to find, and when found, so trivial in
quantity, that the dry, shrivelled kernel scarcely compensates
for the trouble of cracking the nut. Whether this be the
case with my history or not, I am hardly competent to judge.
I sometimes think it might prove useful to some, and
entertaining to others ; but the world may judge for itself.
Shielded by my own obscurity, and by the lapse of years, and
a few fictitious names, I do not fear to venture ; and will
candidly lay before the public what I would not disclose to
the most intimate friend.
My father was a clergyman of the north of England, who
was deservedly respected by all who knew him ; and, in his
younger days, lived pretty comfortably on the joint income
of a small incumbency and a snug little property of his own.
My mother, who married him against the wishes of her
friends, was a squire's daughter, and a woman of spirit. In
vain it was represented to her, that if she became the poor
parson's wife, she must relinquish her carriage and her lady's-
maid, and all the luxuries and elegancies of afiSuence ; which
to her were little less than the necessaries of life. A carriage
and a lady's-maid were great conveniences; but, thank
heaven, she had feet to cany her, and hands to minister to
356 AONES OBEY
her own neoessities. An elegant hooae and spaoions grounds
were not to be despised ; but she would rather live in a
oottage with Biohard Grey than in a palace with any other
man in the world.
Finding arguments of no avail, her father, at length, told
the lovers they might marry if they pleased ; but, in so doing,
his daughter would forfeit every fraction of her fortune. He
expected this would cool the ardour of both; buthewasmis-
taken. My father knew too well my mother's superior worth
not to be sensible that she was a valuable fortune in herself :
and if she would but consent to embellish his humble hearth
he should be happy to take her on any terms ; while she, on
her part, would rather labour with her own hands than be
divided from the man she loved, whose happiness it would be
her joy to make, and who was already one with her in heart
and soul. So her fortune went to swell the purse of a wiser
sister, who had married a rich nabob ; and she, to the wonder
and compassionate regret of all who knew her, went to bury
herself in the homely village parsonage among the hills of .
And yet, in spite of all this, and in spite of my mother's high
spirit and my father's whims, I believe you might search all
England through, and fail to find a happier couple.
Of six children, my sister Mary and myself were the only
two that survived the perils of infancy and early childhood.
I, being the yoimger by five or six years, was always regarded
as the childf and the pet of the family : father, mother, and
sister, all combined to spoil me — not by foolish indulgence, to
lender me fractious and imgovemable, but by ceaseless kind-
ness, to make me too helpless and dependent — too unfit for
buflfeting with the cares and turmoils of life.
Mary and I were brought up in the strictest seclusion. My
mother, being at once highly accomplished, well informed, and
fond of employment, took the whole charge of our education
on herself, with the exception of Latin — ^which my father
undertook to teach us — so that we never even went to school ;
and, as there was no society in the neighbourhood, our only
intercourse with the world consisted in a stately tea-partji
AGNES GREY 867
now and fhen, with fhe principal farmers and tradespeople
of the Tioinity (just to avoid being stigmatized as too proud
to consort with onr neighbours), and an annual visit to our
paternal grandfather's ; where himself, our kind grandmamma,
a maiden aunt, and two or three elderly ladies and gentlemen,
were the only persons we ever saw. Sometimes our mother
would amuse us with stories and anecdotes of her younger
days, which, while they entertained us amazingly, frequently
awoke — ^in me, at least — a secret wish to see a little more ot
the world.
I thought she must have been very happy : but she never
seemed to regret past times. My father, however, whose
temper was neither tranquil nor cheerful by nature, often un-
duly vexed himself with thinking of the sacrifices his dear
wife had made for him ; and troubled his head with revolving
endless schemes for the augmentation of his little fortune,
for her sake and ours. In vain my mother assured him she
was quite satisfied ; and if he would but lay by a little for
the children, we should all have plenty, both for time present
and to come : but saving was not my father's forte. He
would not run in debt (at least, my mother took good care
he should not), but while he had money he must spend it :
he liked to see his house comfortable, and his wife and
daughters well clothed, and well attended ; and besides, he
was charitably disposed, and liked to give to the poor, accord-
ing to his means : or, as some might think, beyond them.
At length, however, a kind friend suggested to him a
means of doubling his private property at one stroke ; and
further increasing it, hereafter, to an untold amount. This
friend was a merchant, a man of enterprising spirit and un-
doubted talent, who was somewhat straitened in his mercan-
tile pursuits for want of capital ; but generously proposed to
give my father a fair share of his profits, if he would only
entrust him with what he could spare ; and he thought he
might safely promise that whatever sum the latter chose to
put into his hands, it should bring him in cent, per cent. The
small patrimony was speedily sold, and the whole of its
368 AGNES GBET
prioe was deposited in the hands of the friendly merchant ;
who as promptly proceeded to ship his cargo, and prepare
for his voyage.
My father was delighted, so were we all, with onr
brightening prospects. For the present, it is trae, we were
reduced to the narrow income of the curacy ; but my father
seemed to think there was no necessity for scrupulously
restricting our expenditure to that ; so, with a standing bill at
Mr. Jackson's, another at Smith's, and a third at Hobson's,
we got along even more comfortably than before : though my
mother affirmed we had better keep within bounds, for our
prospects of wealth were but precarious, after all ; and if my
father would only trust everything to her management, he
should never led. himself stinted : but he, for once, was
incorrigible.
What happy hours Mary and I have passed while sitting
at our work by the fire, or wandering on the heath-clad hills,
or idling under the weeping birch (the only considerable tree
in the garden), talking of future happiness to ourselves and
our parents, of what we would do, and see, and possess ;
with no firmer foundation for our goodly superstructure
than the riches that were expected to flow in upon us from
the success of the worthy merchant's speculations. Our
father was nearly as bad as ourselves ; only that he a£Eected
not to be so much in earnest : expressing his bright hopes
and sanguine expectations in jests and playful sallies, that
always struck me as being exceedingly witty and plea-
sant. Our mother laughed with delight to see him go
hopeful and happy : but still she feared he was setting his
heart too much upon the matter ; and once I heard her
whisper as she left the room,'God grant he be not dis-
appointed I I know not how he would bear it.'
Disappointed he was ; and bitterly, too. It came like a
thunder-dap on us all, that the vessel which contained our
fortune had been wrecked, and gone to the bottom with all
its stores, together with several of the crew, and the imfor-
tunate merchant himself. I was grieved for him ; I was
AGNES GBET 359
grieved (or the overthrow of all our air-built castles : but,
with the elasticity of youth, I soon recovered the shock.
Though riches had charms, poverty had no terrors for an
inexperienced girl like me. Indeed, to say the truth, there
was something exhilarating in the idea of being driven to
straits, and tlurown upon our own resources. I only wished
papa, nuunma, and Mary were all of the same mind as
myself ; and then, instead of lamenting past calamities we
might all cheerfully set to work to remedy them ; and the
greater the difficulties, the harder our present privations, the
greater should be our cheerfulness to endure the latter, and
our vigour to contend against the former.
Mary did not lament, but she brooded continually over the
misfortune, and sank into a state of dejection from which no
eflfort of mine could rouse ^er. I could not possibly bring her
to regard the matter on its bright side as I did : and indeed
I was so fearful of being charged with childish frivolity, or
stupid insensibility, that I carefully kept most of my bright
ideas and cheering notions to myself ; well knowing they
could not be appreciated.
My mother thought only of consoling my father, and
paying our debts and retrenching our expenditure by every
available means ; but my father was completely overwhelmed
by the calamity : health, strength, and spirits sank beneath
the blow, and he never wholly recovered them. In vain my
mother strove to cheer him, by appealing to his piety, to his
courage, to his affection for herself and us. That very affec-
tion was his greatest torment ^: it was for our sakes he had
so ardently longed to increase his fortune — ^it was our
interest that had lent such brightness to his hopes, and that
imparted such bitterness to his present distress. He now
tormented himself with remorse at having neglected my
mother's advice ; which would at least have saved him from
the additional burden of debt — he vainly reproached himself
for having brought her from the dignity, the ease, the luxury
of her former station to toil with him through the cares and
toils of poverty. It was gall and wormwood to his soul tc
960 AGNES GREY'
lee that splendid, highly-aocomplished woman, once so
ooorted and admired, transformed into an active managing
housewife, with hands and head continually occupied with
household labours and household economy. The very will-
ingness with which she performed these duties, the cheer-
fulness with which she bore her reverses, and the kindness
which withheld her from imputing the smallest blame to
him, were all perverted by this ingenious self -tormentor into
further aggravations of his sufferings. And thus the mind
preyed upon the body, and disordered the system of the
nerves, and they in turn increased the troubles of the mind,
till by action and reaction his health was seriously impaired ;
and not one of us could convince him that the aspect of our
affairs was not half so gloomy, so utterly hopeless, as his
morbid imagination represented it to be.
The useful pony phaeton was sold, together with the
stout, well-fed pony — ^the old favourite that we had fully
determined should end its days in peace, and never pass
from our hands ; the little coach-house and stable were let ;
the servant boy, and the more efficient (being the more
expensive) of the two maid-servants, were dismissed. Our
clothes were mended, turned, and darned to the utmost
verge of decency ; our food, always plain, was now simplified
to an unprecedented degree — except my father's favourite
dishes ; our coals and candles were painfully economized —
the pair of candles reduced to one, and that most sparingly
used; the coals carefully husbanded in the half -empty
grate : especially when my father was out on his parish
duties, or confined to bed through illness — then we sat with
our feet on the fender, scraping the perishing embers together
from time to time, and occasionally adding a slight scattering
of the dust and fragments of coal, just to keep them alive.
As for our carpets, they in time were worn threadbare, and
patched and darned even to a greater extent than our
garments. To save the expense of a gardener, Mary and I
undertook to keep the garden in order ; and all the cooking
and household work that could not easily be managed by
AGNES GBET 361
one servant-girl, was done by my mother and sister, with a
little occasional help from me : only a little, because, though
a woman in my own estimation, I was still a child in theirs ;
and my mother, like most active, managing women, was not
gifted with very active daughters : for this reason — that
being so clever and diligent herself, she was never tempted
to trust her affairs to a deputy, but, on the contrary, was
willing to act and think for others as well as for number
one ; and whatever was the business in hand, she was apt to
think that no one could do it so well as herself : so that
whenever I offered to assist her, I received such an answer
as — * No, love, you cannot indeed — there's nothing here you
can do. Oo and help your sister, or get her to take a walk
with you — tell her she must not sit so much, and stay so
constantly in the house as she does — she may well look thin
and dejected.'
'Mary, mamma says I'm to help you ; or get you to take
a walk with me; she says you may well look thin and
dejected, if you sit so constantly in the house.'
'Help me you cannot, Agnes ; and I cannot go out with
you — I have far too much to do.'
'Then let me help you.'
'You cannot, indeed, dear child. Oo and practise your
music, or play with the kitten.'
There was always plenty of sewing on hand ; but I had
not been taught to cut out a single garment, and except plain
hemming and seaming, there was little I could do, even in
that line ; for they both asserted that it was far easier to do
the work themselves than to prepare it for me : and besides,
they liked better to see me prosecuting my studies, or
amusing myself — ^it was time enough for me to sit bending
over my work, like a grave matron, when my favourite little
pussy was become a steady old cat. Under such circum-
stances, although I was not many degrees more useful than
the kitten, my idleness was not entirely without excuse.
Through all our troubles, I never but once heard my
mother complain of our want of money. As summer was
862 AGNES GBBY
coming on she obseired to Mary and me,'What a desirable
thing it would be for your papa to spend a few weeks at a
watering-place. I am convinced the sea-air and the change
of scene would be of incalculable service to him. But then,
you see, there's no money/ she added, with a sigh. We both
wished exceedingly that the thing might be done, and
lamented greatly that it could not.'Well, well 1'said she,
'it's no use complaining. Possibly something might be done
to further the project after all. Mary, you are a beautiful
drawer. What do you say to doing a few more pictures in
your best style, and getting them framed, with the water-
coloured drawings you have already done, and trying to
dispose of them to some liberal picture-dealer, who has the
sense to discern their merits ?'
'Mamma, I should be delighted if you think they cotUd
be sold ; and for anything worth while.'
'It's worth while trying, however, my dear : do you
procure the drawings, and I'll endeavour to find a pur-
chaser.'
'I wish I could do something,'said I.
'You, Agnes I well, who knows? You draw pretty well,
too : if you choose some simple piece for your subject, I dare-
say you will be able to produce something we shall all be
proud to exhibit.'
'But I have another scheme in my head, mamma, and
have had long, only I did not Hke to mention it/
'Indeed ! pray tell us what it is/
'I should like to be a governess.'
My mother uttered an exclamation of surprise, and
laughed. My sister dropped her work in astonishment,
exclaiming,'You a governess, Agnes I What can you be
dreaming of ?'
'Well I I don't see anything so very extraordinary in it.
I do not pretend to be able to instruct great girls ; but surely
I could teach little ones : and I should like it so much : I am
so fond of children. Do let me, mamma I'
'But, my love, you have not learned to take care of
AGNES GBEY/ 363
you/rself yet : and young ohildren require more judgment and
experience to manage than elder ones.'
'But, manmia, I am above eighteen, and quite able to
take care of myself, and others too. You do not know half
the wisdom and prudence I possess, because I have never
been tried.'
* Only think,'said Mary,'what would you do in a house
full of strangers, without me or mamma to speak and act for
you — ^with a parcel of children, besides yourself, to attend
to ; and no one to look to for advice ? You would not even
know what clothes to put on.'
'You think, because I always do as you ^ bid me, I have
no judgment of my own : but only try me — that is all I ask
— and you shaU see what I can do.'
At that moment my father entered and the subject of our
discussion was explained to him.
'What, my little Agnes a governess I'cried he, and, in
spite of his dejection, he laughed at the idea.
'Yes, papa, don't you say anything against it : I should
like it 80 much ; and I am sure I could manage delightfully.'
'But, my darling, we could not spare you.'And a tear
glistened in his eye as he added —'No, no 1 afflicted as we
are, surely we are not brought to that pass yet.'
'Oh, no I'said my mother.'There is no necessity what-
ever for such a step ; it is merely a whim of her own. So
you must hold your tongue, you naughty girl ; for, though
you are so ready to leave t«, you know very well we cannot
part with you.'
I was silenced for that day, and for many succeeding
ones ; but still I did not wholly relinquish my darling scheme.
Mary got her drawing materials, and steadily set to work. I
got mine too ; but while I drew, I thought of other things.
How delightful it would be to be a governess I To go out
into the world ; to enter upon a new life ; to act for myself ;
to exercise my unused faculties ; to try my unknown powers ;
to earn my own maintenance, and something to comfort and
help my father, mother, and sister, besides exonerating them
364 AGNES OBET
from the provision of my food and clothing ; to show papa
what his little Agnes could do; to convince mamma and
Mary that I was not quite the helpless, thoughtless being
they supposed. And then, how charming to be entrusted
witii the care and education of children ! Whatever others
said, I felt I was fully competent to the task : the clear
remembrance of my own thoughts in early childhood would
be a surer guide than the instructions of the most mature
adviser. I had but to turn from my little pupils to myself
at their age, and I should know, at once, how to win their
confidence and a£Fections : how to waken the contrition of the
erring ; how to embolden the timid and console the afilicted ;
how to make Virtue practicable. Instruction desirable, and
Beligion lovely and comprehensible.
Delightful task I
To teaoh the young idea how to shoot I
To train the tender plants, and watch their buds unfolding
day by day I
Influenced by so many inducements, I determined still to
persevere; though the fear of displeasing my mother, or
distressing my father's feelings, prevented me from resuming
the subject for several days. At length, again, I mentioned
it to my mother in private ; and, with some difficulty, got
her to promise to assist me with her endeavours. My
father's reluctant consent was next obtained, and then,
though Mary still sighed her disapproval, my dear, kind
mother began to look out for a situation for me. She wrote
to my father's relations, and consulted the newspaper adver-
tisements — ^her own relations she had long dropped all
communication with : a formal interchange of occasional
letters was all she had ever had since her marriage, and she
would not at any time have applied to them in a case of this
nature. But so long and so entire had been my parents'
seclusion from the world, that many weeks elapsed befoie a
suitable situatioii could be procured. At last, to my great
joy, it was decreed that I should take charge of the young
AGNES GBEY S66
family of a oertain Mrs. Bloomfield ; whom my kind, prim
amit Grey had known in her youth, and asserted to be a
very nice woman. Her husband was a retired tradesman,
who had realized a very comfortable fortune ; but oould not
be prevailed upon to give a greater salary than twenty-five
pounds to the instructress of his children. I, however, was
glad to accept this, rather than refuse the situation — ^whioh
my parents were incUned to think the better plan.
But some weeks more were yet to be devoted to prepara-
tion. How long, how tedious those weeks appeared to mel
Yet they were happy ones in the main — fuU of bright hopes
and ardent expectations. With what peculiar pleasure I
assisted at the making of my new clothes, and, subsequently,
the packing of my trunks 1 But there was a feeling of
bitterness mingUng with the latter occupation too ; and when
it was done — ^when all was ready for my departure on the
morrow, and the last night at home approached — a sudden
anguish seemed to swell my heart. My dear friends looked
so sad, and spoke so very kindly, that I could scarcely keep
my eyes from overflowing : but I still affected to be gay. I
hsA taken my last ramble with Mary on the moors, my last
walk in the garden, and round the house ; I had fed, with
her, our pet pigeons for the last time — the pretty creatures
that we had tamed to peck their food from our hands : I had
given a farewell stroke to all their silky backs as they crowded
in my lap. I had tenderly kissed my own peculiar
favourites, the pair of snow-white f antails ; I had played my
last tune on the old familiar piano, and sung my last song to
papa : not the last, I hoped, but the last for what appeared
to me a very long time. And, perhaps, when I did these
things again, it would be with different feelings: circum-
stances might be changed, and this house might never be
my settled home again. My dear little friend, the kitten,
would certainly be changed: she was already growing a
fine cat; and when I returned, even for a hasty visit at
Christmas, would, most likely, have forgotten both her
playmate and her merry pranks. I had romped with her
866 AGNES GREY
for the lost time ; and when I stroked her soft bright far,
while she lay pamog herself to sleep in my Up, it was with
a feeling of sadness I could not easily disguise. Then at bed-
time, when I retired with Mary to our quiet httle chamber,
where already my drawers were cleared out and my share of
the bookcase was empty — and where, hereafter, she would
have to sleep alone, in dreary solitude, aa she expressed it
— my heart sank more than ever : I felt as if I had been
selfish and wrong to persist in leaving her ; and when I
knelt onoe more beside our little bed, I prayed for a blessing
on her and on my parents more fervently than ever I had
done before. To conceal my emotion, I buried my face in
my hands, and they were presently bathed in tears. I
perceived, on rising, that she had been crying too : bnt
neither of us spoke ; and in silence we betook ourselves to
our repose, creeping more closely together from the conscious-
ness that we were to part so soon.
But the morning brought a renewal of hope and spiritfl.
I was to depart early ; that the conveyance which took me
{a gig, hired from Mr. Smith, the draper, grocer, and tea-
dealer of the village) might return the same day. I rose,
washed, dressed, swallowed a hasty breakfast, received the
fond embraces of my father, mother, and sister, kissed
the cat — to the great scandal of Sally, the maid — shook
hands with her, mounted the gig, drew my veil over my face,
and then, but not till then, burst into a flood of tears. The
gig rolled on ; I looked back ; my dear mother and sister
were still standing at the door, looking after me, and waving
their adieux. I returned their salute, and prayed God to
bless them from my heart: we descended the hill, and I
could see them no more.
'It's a coldish mornin'for yoil, Miss Agnes,'observed
Smith ;'and a darksome'nn too ; but we's happen get to
yon spot afore there come much rain to signify.'
'Yes, I hope so,'replied I, as cahnly as I could.
it's corned a good sup last night too.'
iCee.'
AGNES QBET S67
'But this cold wind will happen keep it o£F/
'Perhaps it will.'
Here ended oar colloquy. We crossed the valley, and
began to ascend the opposite hilL As we were toiling np,
I looked back again ; there was the village spire, and the
old grey parsonage beyond it, basking in a slanting beam of
sunshine — ^it was but a sickly ray, but the village and
surrounding hills were all in sombre shade, and I hailed the
wandering beam as a propitious omen to my home. With
clasped hands I fervently implored a blessing on its inhabi-
tants, and hastily turned away ; for I saw the sunshine was
departing; and I carefully avoided another glance, lest I
should see it in gloomy shadow, like the rest of the land-
scape.
CHAPTEB n
FIB8T IiEBBONB IN THB ABT OF mSTBUOTIOM
Ab we drove along, my spirits revived again, and I turned,
with pleasure, to the contemplation of the new life upon
which I was entering. But though it was not far past the
middle of September, the heavy clouds and strong north-
easterly wind combined to render the day extremely cold and
dreary; and the journey seemed a very long one, for, as
Smith observed, the roads were'very heavy'; and certainly,
his horse was very heavy too : it crawled up the hills, and
crept down them, and only condescended to shake its sides
in a trot where the road was at a dead level or a very gentle
slope, which was rarely the case in those rugged regions ; so
that it was nearly one o'clock before we reached the place of
our destination. Tet, after all, when we entered the lofty
iron gateway, when we drove softly up the smooth, well-
rolled carriage-road, with the green lawn on each side, studded
with young trees, and approached the new but stately
mansion of Wellwood, rising above its mushroom poplar-
groves, my heart failed me, and I wished it were a mile or
two farther off. For the first time in my life I must stand
alone : there was no retreating now. I must enter that
house, and introduce myself among its strange inhabitants.
But how was it to be done ? True, I was near nineteen ;
but, thanks to my retired life and the protecting care of my
mother and sister, I well knew that many a girl of fifteen,
or under, was gifted with a more womanly address, and
greater ease and self-possession, than I was. Yet, if Mrs.
Bloomfield were a kind, motherly woman, I might do very
AGNES GREY 869
well, after all ; and the children, of course, I should soon be
at ease with them — and Mr. Bloomfield, I hoped, I should
have but little to do with.
'Be calm, be calm, whatever happens,'I said within
myself ; an J truly I kept this resolution so well, and was so
fully occupied in steadying my nerves and stilling the rebel-
lious flutter of my heart, that when I was admitted into the
hall and ushered into the presence of Mrs. Bloomfield, I
almost forgot to answer her polite salutation ; and it after-
wards struck me, that the little I did say was spoken in the
tone of one half -dead or half -asleep. The lady, too, was some-
what chilly in her manner, as I discovered when I had time
to reflect. She was a tall, spare, stately woman, with thick
black hair, cold grey eyes, and extremely sallow com-
plexion.
With due politeness, however, she showed me my bed-
room, and left me there to take a little refreshment. I was
somewhat dismayed at my appearance on looking in the
glass : the cold wind had swelled and reddened my hands,
uncurled and entangled my hair, and dyed my face of a pale
purple ; add to this my collar was horridly crumpled, my
frock splashed with mud, my feet clad in stout new boots,
and as the trunks were not brought up, there was no remedy ;
so having smoothed my hair as well as I could, and repeat-
edly twitched my obdurate collar, I proceeded to clomp down
the two flights of stairs, philosophizing as I went ; and with
some difficulty found my way into the room where Mrs.
Bloomfield awaited me.
She led me into the dining-room, where the family
luncheon had been laid out. Some beefsteaks and half-
cold potatoes were set before me ; and while I dined upon
these, she sat opposite, watching me (as I thought) and
endeavouring to sustain something hke a conversation — con-
sisting chiefly of a succession of commonplace remarks, ex-
pressed with frigid f ormahty : but this might be more my fault
than hers, for I really caiUd not converse. In fact, my atten-
tion was almost wholly absorbed in my dinner • not from
870 AGNES GBBY
ravenous appetite, but from distress at the toughness of the
beefsteaks, and the numbness of my hands, almost palsied
by their five-hours'exposure to the bitter wind. I would
gladly have eaten the potatoes and let the meat alone, but
having got a large piece of the latter on to my plate, I could
not be so impoUte as to leave it ; so, after many awkward
and unsuccessful attempts to cut it with the knife, or tear it
with the fork, or pull it asunder between them, sensible that
the awful lady was a spectator to the whole transaction, I at
last desperately grasped the knife and fork in my fists, like
a child of two years old, and fell to work with all the little
strength I possessed. But this needed some apology — with
a feeble attempt at a laugh, I said,'My hands are so
benumbed with the cold that I can scarcely handle my knife
and fork.'
'I daresay you would find it cold,'replied she with a
cool, inunutable gravity that did not serve to re-assure me.
When the ceremony was concluded, she led me into
the sitting-room again, where she rang and sent for the
children.
'You will find them not very far advanced in their
attainments,'said she,'for I have had so Uttle time to attend
to their education myself, and we have thought them too
young for a governess till now ; but I think they are clever
children, and very apt to learn, especially the little boy ; he
is, I think, the flower of the flock — a generous, noble-spirited
boy, one to be led, but not driven, and remarkable for always
speaking the truth. He seems to scorn deception'(this
was good news).'His sister Mary Ann will require watching,'
continued she,'but she is a very good girl upon the whole ;
though I wish her to be kept out of the nursery as much
as possible, as she is now almost six years old, and might
acquire bad habits from the nurses. I have ordered her
crib to be placed in your room, and if you will be so kind
as to overlook her washing and dressing, and take charge
of her clothes, she need have nothing further to do with the
nurseiy maid.'
AGNES GREY 371
I replied I was quite willing to do so ; and at that moment
my young pupils entered the apartment, with their two
younger sisters. Master Tom Bloomfield was a well-grown
boy of seven, with a somewhat wiry frame, flaxen hair, blue
eyes, small tumed-up nose, and fair complexion. Mary Ann
was a tall girl too, somewhat dark like her mother, but with
a round full face and a high colour in her cheeks. The
second sister was Fanny, a very pretty little girl ; Mrs.
Bloomfield assured me she was a remarkably gentle child,
and required encouragement : she had not learned anything
yet ; but in a few days, she would be four years old, and
then she might take her first lesson in the alphabet, and be
promoted to the schoolroom. The remaining one was
Harriet, a little broad, fat, merry, playful thing of scarcely
two, that I coveted more than aU the rest — but with her I
had nothing to do.
I talked to my little pupils as well as I could, and tried
to render myself agreeable ; but with little success I fear,
for their mother's presence kept me under an unpleasant
restraint. They, however, were remarkably free from shy-
ness. They seemed bold, lively children, and I hoped I
should soon be on friendly terms with them — the little boy
especially, of whom I had heard such a favourable character
from his mamma. In Mary Ann there was a certain affected
simper, and a craving for notice, that I was sorry to observe.
But her brother claimed all my attention to himself; he
stood bolt upright between me and the fire, with his hands
behind his back, talking away like an orator, occasionally
interrupting his discourse with a sharp reproof to his sisters
when they made too much noise.
'Oh, Tom, what a darling you are ! * exclaimed his mother.
'Come and kiss dear mamma ; and then won't you show
Miss Grey your schoolroom, and your nice new books ?'
'I won't kiss you, mamma ; but I will show Miss Grey
my schoolroom, and my new books.'
'And my schoolroom, and my new books, Tom/ said
Mary Ann.'They're mine too.'
372 AGNES GBET
'They're mm^/ replied he decisively.'Come along. Miss
Grey — ^I'll escort you.*
When the room and books had been shown, with some
bickerings between the brother and sister that I did my
utmost to appease or mitigate, Mary Ann brought me her
doll, and began to be very loquacious on the subject of its
fine clothes, its bed, its chest of drawers, and other appur-
tenances ; but Tom told her to hold her clamour, that Miss
Grey might see his rocking-horse, which, with a most im-
portant bustle, he dragged forth from its comer into the
middle of the room, loudly calling on me to attend to it.
Then, ordering his sister to hold the reins, he mounted, and
made me stand for ten minutes, watching how manfully he
used his whip and spurs. Meantime, however, I admired
Mary Ann's pretty doll, and all its possessions ; and then
told Master Tom he was a capital rider, but I'hoped he
would not use his whip and spurs so much when he rode a
real pony.
'Oh, yes, I will !'said he, laying on with redoubled ardour.
'I'll cut into him like smoke 1 Eeh ! my word 1 but he shall
sweat for it.'
This was very shocking ; but I hoped in time to be able
to work a reformation.
'Now you must put on your bonnet and shawl,'said the
little hero,'and I'll show you my garden.'
'And minty said Mary Ann.
Tom lifted his fist witli a menacing gesture ; she uttered
a loud, shrill scream, ran to the other side of me, and made
a face at him.
'Surely, Tom, you would not strike your sister I I hope
I shall n & Ger see you do that.'
'You will sometimes : I'm obliged to do it now and then
to keep her in order.'
'But it is not your business to keep her in order, you
know — that is for'
'Well, now go and put on your bonnet.'
'I don't know — ^it is so very cloudy and cold, it
AGNES OBEY 373
seems likely to rain; — and yon know I have had a long
drive/
'No matter — ^yon miMt oome ; I shall allow of no excuses/
replied the consequential little gentleman. And, as it was
the first day of our acquaintance, I thought I might as well
indulge him. It was too cold for Mary Ann to venture, so
she stayed with her mamma, to the great relief of her
brother, who liked to have me all to himself.
The garden was a large one, and tastefully laid out;
besides several splendid dahlias, there were some other fine
flowers still in bloom : but my companion would not give
me time to examine them : I must go with him, across the
wet grass, to a remote sequestered comer, the most impor-
tant place in the grounds, because it contained his garden.
There were two round beds, stocked with a variety of plants.
In one there was a pretty Uttle rose-tree. I paused to
admire its lovely blossoms.
'Oh, never mind that f'said he, contemptuously.
'That's only Mary Ann's garden ; look, this is mine.'
After I had observed every flower, and Ustened to a
disquisition on every plant, I was permitted to depart ; but
first, with great pomp, he plucked a polyanthus and
presented it to me, as one conferring a prodigious favour. I
observed, on the grass about his garden, certain apparatus
of sticks and cord, and asked what they were.
* Traps for birds.'
* Why do you catch them ? *
'Papa says they do harm.'
'And what do you do with them when you catch
them ?'
'Different things. Sometimes I give them to the cat;
sometimes I cut them in pieces with my penknife ; but the
next, I mean to roast alive.'
* And why do you mean to do such a horrible thing ?'
* For two reasons : first, to see how long it will live — and
then, to see what iii will taste like.'
'But don't you know it is extremely wicked to do such
874 AGNES GBET
things ? Bemember, the birds oan feel as well as you ; and
think, how would you like it yourself ?'
'Oh, that's nothing 1 I'm not a bird, and I can't feel what
I do to them.'
'But you will have to feel it some time, Tom : you have
heard where wicked people go to when they die ; and if you
don't leave off torturing innocent birds, remember, you will
have to go there, and suffer just what you have made them
suffer.'
'Oh, pooh ! I shan't. Papa knows how I treat them, and
he never blames me for it : he says it is just what he used to
do when he was a boy. Last summer, he gave me a nest full
of young sparrows, and he saw me pulling off their legs and
wings, and heads, and never said anything; except that
they were nasty things, and I must not let them soil my
trousers : and Uncle Bobson was there too, and he laughed,
and said I was a fine boy.'
'But what would your mamma say ?'
'Oh, she doesn't care ! she says it's a pity to kill the
pretty singing birds, but the naughty sparrows, and mice, and
rats, I may do what I like with. So now. Miss Grey, you
see it is not wicked.'
'I still think it is, Tom ; and perhaps your papa and
mamma would think so too, if they thought much about it.
However,'I internally added, *they may say what they
please, but I am determined you shall do nothing of the
kind, as long as I have power to prevent it.'
He next took me across the lawn to see his mole-traps,
and then into the stack-yard to see his weasel-traps : one of
which, to his great joy, contained a dead weasel ; and then
into the stable to see, not the fine carriage-horses, but a little
rough colt, which he informed me had been bred on purpose
for him, and he was to ride it as soon as it was properly
trained. I tried to amuse the little fellow, and listened to
all his chatter as complacently as I could ; for I thought if
he had any affections at all, I would endeavour to win them ;
and then, in time, I might be able to show him the error of
AGNES GBEY 375
his ways : but I looked in vain for that generous, noble
spirit his mother talked of ; though I could see he was not
without a certain degree of quickness and penetration, when
he chose to exert it.
When we re-entered the house it was nearly tea-time.
Master Tom told me that, as papa was from home, he and I
and Mary Ann were to have tea with mamma, for a treat ;
for, on such occasions, she always dined at luncheon-time
with them, instead of at six o'clock. Soon after tea, Mary
Ann went to bed, but Tom favoured us with his company
and conversation till eight. After he was gone, Mrs.
Bloomfield further enlightened me on the subject of her
ohUdren'B dispositions and acquirements, and on what they
were to learn, and how they were to be managed, and
cautioned me to mention their defects to no one but herself.
My mother had warned me before to mention them as Httle
as possible to her, for people did not like to be told of their
children's faults, and so I concluded I was to keep silence on
them altogether. About half-past nine, Mrs. Bloomfield
invited me to partake of a frugal supper of cold meat and
bread. I was glad when that was over, and she took her
bedroom candlestick and retired to rest ; for though I wished
to be pleased with her, her company was extremely irksome
to me ; and I could not help feeling that she was cold, grave,
and forbidding — the very opposite of the kind, warm-hearted
matron my hopes had depicted her to be.
CHAPTBB in
I
A FBW MORE LB880N8
!
I BOBB next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration,
in spite of the disappointments already experienoed ; but I
found the dressing of Mary Ann was no light matter, as her
abimdant hadr was to be smeared with pomade, plaited in j
three long tails, and tied with bows of ribbon : a task my un-
accustomed fingers found great difficulty in performing. She
told me her nurse could do it in half the time, and, by keep-
ing up a constant fidget of impatience, contrived to render me
still longer. When all was done, we went into the school-
room, where I met my other pupil, and chatted with the two
till it was time to go down to breakfast. That meal being
concluded, and a few civil words having been exchanged with
Mrs. Bloomfield, we repaired to the schoolroom again, and
commenced the business of the day. I found my pupils very
backward, indeed ; but Tom, though averse to every species
of mental exertion, was not without abilities. Mary Ann
could scarcely read a word, and was so careless and
inattentive that I could hardly get on with her at all. How-
ever, by dint of great labour and patience, I managed to get
something done in the course of the morning, and then
accompanied my young charge out into the garden and
adjacent grounds, for a little recreation before dinner. There
we got along tolerably together, except that I found they had
no notion of going with me : I must go with themt wherever
they chose to lead me. I must run, walk, or stand, exactly
as it suited their fancy. This, I thought, was reversing the
order of things ; and I foimd it doubly disagreeable, as on
AGNES GEEY 877
this as well as subsequent occasions, they seemed to prefer
the dirtiest places and the most dismal occupations. But
there was no remedy ; either I must follow them, or keep
entirely apart from them, and thus appear neglectful of my
charge. To-day, they manifested a particular attachment to
a well at the bottom of the lawn, where they persisted in
dabbling with sticks and pebbles for above half an hour. I
was in constant fear that their mother would see them from
the window, and blame me for allowing them thus to draggle
their clothes and wet their feet and hands, instead of taking
exercise ; but no arguments, conmiands, or entreaties could
draw them away. If she did not see them, some one else
did — a gentleman on horseback had entered the gate and
was proceeding up the road ; at the distance of a few paces
from us he paused, and calling to the children in a waspish
penetrating tone, bade them'keep out of that water.''Miss
Grey/ said he, * (I suppose it is Miss Grey), I am surprised
that you should allow them to dirty their clothes in that
manner ! Don't you see how Miss Bloomfield has soiled her
frock? and that Master Bloomfield's socks are quite wet?
and both of them without gloves ? Dear, dear 1 Let me
request that in future you will keep them decent at least !'
so saying, he turned away, and continued his ride up to the
house. This was Mr. Bloomfield. I was surprised that he
should nominate his children Master and Miss Bloomfield ;
and still more so, that he should speak so uncivilly to me,
their governess, and a perfect stranger to himself. iSresently
the bell rang to summon us in. I dined with the children at
one, while he and his lady took their luncheon at the same
table. His conduct there did not greatly raise him in my
estimation. He was a man of ordinary stature — rather below
than above — and rather thin than stout, apparently between
thirty and forty years of age : he had a large mouth, pale,
dingy complexion, milky blue eyes, and hair the colour of a
hempen cord. There was a roast leg of mutton before him :
he helped Mrs. Bloomfield, the children, and me, desiring me
to cut up the children's meat ; then, after twisting about the
378 AGNES GBET
nmtkm in Tarioos diiBctioiiB, snd eyeing it from different
point6, he pronoonoed it not fit to be eaten, snd called for
the cold beef.
'What is the matter with the mutton, my dear ?'aaked
his mate.
'It is quite overdone. Don't yon taete, Mrs. Bloomfield,
that all the goodnese is roasted oat of it? And can't yon
see that all that nice, red gravy is completely dried away?'
'Well, I think the Aee/ will soit yoo.'
The beef was set before him, and he began to canre, bat
with the most mefol expressions of discontent.
'What is the matter with the beef, lir. Bloomfield^ Fm
sore I thought it was very nice.'
'And so it was very nice. A nicer joint ooald not be ;
but it is quite spoiled/ replied he, dolefully.
•How so?'
'How so I Why, don't yoa see how it is cut? Dear —
dear t it is quite shocking I'
'They must have cut it wrong in the kitchen, then, for
I'm sure I carved it quite properly here, yesterday.'
* No doubt they cut it wrong in the kitchen — the savages 1
Dear — dear ! Did ever any one see such a fine piece of beef so
completely ruined ? But remember that, in future, when a
decent dish leaves this table, they shall not touch it in the
kitchen, Bemember that, Mrs. Bloomfield 1'
Notwithstanding the ruinous state of the beef, the gentle-
man managed to cut himself some delicate slices, part of
which he ate in silence. When he next spoke, it was, in a
less querulous tone, to ask what there was for dinner.
'Turkey and grouse,'was the concise reply.
'And what besides ?'
'Rsh.'
'What kind of fish?'
'I don't know.'
'You don't know /'cried he, looking solemnly up from
his plate, and suspending his knife and fork in astonish-
ment.
AGNES GEET 379
'No. I told the cook to get some fish — I did not par-
tioularize what.'
'Well, that beats everything I A lady professes to keep
hoQse, and doesn't even know what fish is for dinner I
professes to order fish, and doesn't specify what I'
'Perhaps, Mr. Bloomfield, you will order dinner yourself
in future.'
Nothing more was said ; and I was very glad to get out
of the room with my pupils ; for I never felt so ashamed and
uncomfortable in my life for anything that was not my own
fault.
In the afternoon we applied to lessons again : then went
out again ; then had tea in the schoolroom ; then I dressed
Mary Ann for dessert ; and when she and her brother had
gone down to the dining-room, I took the opportunity of
beginning a letter to my dear friends at home: but the
children came up before I had half completed it. At seven
I had to put Mary Ann to bed ; then I played with Tom till
eight, when he, too, went; and I finished my letter and
unpacked my clothes, which I had hitherto found no oppor-
tunity for doing, and, finally, went to bed myself.
But this is a very favourable specimen of a day's pro-
ceedings.
My task of instruction and surveillance, instead of be-
coming easier as my charges and I got better accustomed to
each other, became more arduous as their characters unfolded.
The name of governess, I soon found, was a mere mockery
as applied to me : my pupils had no more notion of obedience
than a wild, unbroken colt. The habitual fear of their
father's peevish temper, and the dread of the punishments
he was wont to inflict when irritated, kept them generally
within bounds in his immediate presence. The girls, too,
had some fear of their mother's anger ; and the boy might
occasionally be bribed to do as she bid hhn by the hope of
reward ; but I had no rewards to offer ; and as for punish-
ments, I was given to understand, the parents reserved that
privilege to themselves ; and yet they expected me to keep
380 AGNES OBET
my pupils in order. Other children might be guided by the
fear of anger and the desire of approbation ; but neither the
one nor the other had any effect upon these.
Master Tom, not content'with refusing to be ruled, must
needs set up as a ruler, and manifested a determination to
keep, not only his sisters, but his governess in order, by
^riolent manual and pedal applications ; and, as he was a tall,
strong boy of his years, this occasioned no trifling incon-
venience. A few sound boxes on the ear, on such occasions,
might have settled the matter easily enough : but as, in that
case, he might make up some story to his mother which she
would be sure to believe, as she had such unshaken faith in
his veracity — though I had already discovered it to be by no
means unimpeachable— I determined to refrain from striking
him, even in self-defence ; and, in his most violent moods, my
only resource was to throw him on his back and hold his
hands and feet till the frenzy was somewhat abated. To
the difficulty of preventing him from doing what he ought
not, was added that of forcing him to do what he ought.
Often he would positively refuse to learn, or to repeat
his lessons, or even to look at his book. Here, again, a
good birch rod might have been serviceable; but, as my
powers were so limited, I must make the best use of what
I had.
As there were no settled hours for study and play, I
resolved to give my pupils a certain task, which, with moderate
attention, they could perform in a short time ; and till this
was done, however weary I was, or however perverse they
might be, nothing short of parental interference should induce
me to suffer them to leave the schoolroom, even if I should
sit with my chair against the door to keep them in. Patience,
Firmness, and Perseverance were my only weapons ; and
these I resolved to use to the utmost. I determined always
strictly to fulfil the threats and promises I made ; and, to that
end, I must be cautious to threaten and promise nothing that
I could not perform. Then, I would carefully refrain from all
useless irritability and indulgence of my own ill-temper:
AQNES GBET S81
when they behaved tolerably, I would be as kind and obliging
as it was in my power to be, in order to make the widest possible
distinction between good and bad conduct ; I would reason
with them, too, in the simplest and most effective manner.
When I reproved them, or refused to gratify their wishes,
after a glaring fault, it should be more in sorrow than in
anger : their little hymns and prayers I would make plain
and clear to their understanding; when they said their
prayers at night and asked pardon for their offences, I would
remind them of the sins of the past day, solemnly, but in
perfect kindness, to avoid raising a spirit of opposition ;
penitential hymns should be said by the naughty, cheerful
ones by the comparatively good ; and every kind of instruc-
tion I would convey to them, as much as possible, by enter-
taining discourse — apparently with no other object than their
present amusement in view.
By these means I hoped in time both to benefit the children
and to gain the approbation of their parents ; and also to con-
vince my friends at home that I was not so wanting in skill and
prudence as they supposed. I knew the difficulties I had to
contend with were great ; but I knew (at least I believed)
unremitting patience and perseverance could overcome them ;
and night and morning I implored Divine assistance to this
end. But either the children were so incorrigible, the parents
so unreasonable, or myself so mistaken in my views, or so
unable to carry them out, that my best intentions and most
strenuous efforts seemed productive of no better result than
sport to the children, dissatisfaction to their parents, and
torment to myself.
The task of instruction was as arduous for the body as
the mind. I had to run after my pupils to catch them, to
carry or drag them to the table, and often forcibly to hold
them there till the lesson was done. Tom I frequently put
into a corner, seating myself before him in a chair, with a
book which contained the little task that must be said or
read, before he was released, in my hand. He was not strong
enough to push both me and the chair away, so he would
382 AGNES GBET
stand twisting his body and face into the most groteaqaeand
singular contortions — ^laughable, no doubt, to an anconoemed
spectator, but not to me— and uttering loud yells and doleful
outcries, intended to represent weeping but wholly without
the accompaniment of tears. I knew this was done solely
for the purpose of annoying me ; and, therefore, however I
might inwardly tremble with impatience and irritation, I
manfully strove to suppress all visible signs of molestatioDy
and affected to sit with calm indifference, waiting till it should
please him to cease this pastime, and prepare for a run in
the garden, by casting his eye on the book and reading or
repeating the few words he wsis required to say. Sometimes
he was determined to do his writing badly ; and I had to
hold his hand to prevent him from purposely blotting or
disfiguring the paper. Frequently I threatened that, if he did
not do better, he should have another line : then he would
stubbornly refuse to write this line ; and I, to save my word,
had finally to resort to the expedient of holding his fingers
upon the pen, and forcibly drawing his hand up and down,
till, in spite of his resistance, the line was in some sort com-
pleted.
Yet Tom was by no means the most unmanageable of my
pupils : sometimes, to my great joy, he would have the sense
to see that his wisest policy was to finish his tasks, and go
out and amuse himself till I and his sisters came to join him ;
which frequently was not at all, for Mary Ann seldom
followed his example in this particular : she apparently pre-
ferred rolling on the floor to any other amusement : down
she would drop like a leaden weight ; and when I, with great
difficulty, had succeeded in rooting her thence, I had still to
hold her up with one arm, while with the other I held the
book from which she was to read or spell her lesson. As the
dead weight of the big girl of six became too heavy for one
arm to bear, I transferred it to the other ; or, if both were
weary of the burden, I carried her into a comer, and told her
she might come out when she should find the use of her feet,
and stand up : but she generally preferred lying there like a
AQNES GBET 883
log till dinner or teatime, when, as I oould not deprive her of
her meals, she most be liberated, and would come crawling
out with a grin of triumph on her round, red face. Often she
would stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word
in her lesson ; and now I regret the lost labour I have had
in striving to conquer her obstinacy. If I had passed it over
as a matter of no consequence, it would have been better for
both parties, than vainly striving to overcome it as I did ;
but I thought it my absolute duty to crush this vicious ten-
dency in the bud : and so it was, if I could have done it ; and
had my powers been less limited, I might have enforced
obedience ; but, as it was, it was a trial of strength between
her and me, in which she generally came off victorious ; and
every victory served to encourage and strengthen her for a
future contest. In vain I argued, coaxed, entreated, threat-
ened, scolded ; in vain I kept her in from play, or, if obliged
to take her out, refused to play with her, or to speak kindly
or have anything to do with her ; in vain I tried to set before
her the advantages of doing as she was bid, and being loved,
and kindly treated in consequence, and the disadvantages of
persisting in her absurd perversity. Sometimes, when she
would ask me to do something for her, I would answer, —
'Yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will only say that word.
Gome ! you'd better say it at once, and have no more trouble
about it.'
'No.'
* Then, of course, I can do nothing for you.'
With me, at her age, or under, neglect and disgrace were
the most dreadful of punishments ; but on her they made no
impression. Sometimes, exasperated to the utmost pitch, I
would shake her violently by the shoulder, or pull her long
hair, or put her in the comer ; for which she punished me
with loud, shrill, piercing screams, that went through my
head like a knife. She knew I hated this, and when she had
shrieked her utmost, would look into my face with an air of
vindictive satisfaction, exclaiming, — ^Now, then! that's for
you I'and then shriek agsin and again, till I was forced to
884 AGNES OBET
stop my ears. Often these dreadful cries would bring Mrs
Bloomfield up to inquire what was the matter?
'Mary Ann is a naughty girl, ma'am.'
'But what are these shocking screams ?'
'She is screaming in a psission.'
'I never heard such a dreadful noise ! You might be
killing her. Why is she not out with her brother ?'
'I cannot get her to finish her lessons.'
'But Mary Ann must be a good girl, and finish her
lessons.'This was blandly spoken to the child.'And I
hope I shaU never hear such terrible cries again 1'
And fixing her cold, stony eyes upon me with a look that
could not be mistaken, she would shut the door, and walk
away. Sometimes I would try to take the little obstinate
creature by surprise, and casually ask her the word while
she was thinking of something else ; frequently she would
begin to say it, and then suddenly check herself, with a pro-
voking look that seemed to say,'Ah 1 I'm too sharp for you ;
you shan't trick it out of me, either.'
On another occasion, I pretended to forget the whole
affair ; and talked and played with her as usual, till night,
when I put her to bed ; then bending over her, while she lay
all smiles and good humour, just before departing, I said, as
cheerfully and kindly as before —'Now, Mary Ann, just tell
me that word before I kiss you good-night. Tou are a good
girl now, and, of course, you will say it.'
• No, I won't.'
'Then I can't kiss you.'
* Well, I don't care.'
In vain I expressed my sorrow ; in vain I lingered for
some symptom of contrition ; she really'didn't care,'and I
left her alone, and in darkness, wondering most of all at this
last proof of insensate stubbornness. In my childhood I
could not imagine a more afflictive punishment than for my
mother to refuse to kiss me at night: the very idea was
terrible. More than the idea I never felt, for, happily, I
never committed a fault that was deemed worthy of such a
AGNES GBET 386
penalty ; but onoe I remember, for some transgression of my
sister's, our mother thought proper to inflict it upon her:
what she felt, I cannot tell ; but my sympathetic tears and
Bufifering for her sake I shall not soon forget.
Another troublesome trait in Mary Ann was her incor-
rigible propensity to keep running into the nursery, to play
with her little sisters and the nurse. This was natural
enough, but, as it was against her mother's express desire, I,
of course, forbade her to do so, and did my utmost to keep
her with me; but that only increased her relish for the
nursery, and the more I strove to keep her out of it, the
oftener she went, and the longer she stayed, to the great
dissatisfaction of Mrs. Bloomfield, who, I well knew, would
impute all the blame of the matter to me. Another of my
trials was the dressing in the morning : at one time she
would not be washed ; at another she would not be dressed,
unless she might wear some particular frock, that I knew
her mother would not like her to have ; at another she would
scream and run away if I attempted to touch her hair. So
that, frequently, when, after much trouble and toil, I had,
at length, succeeded in bringing her down, the breakfast
was nearly half over ; and black looks from'mamma,'and
testy observations from'papa,'spoken at me, if not to
me, were sure to be my meed : for few things irritated the
latter so much as want of punctuality at meal times. Then,
among the minor annoyances, was my inability to satisfy
Mrs. Bloomfield with her daughter's dress ; and the child's
hair * was never fit to be seen.'Sometimes, as a powerful
reproach to me, she would perform the ofiBce of tire woman
herself, and then complain bitterly of the trouble it gave her.
When little Fanny came into the schoolroom, I hoped
she would be mild and inoffensive, at least ; but a few days,
if not a few hours, sufiBced to destroy the illusion : I found
her a mischievous, intractable little creature, given up to
falsehood and deception, young as she was, and alarmingly
fond of exercising her two favourite weapons of offence and
defence : that of spitting in the faces of those who incurred
886 AGNES 6BET
her displeasTire, and bellowing like a bull when her unrea-
sonable desires were not gratified. As she, generally, was
pretty qniet in her parents'presence, and they were impressed
with the notion of her being a remarkably gentle child, her
falsehoods were readily believed, and her loud uproars led
them to suspect harsh and injudicious treatment on my part ;
and when, at length, her bad disposition became manifest
even to their prejudiced eyes, I felt that the whole was
attributed to me.
'What a naughty girl Fanny is getting 1'Mrs. Bloomfield
would say to her spouse.'Don't you observe, my dear,
how she is altered since she entered the schoolroom ? She
will soon be as bad as the other two ; and, I am sorry to say,
they have quite deteriorated of late.'
'You may say that,'was the answer.'I've been think-
ing that same myself. I thought when we got them a
governess they'd improve ; but, instead of that, they get
worse and worse : I don't know how it is with their learning,
but their habits, I know, make no sort of improvement ; they
get rougher, and dirtier, and more unseemly every day.'
I knew this was all pointed at me ; and these, and all
similar innuendoes, affected me far more deeply than any
open accusations would have done ; for against the latter I
should have been roused to speak in my own defence : now
I judged it my wisest plan to subdue every resentful
impulse, suppress every sensitive shrinking, and go on
perseveringly, doing my best ; for, irksome, as my situation
was, I earnestly wished to retain it. I thought, if I could
struggle on with unremitting firmness and integrity, the
children would in time become more humanized : every
month would contribute to make them some little wiser,
and, consequently, more manageable ; for a child of nine or
ten as frantic and ungovernable as these at six and seven
would be a maniac.
I flattered myself I was benefiting my parents and sister
by my continuance here ; for small as the salary was, I still
was earning something, and with strict economy I could easily
AGNES GREY 387
manage to have something to spare for them, if they would
favour me by taking it. Then it was by my own will that I
had got the plaoe : I had brought all this tribulation on
myself, and I was determined to bear it ; nay, more than
that, I did not even regret the step I had taken. I longed to
show my friends that, even now, I was competent to under-
take the charge, and able to acquit myself honourably to the
end ; and if ever I felt it degrading to submit so quietly, or
intolerable to toil so constantly, I would turn towards my
home, and say within myself —
They may orush, but they shall not subdue me 1
Tis of thee that I think, not of them.
About Christmas I was allowed to visit home ; but my
holiday was only of a fortnight's duration :'For,'said Mrs.
Bloomfield,'I thought, as you had seen your friends so
lately, you would not care for a longer stay.'I left her to
think so still : but she little knew how long, how wearisome
those fourteen weeks of absence had been to me; how
intensely I had longed for my holidays, how greatly I was
disappointed at their curtailment. Yet she was not to blame
in this ; I had never told her my feelings, and she could not
be expected to divine them ; I had not been vnth her a full
term, and she was justified in not allowing me a full
vacation.
CHAPTER IV
THB GBANDMAMICA
I SFABE my readers the account of my delight on coming
home, my happiness while there — enjoying a brief space of
rest and liberty in that dear, familiar place, among the loving
and the loved — and my sorrow on being obliged to bid them,
once more, a long adieu.
I returned, however, with unabated vigour to my work —
a more arduous task than anyone can imagine, who has not
felt something like the misery of being charged with the care
and direction of a set of mischievous, turbulent rebels, whom
his utmost exertions cannot bind to their duty ; while, at the
same time, he is responsible for their conduct to a higher
power, who exacts & om him what cannot be achieved with-
out the aid of the superior's more potent authority ; which,
either from indolence, or the fear of becoming unpopular
with the said rebeUious gang, the latter refuses to give. I
can conceive few situations more harassing than that wherein,
however you may long for success, however you may labour
to fulfil your duty, your efforts are baffled and set at nought
by those beneath you, and unjustly censured and misjudged
by those above.
I have not enumerated half the vexatious propensities of
my pupils, or half the troubles resulting from my heavy re-
sponsibilities, for fear of trespassing too much upon the reader's
patience ; as, perhaps, I have already done ; but my design
in writing the few last pages was not to amuse, but to benefit
those whom it might concern ; he that has no interest in such
AGNES GREY 389
matters will doubtless have skipped them over with a oursory
glance, and, perhaps, a malediction against the prolixity of the
writer ; but if a parent has, therefrom, gathered any usefnl
hint, or an unfortunate governess received thereby the
sUghtest benefit, I am well rewarded for my pains«
To avoid trouble and confusion, I have taken my pupils
one by one, and discussed their various quahties ; but this
can give no adequate idea of being worried by the whole three
toge^er ; when, as was often the case, all were determined
to'be naughty, and to tease Miss Grey, and put her in a
passion/
Sometimes, on such occasions, the thought has suddenly
occurred to me —'If they could see me now !'meaning, of
course, my friends at home ; and the idea of how they would
pity me has made me pity myself — so greatly that I have
had the utmost difficulty to restrain my tears : but I have
restrained them, till my little tormentors were gone to
dessert, or cleared off to bed (my only prospects of deliver-
ance), and then, in all the bliss of solitude, I have given
myself up to the luxury of an unrestricted burst of weeping.
But this was a weakness I did not often indulge : my em-
ployments were too numerous, my leisure moments too
precious, to admit of much time being given to fruitless
lamentations.
I particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon, soon
after my return in January : the children had all come up from
dinner, loudly declaring that they meant'to be naughty ;'
and they had well kept their resolution, though I hod talked
myself hoarse, and wearied every muscle in my throat, in
the vain attempt to reason them out of it. I had got Tom
pinned up in a comer, whence, I told him, he should not
escape till he had done his appointed task. Meantime,
Fanny had possessed herself of my work-bag, and was rifling
its contents — and spitting into it besides. I told her to let
it alone, but to no purpose, of course.'Bum it, Fanny !'
cried Tom: and this command she hastened to obey. I
sprang to snatch it from the fire, and Tom darted to the door.
S90 AGNES GBET
'Mary Ann, throw her desk out of the window !'cried he :
and my predous desk, containing my letters and papers, my
small amomit of cash, and all my valuables, was about to be
precipitated from the three-storey window. I flew to rescue
it. Meanwhile Tom had left the room, and wsis rushing
down the stairs, followed by Fanny. Haying secured my
desk, I ran to catch them, and Mary Ann came scampering
after. All three escaped me, and ran out of the house into
the garden, where they plunged about in the snow, shouting
and screaming in exultant glee.
What must I do ? If I followed them, I should probably
be unable to capture one, and only drive them farther away ;
if I did not, how was I to get them in ? And what would
their parents think of me, if they saw or heard the children
rioting, hatless, bonnetless, gloveless, and bootless, in the deep
soft snow ? While I stood in this perplexity, just without
the door, trying, by grim looks and angry words, to awe them
into subjection, I heard a voice behind me, in harshly piercing
tones, exclaiming,—
'Miss Grey 1 Is it possible ? What, in the devil's name,
can you be thinking about ?'
'I can't get them in, sir,'said I, turning round, and
beholding Mr. Bloomfield, with his hair on end, and his pale
blue eyes bolting from their sockets.
'But I INSIST upon their being got in 1'cried he, approach-
ing nearer, and looking perfectly ferocious.
* Then, sir, you must call them yourself, if you please,
for they won't listen to me,'I replied, stepping back.
* Come in with you, you filthy brats ; or I'll horsewhip
you every one 1'roared he ; and the children instantly
obeyed.'There, you see ! they come at the first word !'
'Yes, when you speak.'
'And it's very strange, that when you've the care of'em
you've no better control over'em than that 1 — ^Now, there
they are — gone up-stairs with their nasty snowy feet I Do
go after'em and see them made decent, for heaven's
sake !'
AGNES OBEY 391
That gentleman's mother was then staymg in the house ;
and, as I ascended the stairs and passed the drawing-room
door, I had the satisfaction of hearing the old lady declaiming
aloud to her daughter-in-law to this e£G3ct (for I could only
distinguish the most emphatic words) —
'Gracious heavens I ^never in all my life 1 get
their death as sure as ! Do you think, my dear, she's
a ffoper person ? Take my word for it'
I heard no more ; but t^at sufficed.
The senior Mrs. Bloomfield had been very attentive and
dvil to me ; and till now I had thought her a nice, kind-
hearted, chatty old body. She would often come to me and
talk in a confidential strain ; nodding and shaking her head,
and gesticulating with hands and eyes, as a certain class of
old ladies are won't to do ; though I never knew one that
carried the peculiarity to so great an extent. She would even
sympathise with me for the trouble I had with the children,
and express at times, by half sentences, interspersed with
nods and knowing winks, her sense of the injudicious conduct
of their mamma in so restricting my power, and neglecting
to support me with her authority. Such a mode of testifying
disapprobation was not much to my taste ; and I generally
refused to take it in, or understand anything more than was
openly spoken; at least, I never went farther than an implied
acknowledgment that, if matters were otherwise ordered my
task would be a less difficult one, and I should be better able
to guide and instruct my charge ; but now I must be doubly
cautious. Hitherto, though I saw the old lady had her de-
fects (of which one was a proneness to proclaim her perfections),
I had always been wishful to excuse them, and to give her
credit for all the virtues she professed, and even imagine
others yet untold. Kindness, which had been the food of
my life through so many years, had ,lately been so entirely
denied me, that I welcomed with* j^teful joy the slightest
semblance of it. No wonder, then, that my heart warmed
to the old lady, and always gladdened at her approach and
regretted her departure.
15
393 AGNES GBET
But now, the few words luckily or unluckily heard in
passing had wholly revolutionized my ideas respecting her :
now I looked upon her as hypocritical and insincere, a
flatterer, and a spy upon my words and deeds. Doubtless
it would have been my interest still to meet her with the
same cheerful smile and tone of respectful cordiality as
before ; but I could not, if I would : my manner altered
with my feelings, and became so cold and shy that she could
not fail to notice it. She soon did notice it, and her manner
altered too : the familiar nod was changed to a stiff bow, the
gracious smile gave place to a glare of Gorgon ferocity ; her
vivacious loquacity was entirely transferred from me to'the
darling boy and girls,'whom she flattered and indulged
more absurdly than ever their mother had done.
I confess I was somewhat troubled at this change : I
feared the consequences of her displeasure, and even made
some efforts to recover the ground I had lost — and with
better apparent success than I could have anticipated. At
one time, I, merely in common civility, asked after her
cough ; immediately her long visage relaxed into a smile,
and she favoured me with a particular history of that and
her other infirmities, followed by an account of her pious
resignation, delivered in the usual emphatic, declamatory
style, which no writing can portray.
'But there's one remedy for all, my dear, and that's
resignation'(a toss of the head),'resignation to the will of
heaven 1'(an uplifting of the hands and eyes).'It has
always supported me through all my trials, and always will
do'(a succession of nods).'But then, it isn't everybody
that can say that'(a shake of the head) ;'but I'm one of
the pious ones. Miss Grey 1'(a very significant nod and toss).
'And, thank heaven, I always was'(another nod),'and I
glory in it !'(an emphatic clasping of the hands and shaking
of the head). And with several texts of Scripture, mis-
quoted or misapplied, and religious exclamations so redolent
of the ludicrous in the style of delivery and manner of
bringing in, if not in the expressions themselves, that I
AGNES GREY 393
decline repeating them, she withdrew; tossing her large
head in high good-humour — ^with herself at least — and
left me hoping that, after all, she was rather weak than
wicked.
At her next visit to Wellwood House, I went so far as to
say I was glad to see her looking so well. The effect of
this was magical : the words, intended as a mark of ciyility,
were received as a flattering compliment ; her countenance
brightened up, and from that moment she became as
gracious and benign as heart could wish — in outward
semblance at least. From what I now saw of her, and
what I heard from the children, I knew that, in order to gain
her cordial friendship, I had but to utter a word of flattery
at each convenient opportunity : but this was against my
principles ; and for lack of this, the capricious old dame
soon deprived me of her favour again, and I believe did me
much secret injury.
She could not greatly influence her daughter-in-law
against me, because, between that lady and herself there
was a mutual dislike — chiefly shown by her in secret de-
tractions and calumniations ; by the other, in an excess of
frigid formality in her demeanour ; and no fawning flattery
of the elder could thaw away the wall of ice which the
younger interposed between ^em. But with her son, the
old lady had better success : he would listen to all she had
to say, provided she could soothe his fretful temper, and re-
frain from irritating him by her own asperities ; and I have
reason to believe that she considerably strengthened his
prejudice against me. She would tell him that I shamefully
neglected the children, and even his wife did not attend to
them as she ought ; and that he must look after them him-
self, or they would all go to ruin.
Thus urged, he would frequently give himself the trouble
of watching them from the windows during their play ; at
times, he would follow them through the grounds, and too
often came suddenly upon them while they were dabbling in
the forbidden well, talking to the coachman in the stables,
394 AGNBS GBET
or revelling in the filth of the farm-yard — and I, meanwhile,
wearily standing by, having previously exhausted my
energy in vain attempts to get them away. Often, too,
he would unexpectedly pop his head into the schoolroom
while the young people were at meals, and find them spilling
their milk over the table and themselves, plunging their
fingers into their own or each other's mugs, or quarrelling
over their victuals Uke a set of tiger's cubs. If I were quiet
at the moment, I was conniving at their disorderly conduct ;
if (as was frequently the case) I happened to be exalting my
voice to enforce order, I was using undue violence, and
setting the girls a bad example by such ungentleness of tone
and language.
I remember one afternoon in spring when, owing to the
rain, they could not go out ; but, by some amazing good
fortune, they had all finished their lessons, and yet abstained
from running down to tease their parents — a trick that
annoyed me greatly, but which, on rainy days, I seldom
could prevent their doing; because, below, they foimd
novelty and amusement — especially when visitors were in
the house ; and their mother, though she bid me keep them
in the schoolroom, would never chide them for leaving it, or
trouble herself to send them back. But this day they
appeared satisfied with their present abode, and what is
more wonderful still, seemed disposed to play together
without depending on me for amusement, and without
quarrelling with each other. Their occupation was a some-
what puzzling one : they were all squatted together on the
floor by the window, ov^ a heap of broken toys and a
quantity of birds'eggs — or rather egg-shells, for the contents
had luckily been abstracted. These shells they had broken
up and were pounding into small fragments, to what end I
could not imagine ; but so long as they were quiet and not
in positive mischief, I did not care ; and, with a feeling of
unusual repose, I sat by the fire, putting the finishing
stitches to a frock for Mary Ann's doll ; intending, when
that was done, to begin a letter to my mother. Suddenly
AGNES GBET 895
the door opened, and the dingy head of Mr. Bloomfield
looked in.
'All very quiet here I What are you doing?'said he.
'No harm to-day, at least/ thought I. But he was of a
different opinion. Advancing to the window, and seeing the
children's occupations, he testily exclaimed —'What in the
world are you about ? *
'We're grinding egg-shells, papa I'cried Tom.
'How dare you make such a mess, you little devils ?
Don't you see what confounded work you're making of the
carpet?'(the carpet was a plain brown drugget).'Miss Orey,
did you know what they were doing ?'
* Yes, sir.'
'You knew it ?'
'Yes.'
'You knew it I and you actually sat there and permitted
them to go on without a word of reproof !'
* I didn't think they were doing any harm.'
* Any harm ! Why, look there ! Just look at that carpet,
and see — ^was there ever anything like it in a Christian
house before ? No wonder your room is not fit for a pigsty
— no wonder your pupils are worse than a litter of pigs ! —
no wonder — oh ! I declare, it puts me quite past my
patience I'and he departed, shutting the door after him
with a bang that made the children laugh.
'It puts me quite past my patience too I'muttered I,
getting up ; and, seizing the poker, I dashed it repeatedly
into the cinders, and stirred them up with unwonted
energy ; thus easing my irritation under pretence of mending
the fire.
After this, Mr. Bloomfield was continually looking in to
see if the schoolroom was in order ; and, as the children
were continually littering the floor with fragments of toys,
sticks, stones, stubble, leaves, and other rubbish, which I
could not prevent their bringing, or oblige them to gather
up, and which the servants refused to'clean after them,'I
had to spend a considerable portion of my valuable leisure
396 AGNES GBET
moments on my knees upon die floor, in painsfully reducing
things to order. Once I told them that they ^ould not
taste their supper till they had picked up everything from
the carpet ; Fanny might have hers when she had taken up
a certain quantity, Mary Ann when she had gathered twice
as many, and Tom was to clear away the rest. Wonderful
to state, the girls did their part ; but Tom was in such a
fury that he flew upon the table, scattered the bread and
milk about the floor, struck his sisters, kicked the coals out
of the coal-pan, attempted to overthrow the table and chairs,
and seemed inclined to make a Douglas-larder of the whole
contents of the room : but I seized upon him, and, sending
Mary Ann to call her mamma, held him, in spite of kicks,
blows, yells, and execrations, till Mrs. Bloomfield made her
appearance.
'What is the matter with my boy ?'said she.
And when the matter was explained to her, all she did was
to send for the nursery-maid to put the room in order, and
bring Master Bloomfield his supper.
'There now,'cried Tom, triumphantly, looking up
from his viands with his mouth almost too full for
speech.'There now. Miss Grey 1 you see I've got my supper
in spite of you : and I haven't picked up a single thing I'
The only person in the house who had any real
sympathy for me was the nurse ; for she had suffered like
afflictions, though in a smaller degree ; as she had not the
task of teaching, nor was she so responsible for the conduct
of her charge.
* Oh, Miss Grey 1 * she would say, * you have some trouble
with them childer 1'
'I have, indeed, Betty ; and I daresay you know what
it is.'
* Ay, I do so I But I don't vex myself o'er'em as you do.
And then, you see, I hit'em a slap sometimes : and them
little'uns — I gives'em a good whipping now and then :
there's nothing else will do for'em, as what they say. How-
soever, I've lost my place for it.'
AGNES OBEY S97
* Have youy Betty ? I heaxd you were going to leave/
'Eh, bless yoo, yes I Missis gave me warning a three
wik sin'. She told me afore Christmas how it mud be, if I
hit'em again ; but I couldn't hold my hand off'em at
nothing. I know not how you do, for Miss Mary Ann's
worse by the half nor her sisters I'
CJHAPTEB V
THB UMOLB
•
Besides the old lady, there was another relative of the
family, whose visits were a great annoyance to me — this was
'Uncle Bobson/ Mrs. Bloomfield's brother ; a tall, self-
sufficient fellow, with dark hair and sallow complexion like
his sister, a nose that seemed to disdain the earth, and little
grey eyes, frequently half-closed, with a mixture of real
stupidity and affected contempt of all surrounding objects.
He was a thick-set, strongly-built man, but he had found
some means of compressing his waist into a remarkably
small compass ; and that, together with the unnatural stiff-
ness of his form, showed that the lofty-minded, manly Mr.
Bobson, the scomer of the female sex, was not above the
foppery of stays. He seldom deigned to notice me ; and,
when he did, it was with a certain supercilious insolence of
tone and manner that convinced me he was no gentleman :
though it was intended to have a contrary effect. But it
was not for that I disliked his coming, so much as for the
harm he did the children — encouraging all their evil pro-
pensities, and undoing in a few minutes the little good it
had taken me months of labour to achieve.
Fanny and little Harriet he seldom condescended to
notice ; but Mary Ann was something of a favourite. He
was continually encouraging her tendency to affectation
(which I had done my utmost to crush), talking about her
pretty face, and filling her head with all manner of conceited
notions concerning her personal appearance (which I had
AGNES OBEY 399
iiiBtracted her to regard as dust in the balance compared
with the coltiyation of her mind and manners) ; and I never
saw a child so susceptible of flattery as she was. Whatever
was wrong, in either her or her brother, he woxQd encourage
by laughing at, if not by actually praising : people little know
the injury they do to children by laughing at their faults,
and making a pleasant jest of what their true friends
have endeavoured to teach them to hold in grave abhorrence.
Though not a positive drunkard, Mr. Bobson habitually
swallowed great quantities of wine, and took with reUsh an
occasional glass of brandy and water. He taught his
nephew to imitate him in this to the utmost of his ability,
and to believe that the more wine and spirits he could take,
and the better he liked them, the more he manifested his bold
and manly spirit, and rose superior to his sisters. Mr.
Bloomfleld had not much to say against it, for his favourite
beverage was gin and water ; of which he took a considerable
portion every day, by dint of constant sipping — and to that
I chieQy attributed his dingy complexion and waspish
temper.
Mr. Bobson likewise encouraged Tom's propensity to
persecute the lower creation, both by precept and example.
As he frequently came to course or shoot over his brother-in-
laiT^'s grounds, he would bring his favourite dogs with him ;
and he treated them so brutally that, poor as I was, I would
have given a sovereign any day to see one of them bite him,
provided the animal could have done it with impimity.
Sometimes, when in a very complacent mood, he would go
a-birds* -nesting with the children : a thing that irritated and
annoyed me exceedingly; as, by frequent and persevering
attempts, I flattered myself I had partly shown them the evil
of this pastime, and hoped, in time, to bring them to some
general sense of justice and humanity; but ten minutes'
birds'-nesting with uncle Bobson, or even a laugh from him
at some relation of their former barbarities, was sufficient at
cHice to destroy the efifect of my whole elaborate course of
xeasoning and persuasion. Happily, however, during that
400 AGNEB GBET
gpring, tney nevar, bat onoe, got anything bat empty nestB,
or ef^ — being too impatient to leave them till the birda were
hatdhed ; that onoe, Tom, who had been with his unde into
the neighboaring plantation, came running in high glee into
the garden, with a brood of little callow nestlings in his
hands. Mary Ann and Fanny, whom I was just bringing
out, ran to achnire his spoils, and to beg each a bird for them-
selves.'No, not one!'cried Tom.'They're all mine;
uncle Bobson gave them to me — one, two, three, four, five —
you shan't touch one of them t no, not one, for your lives t'
continued he, ezultingly ; laying the nest on the ground, and
standing over it with his legs wide apart, his hands thrust
into his breeches-pockets, his body bent forward, and his face
twisted into all manner of contortions in the ecstasy of his
delight.
'But you shall see me fettle'em ofif. My word, but I
will wallop'em? See if I don't now. By gum I but there's
rare sport for me in that nest.'
* But, Tom,'said I,'I shall not allow you to torture those
birds. They must either be killed at once or carried back to
the place you took them from, that the old birds may continue
to feed them.'
'But you don't know where that is. Madam : it's only me
and uncle Bobson that knows that.'
'But if you don't tell me, I shall kill them myself — muoh
as I hate it.'
'You daren't. You daren't touch them for your life!
because you know papa and mamma, and imcle Bobson,
would be angry. Ha, ha ! I've caught you there, Miss !'
'I shall do what I think right in a case of this sort with-
out consulting any one. If your papa and mamma don't
happen to approve of it, I shall be sorry to offend them ; but
your uncle Bobson's opinions, of course, are nothing to me.'
So saying— urged by a sense of duty — at the risk of both
making myself sick and incurring the wrath of my employers
— I got a large flat stone, that had been reared up for a
mouse-trap by the gardener ; then, having once more vainly
J
AGNES GBET 401
endeavotued to persnade the little tyrant to let the birds
be oarried back, I asked what he intended to do with them.
With fiendish glee he commenced a Ust of torments ; and
while he was busied in the relation, I dropped the stone upon
his intended victims and crushed them flat beneath it. Loud
were the outcries, terrible the execrations, consequent upon
this daring outrage ; uncle Bobson had been coming up the
walk with his gun^ and was just then pausing to kick his dog.
Tom flew towards him, vowing he would make him kick me
instead of Juno. Mr. Bobson leant upon his gun, and
laughed excessively at the violence of his nephew's passion,
and the bitter maledictions and opprobrious epithets he
heaped upon me.'Well, you ore a good'un !'exclaimed
he, at length, taking up his weapon and proceeding towards
the house. Damme, but the lad has some spunk in him, too.
Curse me, if ever I saw a nobler Uttle scoundrel than that.
He's beyond petticoat government already : by Gk > d t he
defies mother, gnuuiy, governess, and all I Ha, ha, ha t
Never mind, Tom, I'll get you another brood to-morrow/
'If you do, Mr. Bobson, I shall kill them too,'said I.
'Hxmiph !'repUed he, and having honoured me with a
broad stare — ^which, contrary to his expectations, I sustained
without flJTiohing — ^he turned away with an air of supreme
contempt, and stalked into the house. Tom next went to tell
his mamma. It was not her way to say much on any sub-
ject ; but, when she next saw me, her aspect and demeanour
were doubly dark and chilled. After some casual remark
about the weather, she observed —'I am sorry. Miss Grey,
you should think it necessary to interfere with Master Bloom-
field's amusements ; he was very much distressed about your
destroying the birds.'
'When Master Bloomfield's amusements consist in injur-
ing sentient creatures,'I answered,'I think it my duty to
interfere.'
'You seemed to have forgotten,'said she, calmly,'that
the creatures were all created for our convenience.'
I thought that doctrine admitted some doubt, but merely
409 AONBS GBBY
repliied —'If they were, we have no right to torment them for
our amuBement/
'I think,'said she,'a ohild's amusement is scarcely to be
weighed against the welfare of a soulless brute.*
'But, for the child's own sake, it ought not to be en-
couraged to have such amusements,'answered I, as meekly
as I could, to make up for such unusual pertinacity.
'" Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. "'
'Oh I of course ; but that refers to our conduct towards
each other/
*'* The merciful man shows mercy to his beast, "'I ven-
tured to add.
'I think you have not shown much mercy,'replied she,
with a short, bitter laugh ;'killing the poor birds by whole-
sale in that shocking manner, and putting the dear boy to
such misery for a mere whim.'
I judged it prudent to say no more. This was the
nearest approach to a quarrel I ever had with Mrs. Bloom-
field ; as well as the greatest number of words I ever exchanged
with her at one time, since the day of my first arrival.
But Mr. Bobson and old Mrs. Bloomfield were not the
only guests whose coming to Wellwood House annoyed me ;
every visitor disturbed me more or less ; not so mnoh
because they neglected me (though I did feel their conduct
strange and disagreeable in that respect), as because I found
it impossible to keep my pupils away from them, -as I was re-
peatedly desired to do : Tom must talk to them, and Mary Ann
must be noticed by them. Neither the one nor the other knew
what it was to feel any degree of shamefacedness, or even
common modesty. They would indecently and clamorously
interrupt the conversation of their elders, tease them with the
most impertinent questions, roughly collar the gentlemen,
cUmb their knees uninvited, hang about their shoulders or
rifle their pockets, pull the ladies'gowns, disorder their hair,
tumble their collars, and importunately beg for their trinkets.
Mrs. Bloomfield had the sense to be shocked and annoyed
at all this, but she had not sense to prevent it : she expeoted
AGNES OBEY 403
me to prevent it. But how oould I — when the gaeste, with
their fine clothes and new faces, oontinnally flattered and
indulged them, out of complaisance to their parents — ^how
oould J, with my homely garments, every-day face, and
honest words, draw them away ? I strained every nerve to
do so : by striving to amuse them, I endeavoured to attract
them to my side; by the exertion of such authority as I
possessed, and by such severity as I dared to use, I i^ed to
deter them from tormenting the guests ; and by reproaching
their unmannerly conduct, to make them ashamed to repeat it.
But they knew no shame ; they scorned authority which had
no terrors to back it ; and as for kindness and affection, either
they had no hearts, or such as they had were so strongly
guarded, and so well concealed, that I, with all my efforts,
had not yet discovered how to reach them.
But soon my trials in this quarter came to a close — sooner
than I either expected or desired ; for one sweet evening towards
the close of May, as I was rejoicing in the near approach of
the hoUdays, and congratulating myself upon having made
some progress with my pupils (as far as their learning went,
at least, for I had instilled something into their heads, and I
had, at length, brought them to be a Uttle — a very little —
more rational about getting their lessons done in time to
leave some space for recreation, instead of tormenting them-
selves and me all day long to no purpose), Mrs. Bloomfield
sent for me, and calmly told me that after Midsummer my
services would be no longer required. She assured me that
my character and general conduct were unexceptionable ; but
the children had made so Uttle improvement since my arrival
that Mr. Bloomfield and she felt it their duty to seek some other
mode of instruction. Though superior to most children of their
years in abilities, .they were decidedly behind them in attain-
ments ; their manners were uncultivated, and their tempers
unruly. And this she attributed to a want of sufficient
firnmess, and diligent, persevering care on my part.
Unshaken firmness, devoted diligence, unwearied perse-
yerance, unceasing care, were the very qualifications on
4M AGNES OBET
which I had secretly prided myself ; and by which I had
hoped in time to overcome all difficulties, and obtain snooeBS
at last. I wished to say something in my own justification ;
but in attempting to speak, I felt my voice falter; and
rather than testify any emotion, or suffer the tears to
overflow that were already gathering in my eyes, I chose to
keep silence, and bear all like a self -convicted culprit.
Thus was I dismissed, and thus I sought my home.
Alas I what would they think of me? unable, after all my
boasting, to keep my place, even for a single year, as
governess to three small children, whose mother was asserted
by my own aunt to be a'very nice woman.'Having been
thus weighed in the balance and found wanting, I need not
hope they would be willing to try me again. And this was
an unwelcome thought ; for vexed, harassed, disappointed as
I had been, and greatly as I had learned to love and value
my home, I was not yet weary of adventure, nor willing to
relax my efforts. I knew that all parents were not like Mr.
and Mrs. Bloomfield, and I was certain all children were
not like theirs. The next family must be different, and any
change must be for the better. I had been seasoned by ad-
versity, and tutored by experience, and I longed to redeem
my lost honour in the eyes of those whose opinion was more
than that of all the world to me.
CHAPTER VI
THB PABSONAGB AGAIN
Fob a few months I remained peaceably at home, in the
quiet enjoyment of liberty and rest, and genuine friendship,
from all of which I had fasted so long ; and in the earnest
prosecution of my studies, to recover what I had lost during
my stay at Wellwood House, and to lay in new stores for
future use. My father's health was stiU very infirm, but not
materially worse than when I last saw him ; and I^^was glad
I had it in my power to cheer him by my return, and to
amuse him with singing his favourite songs.
No one triumphed over my failure, or said I had better
have taken his or her advice, and quietly stayed at home.
AU were glad to have me back again, and lavished more
kindness than ever upon me, to make up for the sufferings I
had undergone ; but not one would touch a shilling of what
I had so cheerfully earned and so carefuUy saved, in the hope
of sharing it with them. By dint of pinching here, and
scraping there, our debts were already nearly paid. Mary had
had good success with her drawings; but our father had
insisted upon her likewise keeping all the produce of her
industry to herself. All we could spare from the supply of
our humble wardrobe and our little casual expenses, he
directed us to put into the savings'-bank ; saying, we knew
not how soon we might be dependent on that alone for
support : for he felt he had not long to be with us, and what
would become of our mother and us when he was gone, Ood
only knew I
Dear papa! if he had troubled himself lees about the
406 AGNES GBET
afSiotionB that threatened us in case of his death, I am oon-
yinoed that dreaded event would not have taken plaoe so soon.
My mother would never suffer him to ponder on the subject
if she could help it.
'Oh, Bichard !'exclaimed she, on one occasion, * if you
would but dismiss such gloomy subjects from your mind,
you would Uve as long as any of us ; at least you would
live to see the girls married, and yourself a happy grandfather,
with a canty old dame for your companion.'
My mother laughed, and so did my father : but his laugh
soon perished in a dreary sigh.
*They married — poor penniless things 1'said he;'who
will take them I wonder !'
'Why, nobody shall that isn't thankful for them.
Wasn't I penniless when you took me ? and you pretended,
at least, to be vastly pleased with your acquisition. But it's
no matter whether they get married or not : we can devise a
thousand honest ways of making a livelihood. And I wonder,
Bichard, you can think of bothering your head about our
poverty in case of your death ; as if that would be anything
compared with the calamity of losing you — an affliction that
you well know would swallow up all others, and which you
ought to do your utmost to preserve us from : and there is
nothing like a cheerful mind for keeping the body in health.'
'I know, Alice, it is wrong to keep repining as I do, but
I cannot help it : you must bear with me.'
'I won't bear with you, if I can alter you,'replied my
mother : but the harshness of her words was undone by the
earnest affection of her tone and pleasant smile, that made
my father smile again, less sadly and less transiently than
was his wont.
'Mamma,'said I, as soon as I could find an opportunity
of speaking with her alone,'my money is but little, and can-
not last long ; if I could increase it, it would lessen papa's
anxiety, on one subject at least. I cannot draw like Mary, and
so the best thing I could do would be to look out for another
situation.'
AGNES GBBY 407
'And so yon wonld aotnally try again, Agnes ?'
'Decidedly, I wonld.'
'Why, my dear, I shonld have thought yon had had
enongh of it.'
'I know,'said I,'everybody is not like Mr. and Mrs.
Bloomfield'
'Some are worse,'interrupted my mother.
* But not many, I think,'repUed I,'and I'm sure all
ohildren are not like theirs ; for I and Mary were not : we
always did as you bid us, didn't we ?'
'Generally : but then, I did not spoil you ; and you were
not perfect angels after all : Mary had a fund of quiet obsti-
nacy, and you were somewhat faulty in regard to temper ;
but you were very good children on the whole.'
'I know I was sulky sometimes, and I should have been
glad to see these children sulky sometimes too ; for then I
could have understood them : but they never were, for they
couid not be offended, nor hurt, nor ashamed : they could
not be unhappy in any way, except when they were in a
passion.'
'Well, if they could not, it was not their fault : you can-
not expect stone to be as pliable as clay.'
* No, but still it is very unpleasant to live with such unim-
pressible, incomprehensible creatures. You cannot love them ;
and if you could, your love would be utterly thrown away :
they could neither return it, nor value, nor understand it.
But, however, even if I should stumble on such a family
again, which is quite unlikely, I have all this experience to
begin with, and I should manage better another time ; and
the end and aim of this preamble is, let me try again.'
'Well, my girl, you are not easily discouraged, I see : I
am glad of that. But, let me tell you, you are a good deal
paler and thinner than when you first left home ; and we
cannot have yon undermining your health to hoard up money
either for yourself or others.'
'Mary tells me I am changed too ; and I don't much
wonder at it, for I was in a constant state of agitation and
lOS AGNES OBET
uudaty all day long : bat next time I am detenmned to take
things oooUy/
After some further diflcnssion, my mother promised once
more to assist me, provided I would wait and be patient ; and
I left her to broach the matter to my father, when and how
she deemed it most advisable : never doubting her ability
to obtain his consent. Meantime, I searched, with great
interest, the advertising columns of the newspapers, and
wrote answers to every'Wanted a (Jovemess'that appeared
at all eligible ; but all my letters, as well as the replies, when
I got any, were dutifully shown to my mother ; and she, to
my cha^in, made me reject the situations one after another :
these were low people, these were too exacting in their de-
mands, and these too niggardly in their remuneration.
'Your talents are not such as every poor clergyman's
daughter possesses, Agnes,'she would say,'and you must
not throw them away. Bemember, you promised to be
patient : there is no need of hurry : you have plenty of
time before you, and may have many chances yet/
At length, she advised me to put an advertisement,
myself, in the paper, stating my qualifications, Ac.
'Music, singing, drawing, French, Latin, and German,'
said she,'are no mean assemblage : many will be glad to
have so much in one instructor; and this time, you
shall try your fortune in a somewhat higher family —
in that of some genuine, thorough-bred gentieman; for
such are far more likely to treat you with proper respect and
consideration than those purse-proud tradespeople and
arrogant upstarts. I have known several among the higher
ranks who treated their governesses quite as one of the
family ; though some, I allow, are as insolent and exacting
as any one else can be : for there are bad and good in all
classes.'
The advertisement was quickly written and despatched.
Of the two parties who answered it, but one would consent
to give me fifty pounds, the sum my mother bade me name
as the salary I should require ; and here, I hesitated aboal
AGNES GBET 409
engaging myself, as I feared the children would be too old,
and their parents would require some one more showy, or
more experienced, if not more accomplished than I. But my
mother dissuaded me from declining it on that account : I
should do vastly well, she said, if I would only throw aside
my diffidence, and acquire a little more confidence in
myself. I was just to give a plain, true statement of my
acquirements and qualifications, and name what stipulations
I chose to make, and then await the result The only
stipulation I ventured to propose, was that I might be
allowed two months'holidays during the year to visit my
friends, at Midsummer and Chiistmas. The unknown lady,
in her reply, made no objection to this, and stated that, as to
my acquirements, she had no doubt I should be able to give
satisfaction ; but in the engagement of governesses she con-
sidered those things as but subordinate points; as being
situated in the neighbourhood of , she could get
masters to supply any deficiencies in that respect : but, in
her opinion, next to unimpeachable morality, a mild and
cheerful temper and obliging disposition were the most
essential requisities.
My mother did not relish this at all, and now made
many objections to my accepting the situation ; in which
my sisteor warmly supported her : but, unwilling to be
balked again, I overruled them all ; and, having first obtained
the consent of my father (who had, a short time previously,
been apprised of these transactions), I wrote a most obliging
epistle to my unknown correspondent, and, finally, the
bargain was concluded.
It was decreed that on the last day of January I was to
enter upon my new office as governess in the family of
Mr. Murray, of Horton Lodge, near , about seventy
miles from our village : a formidable distance to me, as I
had never been above twenty miles from home in all the
course of my twenty years'sojourn on earth; and as,
moreover, every individual in that family and in the neigh-
bourhood was utterly unknown to myself and all my
410 AGNES GBET
aoquaintanoes. But this rendered it only the more piquant
to me. I had now, in some measnre, got rid of the
mauvaise honte that had formerly oppressed me so much ;
there was a pleasing excitement in the idea of entering these
unknown regions, and making my way alone among its
strange inhabitants. I now flattered myself I was going to
see something in the world: Mr. Murray's residence was
near a large town, and not in a manufacturing district, where
the people had nothing to do but to make money ; his rank
from what I could gather, appeared to be higher than that of
Mr. Bloomfield ; and, doubtless, he was one of those genuine
thorough-bred gentry my mother spoke of, who would treat
his governess with due consideration as a respectable well-
educated lady, the instructor and guide of his children, and
not a mere upper servant. Then, my pupils being older,
would be more rational, more teachable, and less troublesome
than the last'; they would be less confined to the schoolroom,
and not require that constant labour and incessant watching;
and, finally, bright visions mingled with my hopes, with
which the care of children and the mere duties of a governess
had little or nothing to do. Thus, the reader will see that I
had no claim to be regarded as a martyr to filial piety, going
forth to sacrifice peace and liberty for the sole purpQse of
laying up stores for the comfort and support of my parents :
though certainly the comfort of my father, and the future
support of my mother, had a large share in my calculations ;
and fifty pounds appeared to me no ordinary sum. I must
have decent clothes becoming my station ; I must, it seemed,
put out my washing, and also pay for my four annual
journeys between Horton Lodge and home ; but with strict
attention to economy, surely twenty pounds, or little more,
would cover those expenses, and then there would be thirty
for the bank, or little less : what a valuable addition to our
stock 1 Oh, I must struggle to keep this situation, whatever
it might be ! both for my own honour among my friends and
for the solid services I might render them by my oDntinuanoe
there.
CHAPTEB VII
HOBTON LODGE
Thb Slst of January was a wild, tempestuous day : there
was a strong north wind, with a continual storm of snow
drifting on the ground and whirling through the air. My
friends would have had me delay my departure, but fearful
of prejudicing my employers against me by suoh want of
punctuality at the commencement of my undertaking, I
persisted in keeping the appointment.
I will not inflict upon my readers an account of my
leaving home on that dark winter morning: the fond
farewells, the long, long journey to O , the solitary
waitings in inns for coaches or trains — for there were some
railways then — and, finally, the meeting at O with
Mr. Murray's servant, who had been sent with the phaeton
to drive me from thence to Horton Lodge. I will just
state that the heavy snow had thrown such impediments in
the way of both horses and steam-engines, that it was dark
some hours before I reached my journey's end, and that a
most bewildering storm came on at last, which made the
few miles^ space between O and Horton Lodge a long
and formidable passage. I sat resigned, with the cold,
sharp snow drifting through my veil and filling my lap,
seeing nothing, and wondering how the unfortunate horse
and driver could make their way even as well as they did ; and
indeed it was but a toilsome, creeping style of progression, to
say the best of it. At length we paused ; and, at the call of
the driver, someone unlatched and rolled back upon their
413 AONE8 GBBT
creaking hinges what appeared to be the park gates. Then
we proceeded along a smoother road, whence, occasionally, I
perceived some huge, hoary mass gleaming through the
darkness, which I took to be a portion of a snow-dad tree.
After a considerable time we paused again, before the stately
portico of a large house with long windows descending to the
ground.
I rose with some difficulty from under the superincum-
bent snowdrift, and alighted from the carriage, expecting
that a kind and hospitable reception would indemnify me
for the toils and hardships of the day. A gentlemanly
person in black opened the door, and admitted me into a
spacious hall, lighted by an amber-coloured lamp sus-
pended from the ceiling ; he led me through this, along a
passage, and opening the door of a back room, told me that
was the schoolroom. I entered, and found two young ladies
and two young gentlemen — my future pupils, I supposed.
After a formal greeting, the elder girl, who was trifling over
a piece of canvas and a basket of German wools, asked if I
should like to go upstairs. I replied in the affirmative, of
course.
'Matilda, take a candle, and show her her room,'said she.
Miss Matilda, a strapping hoyden of about fourteen, with
a short frock and trousers, shrugged her shoulders and made
a slight grimace, but took a candle and proceeded before me
up the back stairs (a long, steep, double flight), and through
a long, narrow passage, to a small but tolerably comfortable
room. She then asked me if I would take some tea or
coffee. I was about to answer No ; but remembering that I
had taken nothing since seven o'clock that morning, and
feeling faint in consequence, I said I would take a cup of
tea. Saying she would tell'Brown,'the young lady
departed ; and by the time I had divested myself of my
heavy, wet cloak, shawl, bonnet, & c., a mincing damsel came
to say the young ladies desired to know whether I would
take my tea up there or in the schoolroom. Under the plea
of fatigue I chose to take it there. She withdrew; and,
AQNBS OBEY 41S
after a while, returned again with a small tea-tray, and
placed it on the chest of drawers, which served as a dressing-
table. Having civilly thanked her, I asked at what time I
should be expected to rise in the morning.
'The young ladies and gentlemen breakfast at half-past
eight, ma'am/ said she;'they rise early; but, as they
seldom do any lessons before breakfast, I should thiiik it will
do if you rise soon after seven.'
I desired her to be so kind as to call me at seven, and,
promising to do so, she withdrew. Then, having broken my
long fast on a cup of tea and a Uttle thin bread and butter,
I sat down beside the small, smouldering fire, and amused
myself with a hearty fit of crying ; after which, I said my
prayers, and then, feeling considerably relieved, began to
prepare for bed. Finding that none of my luggage was
brought up, I instituted a search for the bell ; and failing to
discover any signs of such a convenience in any comer of
the room, I took my candle and ventured through the long
passage, and down the steep stairs, on a voyage of discovery.
Meeting a well-dressed female on the way, I told her what
I wanted ; but not without considerable hesitation, as I was
not quite sure whether it was one of the upper servants, or
Mrs. Murray herself : it happened, however, to be the lady's-
maid. With the air of one conferring an unusual favour,
she vouchsafed to undertake the sending up of my things ;
and when I had re-entered my room, and waited and
wondered a long time (greatly fearing that she had forgotten
or neglected to perform her promise, and doubting whether
to keep waiting or go to bed, or go down again), my
hopes, at length, were revived by the sound of voices and
laughter, accompanied by the tramp of feet along the
passage ; and presently the luggage was brought in by a
rough-looking maid and a man, neither of them very respect-
ful in their demeanour to me. Having shut the door upon
their retiring footsteps, and unpacked a few of my things, I
betook myself to rest ; gladly enough, for I was weary in
body and mind.
4U AONE8 QBET
It was with a strange feeling of desolation, mingled with
a strong sense of the novelty of my situation, and a joyless
kind of cariosity oonoeming what was yet unknown, that I
awoke the next morning ; feeling like one whirled away by
enohantment, and suddenly dropped from the clouds into a
remote and unknown land, widely and completely isolated
from all he had ever seen or known before ; or like a thistle-
seed borne on the wind to some strange nook of uncongenial
soil, where it must lie long enough before it can take root
and germinate, extracting nourishment from what appears
so alien to its nature : if, indeed, it ever can. But this gives
no proper idea of my feelings at all ; and no one that has
not lived such a retired, stationary life as mine, can possibly
imagine what they were : hardly even if he has known what
it is to awake some morning, and find himself in Port Nelson,
in New Zealand, with a world of waters between himself and
all that knew him.
I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with which
I raised my blind and looked out upon the unknown world :
a wide, white wilderness was all that met my gaze; a
waste of
Deserts tossed in snow,
And heayy laden groyes.
I descended to the schoolroom with no remarkable
eagerness to join my pupils, though not without some feeling
of curiosity respecting what a further acquaintance would
reveal. One thing, among others of more obvious importance,
I determined with myself — I must begin with calling them
Miss and Master. It seemed to me a chilling and unnatural
piece of ptmctilio between the children of a family and their
instructor and daily companion ; especially where the
former were in their early childhood, as at Wellwood
House ; but even there, my calling the little Bloomfields
by their simple names had been regarded as an ofC^isive
liberty: as their parents had taken care to show me, by
carefully designating them Master and Miss Bloomfield, & c.,
AGNES GREY 415
in speaking to me. I had been very slow to take the hint,
because the whole affair strack me as so very absurd ; but
now I determined to be wiser, and begin at once with as
much form and ceremony as any member of the family would
be likely to require : and, indeed, the children being so much
older, there would be less difficulty ; though the little words
Miss and Master seemed to have a surprising effect in
repressing all familiar, open-hearted kindness, and ex-
tinguishing every gleam of cordiality that might arise be-
tween us.
As I cannot, like Dogberry, find it in my heart to bestow
all my tediousness upon the reader, I will not go on to bore
him with a minute detail of all the discoveries and proceed-
ings of this and the following day. No doubt he will be
amply satisfied with a slight sketch of the different members
of the family, and a general view of the first year or two of
my sojourn among them.
To begin with the head : Mr. Murray was, by all accounts,
a blustering, roystering, country squire : a devoted fox-
hunter, a skilful horse-jockey and farrier, an active, practical
farmer, and a hearty bon vivant. By all accounts, I say ;
for, except on Sundays, when he went to church, I never
saw him from month to month : unless, in crossing the hall
or walking in the grounds, the figure of a tall, stout gentle-
man, with scarlet cheeks and crimson nose, happened to
come across me ; on which occasions, if he passed near enough
to speak, an unceremonious nod, accompanied by a'Morn-
ing, Miss Grey,'or some such brief salutation, was usually
vouchsafed. Frequently, indeed, his loud laugh reached me
from afar ; and of tener still I heard him swearing and blas-
pheming against the footmen, groom, coachman, or some
other hapless dependant.
Mrs. Murray was a handsome, dashing lady of forty, who
certainly required neither rouge nor padding to add to her
charms ; and whose chief enjoyments were, or seemed to be,
in giving or frequenting parties, and in dressing at the very
top of the fashion. I did not see her till eleven o'clock on
416 AGNES GBET
the morning after my arrival ; when she honoured me with
a visit, just as my mother might step into the kitchen to see
a new servant-girl : yet not so, either, for my mother would
have seen her immediately after her arrival, and not waited
till the next day ; and, moreover, she would have addressed
her in a more kind and friendly manner, and given her some
words of comfort as well as a plain exposition of her duties ;
but Mrs. Murray did neither the one nor the other. She just
stepped into the schoohroom on her return from ordering
dinner in the housekeeper's room, bade me good-morning,
stood for two minutes by the fire, said a few words about the
weather and the * rather rough'journey I must have had
yesterday ; petted her youngest child — a boy of ten — ^who
had just been wiping his mouth and hands on her gown,
after indulging in some savoury morsel from the house-
keeper's store ; told me what a sweet, good boy he was ; and
then sailed out, with a self-complacent smile upon her face :
thinking, no doubt, that she had done quite enough for the
present, and had been delightfully condescending into the
bargain. Her children evidently held the same opinion, and
I alone thought otherwise.
After this she looked in upon me once or twice, during
the absence of my pupils, to enlighten me concerning my
duties towards them. For the girls she seemed anxious
only to render them as superficially attractive and showily
accomplished as they could possibly be made, without pre-
sent trouble or discomfort to themselves ; and I was to act
accordingly — to study and strive to amuse and oblige, instruct,
refine, and polish, with the least possible exertion on their
part, and no exercise of authority on mine. With regard to
the two boys, it was much the same ; only instead of accom-
plishments, I was to get the greatest possible quantity of
Latin grammar and Yalpy's Delectus into their heads, in
order to fit them for school — the greatest possible quantity at
least without trouble to themselves. John might be a'little
high-spirited/ and Charles might be a little'nervous and
tedious —'
AGNES OBEY 417
* But at all events, Miss Grey/ said she,'I hope you will
keep your temper, and be mild and patient throughout;
especially with the dear little Charles ; he is so extremely
nervous and susceptible, and so utterly unaccustomed to
anything but the tenderest treatment. You will excuse my
naming these things to you ; for the fact is, I have hitherto
found all the governesses, even the very best of them, faulty
in this particular. They wanted that meek and quiet spirit,
which St. Matthew, or some of them, says is better than the
putting on of apparel — you will know the passage to which I
allude, for you are a clergyman's daughter. But I have no
doubt you will give satisfaction in this respect as well as the
rest. And remember, on all occasions, when any of the
young people do anything improper, if persuasion and gentle
remonstrance will not do, let one of the others come and tell
me ; for I can speak to them more plainly than it would be
proper for you to do. And make them as happy as you can,
Miss Grey, and I dare say you will do very well.'
I observed that while Mrs. Murray was so extremely
soUcitous for the comfort and happiness of her children, and
continually talking about it, she never once mentioned mine ;
though they were ac home, surrounded by friends, and I an
alien among strangers ; and I did not yet know enough of
the world, not to be considerably surprised at this anomaly.
Miss Murray, otherwise Bosalie, was about sixteen when I
came, and decidedly a very pretty girl ; and in two years longer,
as time more completely developed her form and added grace
to her carriage and deportment, she became positively beauti-
ful; and that in no common degree. She was tall and
slender, yet not thin ; perfectly formed, exquisitely fair,
though not without a brilliant, healthy bloom; her hair,
which she wore in a profusion of long ringlets, was of a very
light brown inclining to yellow ; her eyes were pale blue, but
BO clear and bright that few would wish them darker ; the
rest of her features were small, not quite regular, and not
remarkably otherwise : but altogether you could not hesitate
to pronounce her a very lovely girl. I wish I could say as
418 AGNES OBET
mnoh for mind and disposition as I can for her form and
face.
Yet think not I have any dreadful disclosnreB to make :
she was lively, light-hearted, and could be very agreeable,
with those who did not cross her will. Towards me, when I
first came, she was cold and haughty, then insolent and
overbearing ; but, on a further acquaintance, she gradually
laid aside her airs, and in time became as deeply attached to
me as it was possible for her to be to one of my character and
position : for she seldom lost sight, for above half an hour at
a time, of the fact of my being a hireling and a poor curate's
daughter. And yet, upon the whole, I believe she respected
me more than she herself was aware of ; because I was the
only person in the house who steadily professed good princi-
ples, habitually spoke the truth, and generally endeavoured to
make inclination bow to duty ; and this I say, not, of course,
in commendation of myself, but to show the unfortunate
state of the family to which my services were, for the present,
devoted. There was no member of it in whom I regretted
this sad want of principle so much as Miss Miirray herself ;
not only because she had taken a fancy to me, but because
there was so much of what was pleasant and prepossessing
in herself, that, in spite of her failings, I really liked her —
when she did not rouse my indignation, or iiifile my temper
by too great a display of her faults. These, however, I would
fain persuade myself were rather the effect of her education
than her disposition : she had never been perfectly taught
the distinction between right and wrong ; she had, like her
brothers and sisters, been suffered, from infancy, to tyrannize
over nurses, governesses, and servants ; she had not been
taught to moderate her desires, to control her temp^ or
bridle her will, or to sacrifice her own pleasure for the good
of others. Her temper being naturally good, she was never
violent or morose, but from constant indulgence, and habi-
tual scorn of reason, she was often testy and capricious ; her
mind had never been cultivated : her intellect, at best, was
somewhat shallow ; she possessed considerable vivacity, some
AGNES GREY 419
quickness of perception, and some talent for music and the
acquisition of languages, but till fifteen she had troubled
herself to acquire nothing ; — then the love of display had
roused her faculties, and induced her to apply herself, but
only to the more showy accomplishments. And when I
came it was the same : everything was neglected but French,
German, music, singing, dancing, fancy-work, and a little
drawing — such drawing as might produce the greatest show
with the smallest labour, and the principal parts of which
were generally done by me. For music and singing, besides
my occasional instructions, she had the attendance of the best
master the country afforded ; and in these accomplishments,
as well as in dancing, she certainly attained great proficiency.
To music, indeed, she devoted too much of her time, as,
governess though I was, I frequently told her ; but her
mother thought that if she liked it, she could not give too
much time to the acquisition of so attractive an art. Of
fancy-work I knew nothing but what I gathered from my
pupU and my own observation ; but no sooner was I initiated,
than she made me useful in twenty different ways : all the
tedious parts of her work were shifted on to my shoulders ;
such as stretching the frames, stitching in the canvas, sorting
the wools and silks, putting in the grounds, cotmting the
stitches, rectifying mistakes, and finishing the pieces she was
tired of.
At sixteen. Miss Murray was something of a romp, yet not
more so than is natural and allowable for a girl of that age,
but at seventeen, that propensity, like all other things, began
to give way to the ruling passion, and soon was swallowed
np in the all-absorbing ambition to attract and dazzle the
other sex. But enough of her: now let us turn to her
sister.
Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoyden, of whom
little need be said. She was about two years and a half
younger than her sister ; her features were larger, her com-
plexion much darker. She might possibly make a handsome
woman ; but she was far too big-boned and awkward ever to
420 AONES OBEY
be called a pretty girl, and at present she oared little aboat
it. Rosalie knew all her charms, and thought them even
greater than they were, and valued them more highly than
she ought to have done, had they been three times as great ;
Matilda thought she was well enough, but cared little about
the matter ; still less did she care about the cultivation of
her mind, and the acquisition of ornamental aocomphshments.
The manner in which she learnt her lessons and practised her
music was calculated to drive any governess to despair.
Short and easy as her tasks were, if done at all, they were
slurred over, at any time and in any way ; but generally at
the least convenient times, and in the way least beneficial to
herself, and least satisfactory to me : the short half -hour of
practising was horribly strummed through ; she, meantime,
unsparingly abusing me, either for interrupting her with
corrections, or for not rectifying her mistakes before they were
made, or something equally unreasonable. Once or twice, I
ventured to remonstrate with her seriously for such irrational
conduct ; but on each of those occasions, I received such re-
prehensive expostulations from her mother, as convinced me
that, if I wished to keep the situation, I must even let Miss
Matilda go on in her own way.
When her lessons were over, however, her ill-humour was
generally over too : while riding her spirited pony, or romping
with the dogs or her brothers and sister, but especially with
her dear brother John, she was as happy as a lark. As an
animal, Matilda was all right, full of life, vigour, and activity ;
as an intelligent being, she was barbarously ignorant, indo-
cile, careless and irrational ; and, consequently, very distress-
ing to one who had the task of cultivating her understanding,
reforming her manners, and aiding her to acquire those
ornamental attainments which, unlike her sister, she despised
as much as the rest. Her mother was partly aware of her
deficiencies, and gave me many a lecture as to how I should
try to form her tastes, and endeavour to rouse and cherish
her dormant vanity ; and, by insinuating, skilful flattery, to
win her attention to the desired objects — ^whioh I would
AGNES GBEY 421
not do ; and how I should prepare and smooth the path of
learning till she could glide along it without the least exertion
to herself : which I could not, for nothing can be taught to
any purpose without some little exertion on the psurt of the
learner.
As a moral agent, Matilda was reckless, headstrong,
violent, and unamenable to reason. One proof of the de-
plorable state of her mind was, that from her father's example
she had learned to swear like a trooper. Her mother was
greatly shocked at the'unlady-like trick,'and wondered'how
she had picked it up.''But you can soon break her of it,
Miss Grey,'said she :'it is only a habit ; and if you will just
gently remind her every time she does so, I am sure she will
soon lay it aside.'I not only'gently reminded'her, I tried to
impress upon her how wrong it was, and how distressing to
the ears of decent people : but all in vain : I was only
answered by a careless laugh, and,'Oh, Miss Grey, how
shocked you are t I'm so glad t'or,'Well I I can't help it ;
papa shouldn't have taught me : I learned it all from him ;
and maybe a bit from the coachman.'
Her brother John, alias Master Murray, was about
eleven when I came : a fine, stout, healthy boy, frank and
good-natured in the main, and might have been a decent lad
had he been properly educated ; but now he was as rough
as a young bear, boisterous, unruly, unprincipled, untaught,
unteachable — at least, for a governess under his mother's
eye. His masters at school might be able to manage him
better — ^f or to school he was sent, greatly to my relief, in the
course of a year ; in a state, it is true, of scandalous igno-
rance as to Latin, as well as the more useful though more
neglected things : and this, doubtless, would all be laid to
the account of his education having been entrusted to an
ignorant female teacher, who had presumed to take in hand
what she was wholly incompetent to perform. I was not
delivered from his brother till full twelve months after, when
he also was despatched in the same state of disgraceful
ignorance as the former.
422 AGNES OBEY
Master Charles was his mother's peculiar darling. He
was little more than a year younger than John, but much
smaller, paler, and less active and robust; a pettish,
cowardly, capricious, selfish little fellow, only active in
doing mischief, and only clever in inventing falsehoods : not
simply to hide his faults, but, in mere malicious wantonness,
to bring odium upon others. In fact, Master Charles was a
very great nuisance to me : it was a trial of patience to live
wiUi him peaceably ; to watch over him was worse ; and to
teach him, or pretend to teach him, was inconceivable. At
ten years old, he could not read correctly the easiest line in
the simplest book; and as, according to his mother's
principle, he was to be told every word, before he had time
to hesitate or examine its orthography, and never even to be
informed, as a stimulant to exertion, that other boys were
more forward than he, it is not surprising that he made but
httle progress during the two years I had charge of his
education. His minute portions of Latin grammar, & c.,
were to be repeated over to him, till he chose to say he
knew them, and then he was to be helped to say them ; if he
made mistakes in his little easy sums in arithmetic, they
were to be shown him at once, and the sum done for him,
instead of his being left to exercise his faculties in finding
them out himself ; so that, of course, he took no pains to
avoid mistakes, but frequently set down his figures at
random, without any calculation at all.
I did not invariably confine myself to these rules : it was
against my conscience to do so ; but I seldom could venture
to deviate from them in the slightest degree, without
incurring the wrath of my little pupil, and subsequently of
his mamma; to whom he would relate my transgressions
maliciously exaggerated, or adorned with embellishments of
his own ; and often, in consequence, was I on the point of
losing or resigning my situation. But, for their sakes at
home, I smothered my pride and suppressed my indignation,
and managed to struggle on till my little tormentor was de-
spatched to school ; his father declaring that home education^
AONES GBET 428
was * no go for him, it was plain ; his mother spoiled him
outrageously, and his governess ooold make no hand of him
ataU.'
A few more observations about Horton Lodge and its
ongoings, and I have done with dry description for the
present. The house was a very respectable one; superior
to Mr. Bloomfield's, both in age, size, and magnificence : the
garden was not so tastefully laid out ; but instead of the
smooth-shaven lawn, the yoimg trees guarded by palings,
the grove of upstart poplars, and the plantation of firs, there
was a wide park, stocked with deer, and beautified by fine
old trees. The surrounding country itself was pleasant, as
far as fertile fields, flourishing trees, quiet green lanes, and
smiling hedges with wild-flowers scattered along their
banks, could make it ; but it was depressingly flat to one
bom and nurtured among the rugged hills of .
We were situated nearly two miles from the village
church, and, consequently, tiie family carriage was put in
requisition every Sunday morning, and sometimes oftener.
Mr. and Mrs. Murray generally thought it sufficient to show
themselves at church once in tiiie course of the day ; but fre-
quently the children preferred going a second time to
wandering about the grounds all the day with nothing to do.
If some of my pupils chose to walk and take me with them,
it was weU for me; for otherwise my position in the
carriage was, to be crushed into the corner farthest from the
open window, and with my back to the horses : a position
which invariably made me sick ; and if I were not actually
obliged to leave the church in the middle of the service, my
devotions were disturbed with a feeling of languor and
sickliness, and the tormenting fear of its becoming worse :
and a depressing headache was generally my companion
throughout the day, which would otherwise have been one of
welcome rest, and holy, calm enjoyment.
'It's very odd, Miss Grey, that the carriage should
always make you sick : it never makes me,'remarked Miss
Matilda*
i6
434 AGNES OBET
'Nor me either/ said her sister;'bat I diire say it
would, if I sat where she does — such a nasty, horrid place.
Miss Grey ; I wonder how yon can bear it 1'
'I am obliged to bear it, since no choice is left me,'— I
might have answered ; but in t^demess for their feelings I
only replied, —'Oh ! it is but a short way, and if I am not
sick in church, I don't mind it/
If I were called upon to give a description of the usual
divisions and arrangements of the day, I should find it a
very difficult matter. I had all my meals in the schoolroom
with my pupils, at such times as suited their fancy : some-
times they would ring for dinner before it was half cooked ;
sometimes they would keep it waiting on the table for above
an hour, and then be out of humour because the potatoes were
cold, and the gravy covered with cakes of solid fat ; sometimes
they would have tea at four ; frequently, they would storm
at Uie servants because it was not in precisely at five ; and
when these orders were obeyed, by way of encouragement
to punctuality, they would keep it on the table till seven or
eight.
Their hours of study were managed in much the same
way ; my judgment or convenience was never once consulted.
Sometimes Matilda and John would determine'to get all
the plaguy business over before breakfast,'and send the
maid to call me up at half -past five, without any scruple or
apology; sometimes, I was told to be ready precisely at six,
and, having dressed in a hurry, came down to an empty
room, and after waiting a long time in suspense, discovered
that they had changed their minds, and were still in bed ; or,
perhaps, if it were a fine summer morning, Brown would
come to tell me that the young ladies and gentlemen had
taken a holiday, and were gone out ; and then I was kept
waiting for breakfast till I was almost ready to faint : they
having fortified themselves vrith something before they
went.
Often they would do their lessons in the open air ; which
I had nothing to say against : except that I frequently caught
AGNES GBET 426
oold by sittmg on the damp grass, or from exposure to the
evening dew, or some insidious draught, whioh seemed to
have no injurious effect on them. It was quite right that
they should be hardy; yet, surely, they might have been
taught some consideration for others who were less so. But
I must not blame them for what was, perhaps, my own
fault ; for I never made any particular objections to sitting
where they pleased ; foolishly choosing to risk the conse-
quences, rather than trouble them for my convenience.
Their indecorous manner of doing their lessons was quite as
remarkable as the caprice displayed in their choice of time
and place. While receiving my instructions, or repeating
what they had learned, they would lounge upon the sofa, lie
on the rug, stretch, yawn, talk to each other, or look out of
the window ; whereas, I could not so much as stir the fire,
or pick up the handkerchief I had dropped, without being
rebuked for inattention by one of my pupils, or told that
'mamma would not like me to be so careless.'
The servants, seeing in what little estimation the
governess was held by both parents and children, regulated
their behaviour by the same standard. I have frequently
stood up for them, at the risk of some injury to myself,
against the tyranny and injustice of their young masters and
mistresses ; and I always endeavoured to give them as little
trouble as possible : but they entirely neglected my comfort,
despised my requests, and slighted my directions. All
servants, I am convinced, would not have done so ; but
domestics in general, being ignorant and little accustomed to
reason and reflection, are too easily corrupted by the care-
lessness and bad example of those above them ; and these, I
think, were not of the best order to begin with.
I sometimes felt myself degraded by the life I led, and
ashamed of submitting to so many indignities ; and some-
times I thought myself a fool for caring so much about them,
and feared I must be sadly wantingin Christian humility, or that
charity which'suffereth long and is kind, seeketh not her own,
is not easily provoked, beareth all things, endureth all things.'
426 AGNES GBET
But, with time and patienoe, matters began to be slightly
ameliorated : slowly, it is true, and aknoet imperceptibly ; but
I got rid of my male pupils (that was no trifling advantage),
and the girls, as I intimated before conoeming one of them, be-
came a httle less insolent, and began to show some symptoms
of esteem.'Miss Grey was a queer creature : she never
flattered, and did not praise them half enough ; but when-
ever she did speak favourably of them, or anything belonging
to them, they could be quite sure her approbation was
sincere. She was very obUging, quiet, and peaceable in the
main, but there were some things that put her out of temper :
they did not much care for that, to be sure, but still it was
better to keep her in tune; as when she was in a good
humour she would talk to them, and be very agreeable and
amusing sometimes, in her way ; which was quite different
to mamma's, but still very well for a change. She had her
own opinions on every subject, and kept steadily to them —
very tiresome opinions they often were ; as she was always
thinking of what was right and what was wrong, and had a
strange reverence for matters connected with religion, and
an imaccountable liking to good people.'
CHAPTEB Vm
THB'OOMINQ OUT*
j^T eighteen, Miss Murray was to emerge from the quiet
obscurity of the schoobroom into the full blaze of the
fashionable world — as much of it, at least, as could be had
out of London ; for her papa could not be persuaded to leave
his rural pleasures and pursuits, even for a few weeks'
residence in town. She was to ma.ke her d6but on the
third of January, at a magnificent ball, which her mamma
proposed to give to all the nobility and choice gentry of
O and its neighbourhood for twenty miles round. Of
course, she looked forward to it with the wildest impatience,
and the most extravagant anticipations of delight.
'Miss Grey,'said she, one evening, a month before the
all-important day, as I was perusing a long and extremely
interesting letter of my sister's — which I had just glanced at
in the morning to see that it contained no very bad news,
and kept till now, unable before to find a quiet moment for
reading it, — * Miss Grey, do put away that dull, stupid letter,
and listen to me t I'm sure my talk must be far more
amusing than that.'
She seated herself on the low stool at my feet ; and I,
suppressing a sigh of vexation, began to fold up the
epistle.
'You should tell the good people at home not to bore you
with such long letters,'said she;'and, above all, do bid
them write on proper note-paper, and not on those great
vulgar sheets. You should see the charming little lady-like
notes mamma writes to her friends.'
438 AGNEB GBET
'The good people at home/ replied I,'know very well
that the longer their letters are, the better I like them. I
should be very sorry to receive a charming Httle lady-like
note from any of them ; and I thought you were too much
of a lady yourself, Miss Murray, to talk about the ** vulgarity "
of writing on a large sheet of paper.'
'Well, I only said it to tease you. But now I want to
talk about the ball ; and to tell you that you positively must
put off your holidays till it is over.'
'Why so ? — I shall not be present at the ball.*
'No, but you will see the rooms decked out before it
begins, and hear the music, and, above all, see me in my
splendid new dress. I shall be so charming, you'll be ready
to worship me— you really must stay.'
'I should like to see you very much ; but I shall have
many opportunities of seeing you equally charming, on the
occasion of some of the numberless balls and parties that are
to be, and I cannot disappoint my friends by postponing my
return so long.'
'Oh, never mind your friends t Tell them we won't let
you go.'
'But, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment to
myself : I long to see them as much as they to see me —
perhaps more.'
'Well, but it is such a short time.'
'Nearly a fortnight by my computation ; and, besides, I
cannot bear the thoughts of a Christmas spent from home :
and, moreover, my sister is going to be married.'
'Is she — ^when ?'
'Not till next month ; but I want to be there to assist
her in making preparations, and to make the best of her
company while we have her.'
'Why didn't you tell me before ?'
'I've only got the news in this letter, which you
stigmatize as dull and stupid, and won't let me read.'
'To whom is she to be married ?'
'To Mr. Bichardson, the vicar of a neighbouring parish.'
AONES OBEY 129
*lBherioh?'
'No ; only oomfortable.'
* Is he handsome ?'
* No ; only decent.'
*Tomig?'
'No ; only middling/
'Oh, meroy ! what a wretoh I What sort of a house
is it?'
'A quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-dad porch, an old-
fashioned garden, and'
'Oh, stop ! — you'll make me sick. How can she bear it ?'
'I expect she'll not only be able to bear it, but to be very
happy. You did not ask me if Mr. Richardson were a good,
wise, or amiable man; I could have answered Yes, to all
these questions — at least so Mary thinks, and I hope she will
not find herself mistaken.'
'But — miserable creature ! how can she think of spending
her life there, cooped up with that nasty old man ; and no
hope of change?'
* He is not old : he's only six or seven and thirty ; and
she herself is twenty-eight, and as sober as if she were fifty.'
'Oh ! that's better then — they're well matched ; but do
they caU him the " worthy vicar " ?'
* I don't know ; but if they do, I believe he merits the
epithet.'
'Mercy, how shocking ! and will she wear a white apron
and make pies and puddings ?'
'I don't know about the white apron, but I dare say she
will make pies and puddings noyr and then ; but that will
be no great hardship, as she has done it before.'
'And will she go about in a plain shawl, and a large
straw bonnet, carrying tracts and bone soup to her husband's
poor parishioners ?'
* I'm not clear about that ; but I dare say she will do her
best to make them comfortable in body and mind, in
accordance with our mother's example.'
GHAPTEB IX
THB BALL
'Now, Miss Orey/ exclaimed Miss Murray, immediately I
entered the schoolroom, after having taken off my outdoor
garments, upon returning from my four weeks'recreation,
'Now — shut the door, and sit down, and I'll tell you all
about the ball.'
'No — damn it, no 1'shouted Miss Matilda.'Hold
your tongue, can't ye ? and let me tell her about my new
mare — svch a splendour, Miss Grey ! a fine blood mare'
'Do be quiet, Matilda ; and let me tell my news first.'
'No, no, Bosalie; you'll be such a danmed long time
over it — she shall hear me first — I'll be hanged if she
doesn't !'
'I'm sorry to hear, Miss Matilda, that you've not got rid
of that shocking habit yet.'
'Well, I can't help it : but I'll never say a wicked word
again, if you'll only listen to me, and tell Bosalie to hold her
confounded tongue.'
Bosalie remonstrated, and I thought I should have been
torn in pieces between them ; but Miss Matilda having tixe
loudest voice, her sister at length gave in, and suffered her to
tell her story first : so I was doomed to hear a long account
of her splendid mare, its breeding and pedigree, its paces, its
action, its spirit, & c., and of her own amazing skill and
courage in riding it ; concluding with an assertion that she
could clear a five-barred gate'like vdnking,'that papa said
she might hunt the next time the hounds met, and mamma
had ordered a bright scarlet hunting-habit for her.
AONES 6BE7 4Sl
* Oh, Matilda I what stories yon are telling t'exolaimed
her sister.
'Well/ answered she, no whit abashed,'I know I could
dear a five-barred gate, if I tried, and papa wUl say I may
hunt, and mamma wiU order the habit when I ask it.'
'Well, now get along,'replied Miss Murray ;'and do,
dear Matilda, try to be a little more lady-like. Miss Grey, I
wish you would tell her not to use such shocking words ;
she will call her h9rse a mare : it is so inconceifoaibly shock-
ing I and then she uses such dreadful expressions in
describing it : she m/ust have learned it from the grooms. It
nearly puts me into fits when she begins.'
'I learned it from papa, you ass I and his jolly friends,
said the young lady, vigorously cracking a hunting-whip,
which she habitually carried in her hand.'I'm as good a
judge of horseflesh as the best of'm.'
'Well, now get along, you shocking girl ! I really shall
take a fit if you go on in such a way. And now, Miss Grey,
attend to me ; I'm going to tell you about the ball. You
must be dying to hear about it, I know. Oh, such a ball I
You never saw or heard, or read, or dreamt of anything like
it in all your life. The decorations, the entertainment, the
supper, the music were indescribable I and then the guests I
There were two noblemen, three baronets, and five titled
ladies, and other ladies and gentlemen innumerable. The
ladies, of course, were of no consequence to me, except to put
me in a good humour with myself, by showing how ugly and
awkward most of them were ; and the best, mamma told me,
— the most transcendent beauties among them, were nothing
to me. As for me. Miss Grey — I'm so sorry you didn't see
me ! I was charming — ^wasn't I, Matilda ?'
'Middling.'
'No, but I really wcu — at least so mamma said — ^and
Brown and Williamson. Brown said she v^as sure no
gentleman could set eyes on me without falling in love that
minute ; and so I may be allowed to be a little vain. I
know you think me a shocking, ooooeited, frivoloas girl ; bat
432 AGNES OBEY
then, yoa know, I don't attribute it all to my personal
attractions : I give some praise to the hairdresser, and some
to my exquisitely lovely dress — ^you must see it to-morrow —
white gauze over pink satin — and so 9weetVy made 1 and a
necklace and bracelet of beautiful, large pearls I'
'I have no doubt you looked very charming : but should
that delight you so very much ?'
'Oh, no I — not that alone : but, then, I was so much
admired ; and I made so many conquests in that one night —
you'd be astonished to hear'
'But what good will they do you ?'
'What good I Think of any woman asking that !'
'Well, I should think one conquest ;p7ould be enough ;
and too much, unless the subjugation were mutual.'
'Oh, but you know I never agree with you on those
points. Now, wait a bit, and I'll tell you my principal
admirers — ^those who made themselves very conspicuous that
night and after : for I've been to two parties since. Unfor-
tunately the two noblemen. Lord and Lord P ,
were married, or I might have condescended to be parti-
cularly gracious to them ; as it was, I did not : though Lord
P , who hates his wife, was evidently much struck with
me. He asked me to dance with him twice — he is a charm-
ing dancer, by-the-by, and so am I : you can't think how well
I did — ^I was astonished at myself. My lord was very compli-
mentary too— rather too much so in fact — and I thought
proper to be a little haughty and repellent ; but I had the
pleasure of seeing his nasty, cross wife ready to perish with
spite and vexation'
'Oh, Miss Murray ! you don't mean to say that such
a thing could really give you pleasure? However eroBs
or •
* Well, I know it's very wrong ; — but never mind I I
mean to be good some time — only don't preach now, there's
a good creature. I haven't told you half yet. Let me see.
Oh! I was going to tell you how many unmistakeable
admirers I had : — Sir Thomas Ashby was one,— Sir Hugh
AGNES GBET 433
Meltham and Sir Bioadley Wilson are old oodgers, only fit
companions for papa and mamma. Sir Thomas is yomig,
rich, and gay; but an ngly beast, nevertheless: however,
mamma says I should not mind that after a few months'ac-
quaintance. Then, there was Henry Meltham, Sir Hugh's
younger son ; rather good-looking, and a pleasant fellow to
flirt with: hut being a younger son, that is all he is good
for ; then there was young Mr. Green, rich enough, but of
no family, and a great stupid fellow, a mere country booby I
and then, our good rector, Mr. Hatfield : an humble admirer
he ought to consider himself ; but 1 fear he has forgotten to
number humility among his stock of Christian virtues.'
* Was Mr. Hatfield at the ball ?'
'Yes, to be sure. Did you think he was too good to
go?'
'I thought be might consider it unclerical.'
'By no means. He did not profane his cloth by dan-
cing ; but it was with difficulty he could refrain, poor man :
he looked as if he were dying to ask my hand just for one
set ; and — oh ! by-the-by — he's got a new curate : that seedy
old fellow Mr. Bligh has got his long-wished-for living at
last, and is gone.'
* And what is the new one like ?
'Oh, such a beast ! Weston his name is. I can give
you his description in three words — an insensate, ugly,
stupid blockhead. That's four, but no matter — enough of
him now.*
Then she returned to the ball, and gave me a further
account of her deportment there, and at the several parties
she had since attended ; and further particulars respecting
Sir Thomas Ashby and Messrs. Meltham, Green, and Hat-
field, and the ineffaceable impression she had wrought upon
each of them.
'Well, which of the four do you like Jwst ?'said I, sup-
pressing my third or fourth yawn.
'I detest them all I'replied she, shaking her bright ring-
lets in vivacious scorn.
434 AGNES GBET
'That means, I suppose, " I like them all'* — ^bat which
most ?'
'No, I really detest them all; but Harry Meltham is
the handsomest and most amusing, and Mr. Hatfield the
cleverest, Sir Thomas the wickedest, and Mr. Green the
most stupid. But the one I'm to have, I suppose, if I'm
doomed to have any of them, is Sir Thomas Ashby.'
'Surely not, if he's so wicked, and if you dislike him ?'
'Oh, I don't mind his being wicked : he's all the better
for that ; and as for disliking him — I shouldn't greatly
object to being Lady Ashby of Ashby Park, if I must marry.
But if I could be always young, I would be always single.
I should like to enjoy myself thoroughly, and coquet with
all the world, till I am on the verge of being called an old
maid ; and then, to escape the infamy of that, after having
made ten thousand conquests, to break all their hearts save
one, by marrying some high-bom, rich, indulgent husband,
whom, on the other hand, fifty ladies were dying to have.'
* Well, as long as you entertain these views, keep single
by all means, and never marry at all : not even to escape
the infamy of old-maidenhood.'
CHAPTER X
THB GHUBOH
'Well, Miss Grey, what do you think of the new curate?'
asked Miss Murray, on our return from church the Sunday
after the recommencement of our duties.
* I can scarcely tell/ was my reply : * I have not even
heard him preach.'
'Well, but you saw him, didn't you ?'
'Yes, but I cannot pretend to judge of a man's character
by a single cursory glance at his face.'
* But isn't he ugly ?'
'He did not strike me as being particularly so ; I don't
dislike that cast of countenance : but the only thing I
particularly noticed about him was his style of reading;
which appeared to me good — infinitely better, at least, than
Mr. Hatfield's. He read the Lessons as if he were bent on
giving full effect to every passage ; it seemed as if the most
careless person could not have helped attending, nor the most
ignorant have failed to understand ; and the prayers he read
as if he were not reading at all, but praying earnestly and
sincerely from his own heart.'
'Oh, yes, that's all he is good for : he can plod throug'i
the service well enough; but he has not a single idea
beyond it.'
* How do you know ?'
'Oh ! I know perfectly well ; I am an excellent judge in
such matters. Did you see how he went out of church?
stumping along — as if there were nobody there but himself —
436 AGNES OBEY
never looking to the right hand or the left, and evidently
thinking of nothing but jnst getting out of the chnrch, and,
perhaps, home to his dinner: his great stnpid head oould
contain no other idea.'
'I suppose yon would have had him cast a glance into
the squire's pew/ said I, laughing at the vehemence of her
hostility.
'Indeed ! I should have been highly indignant if he had
dared to do such a thingl'replied she, haughtily tossing her
head ; then, after a moment's reflection, she added —'Well,
well ! I suppose he's good enough for his place : but Fm
glad I'm not dependent on him for amusement — ^that's alL
Did you see how Mr. Hatfield hurried out to get a bow from
me, and be in time to put us into the carriage ?'
'Yes,'answered I ; internally adding,'and I thought it
somewhat derogatory to his dignity as a clergyman to come
flying from the pulpit in such eager haste to shake hands
with the squire, and hand his wife and daughters into their
carriage : and, moreover, I owe him a grudge for nearly
shutting me out of it'; for, in fact, though I was standing
before his face, dose beside the carriage steps, waiting to
get in, he would persist in putting them up and closing the
door, till one of the family stopped him by calling out that
the governess was not in yet; then, without a word of
apology, he departed, wishing them good-morning, and
leaving the footman to finish the business.
Nota bene. — Mr. Hatfield never spoke to me, neither did
Sir Hugh or Lady Meltham, nor Mr. Harry or Miss Meltham,
nor Mr. Green or his sisters, nor any oliier lady or gentle-
man who frequented that church: nor, in fact, any one that
visited at Horton Lodge.
Miss Murray ordered the carriage again, in the afternoon,
for herself and her sister : she said it was too cold for them
to enjoy themselves in the garden ; and besides, she believed
Harry Meltham would be at churck'For,'said she,
smiling slyly at her own fair image in the glass,'he has
been a most exemplary attendant at church these last few
AGNES GEET 487
Sundays : you would think he was quite a good Christian.
And you may go with us, Miss Grey : I want you to see him ;
he is so greatly improved since he returned from abroad —
you can't think ! And besides, then you will have an oppor-
tunity of seeing the beautiful Mr. Weston again, and of
hearing him preach.'
I did hear him preach, and was decidedly pleased with
the evangelical truth of his doctrine, as well as the earnest
simplicity of his manner, and the clearness and force of his
style. It was truly refreshing to hear such a sermon, after
being so long accustomed to the dry, prosy discourses of the
former curate, and the still less edifying harangues of the
rector. Mr. Hatfield would come ssdling up the aisle, or
rather sweeping along like a whirlwind, with his rich silk
gown flying behind him and rustling against the pew doors,
mount the pulpit like a conqueror ascending his triumphal
car ; then, sinking on the velvet cushion in an attitude pf
studied grace, remain in silent prostration for a certain time ;
then mutter over a Collect, and gabble through the Lord's
Prayer, rise, draw off one bright lavender glove, to give the
congregation the benefit of his sparkling migs, lightly pass
his fingers through his well-curled hair, flourish a cambric
handkerchief, recite a very short passage, or, perhaps, a mere
phrase of Scripture, as a head-piece to his discourse, and,
finally, deliver a composition which, as a composition, might
be considered good, though far too studied and too artificial
to be pleasing to me : the propositions were well laid down,
the arguments logically conducted; and yet, it was some-
times hard to listen quietly throughout, without some slight
demonstrations of disapproval or impatience.
His favourite subjects were church discipline, rites and
ceremonies, apostolical succession, the duty of reverence and
obedience to the clergy, the atrocious criminality of dissent,
the absolute necessity of observing all the forms of godliness,
the reprehensible presumption of individuals who attempted
to think for themselves in matters connected vnth religion,
or to be guided by their own interpretations of Scripture,
438 AGNES GBBT
and, oooasionally (to please his wealthy parishioners) the
neoessity of deferential obedience from the poor to the rich
— supporting his maxims and exhortations throughout with
quotations from the Fathers : with whom he appeared to be
far better acquainted than with the Apostles and Evangelists,
and whose importance he seemed to consider at least equal
to theirs. But now and then he gave us a sermon of a
different order — ^what some would call a very good one ; but
sunless and severe : representing the Deity as a terrible task-
master rather than a benevolent father. Yet, as I listened,
I felt inclined to think the man was sincere in all he said :
he must have changed his views, and become decidedly
religious, gloomy and austere, yet still devout. But such
illusions were usually dissipated, on coming out of church, by
hearihghis voice in jocund colloquy with some of the Melthams
or Greens, or, perhaps, the Murrays themselves; probably
laughing at his own sermon, and hoping that he had given
the rascally people something to think about; perchance,
exulting in the thought that old Betty Holmes would now lay
aside the sinful indulgence of her pipe, which had been her
daily solace for upwards of thirty years : that George Higgins
would be frightened out of his Sabbath evening walks, and
Thomas Jackson would be sorely troubled in his conscience,
and shaken in his sure and certain hope of a joyful resurrec-
tion at the last day.
Thus, I could not but conclude that Mr. Hatfield was
one of those who'bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
borne, and lay them upon men's shoulders, while they them-
selves will not move them with one of their fingers'; and
who * make the word of God of none effect by their traditions,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.'I was
well pleased to observe that the new curate resembled him,
as far as I could see, in none of these particulars.
'Well, Miss Grey, what do you think of him now ?'said
Miss Murray, as we took our places in the carriage after
service.
'No harm still,'replied I.
AGNES GBEY 439
'No harm I'repeated she in amazement.'What do you
mean?'
'I mean, I think no worse of him than I did before.'
'No worse ! I should think not indeed — quite the con-
trary ! Is he not greatly improved ?'
'Oh, yes ; very much indeed/ replied I ; for I had now
discovered that it was Harry Meltham she meant, not Mr.
Weston. That gentleman had eagerly come forward to speak
to the young ladies : a thing he would hardly have ventured
to do had their mother been present ; he had likewise politely
handed them into the carriage. He had not attempted to
shut me out, like Mr. Hatfield ; neither, of course, had he
offered me his assistance (I should not have accepted it, if
he had), but as long as the door remained open he had stood
smirking and chatting with them, and then lifted his hat and
departed to his own abode : but I had scarcely noticed him
all the time. My companions, however, had been more
observant : and, as we rolled along, they discussed between
them not only his looks, words, and actions, but every feature
of his face, and every article of his apparel.
'You shan't have him all to yourself, Eosalie,'said Miss
Matilda at the close of this discussion ; * I like him : I know
he'd make a nice, joUy companion for me.'
'Well, you're quite welcome to him, Matilda,'replied her
sister, in a tone of affected indifference.
'And I'm sure,'continued the other,'he admires me quite
as much as he does you ; doesn't he, Miss Grey ?'
'I don't know ; I'm not acquainted with his sentiments.'
'Well, but he does though.'
'My dea/r Matilda I nobody will ever admire you till you
get rid of your rough, awkward manners.'
'Oh, stuff I Harry Meltham likes such manners ; and so
do papa's friends.'
'Well, you ffUMf captivate old men, and younger sons ;
but nobody else, I am sure, will ever take a fancy to you.'
'I don't care : I'm not always grubbing after money, like
you and mamma. If my husband is able to keep a few good
no AONBB 6BET
horses and dogs, I shall be qiiite satisfied ; and all the rest
may go to the devil !'
'Well, if you use such shocking expressions, I'm sure no
real gentleman will ever venture to come near you. Beally,
Miss Grey, you should not let her do so.'
'I can't possibly prevent it, Miss Murray.'
'And you're quite mistaken, Matilda, in supposing that
Harry Meltham admires you : I assure you he does nothing
of the kind.'
Matilda was beginning an angry reply; but, happily,
our journey was now at an end ; and the contention was cut
short by the footman opening the carriage-door, and letting
down the steps for our descent.
CHAPTBB XI
THB OOTTAOBBS
As I had now only one regular pupil — though she oontrived ,
to give me as muoh trouble as three or four ordinary ones, and
though her sister still took lessons in German and drawing —
I had considerably more time at my own disposal than I had
ever been blessed with before, since I had taken upon me the
governess's yoke ; which time I devoted partly to correspon-
dence with my friends, partly to reading, study, and the
practice of music, singing, Ac., partly to wandering in the
groimds or adjacent fields, with my pupils if they wanted me,
alone if they did not.
Often, when they had no more agreeable occupation at
hand, the Misses Murray would amuse themselves with
visiting the poor cottagers on their father's estate, to receive
their flattering homage, or to hear the old stories or gossiping
news of the garrulous old women ; or, perhaps, to enjoy the
purer pleasure of making the poor people happy wi^ their
cheeringpresence and their occasional gifts, so easily bestowed,
so thankfully received. Sometimes, I was called upon to
accompany one or both of the sisters in these visits ; and some-
times I was desired to go alone, to fulfil some promise which
they had been more ready to make than to perform ; to carry
some small donation, or read to one who was sick or seriously
disposed : and thus I made a few acquaintances among the
cottagers ; and, occasionally, I went to see them on my own
account.
I generally had more satisfaction in gomg alone than with
442 AGNES OBET
either of the yotmg ladies ; for they, chiefly owing to ihdr
defective education, comported themselves towards their in-
feriors in a manner that was highly disagreeable for me to
witness. They never, in thought, exchanged places with
ihem; and, consequently, had no consideration for their
feelings, regarding them as an order of beings entirely
different from themselves. They would watch the poor crea-
tures at their meals, making uncivil remarks about their food,
and their manner of eating ; they would laugh at their simple
notions and provincial expressions, till some of them scarcely
durst venture to speak ; they would call the grave elderiy
men and women old fools and silly old blockheads to their
faces : and all this without meaning to offend. I could see
that the people were often hurt and annoyed by such conduct,
though their fear of the * grand ladies'prevented them from
testifying any resentment ; but they never perceived it. They
thought that, as these cottagers were poor and untaught, they
must be stupid and brutish; and as long as they, their
superiors, condescended to talk to them, and to give them
shillings and half-crowns, or articles of clothing, they had a
right to amuse themselves, even at their expense ; and the
people must adore them as angels of light, condescending to
minister to their necessities, and enlighten their humble
dwellings.
I made many and various attempts to deliver my pupils
from these delusive notions without alarming their pride —
which was easily offended, and not soon appeased — but with
little apparent result ; and I know not which was the more
reprehensible of the two : Matilda was more rude and bois-
terous ; but from EosaUe's womanly age and lady-like exterior
better things were expected : yet she was as provokingly care-
less and inconsiderate as a giddy child of twelve.
One bright day in the last week of February, I was walk-
ing in the park, enjoying the threefold luxury of solitude, a
book, and pleasant weather ; for Miss Matilda had set out
on her daily ride, and Miss Murray was gone in the carriage
with her mamma to pay some morning calls. But it strack
AGNES OBEY 443
me that I ought to leave these selfish pleasures, and the park
with its glorious canopy of bright blue sky, the west wind
sounding through its yet leafless branches, the snow-wreaths
still lingering in its hollows, but melting fast beneath the
sun, and the graceful deer browsing on its moist herbage
already assuming the freshness and verdure of spring — and
go to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow, whose son
was at work all day in the fields, and who was afiBicted with
an inflammation in the eyes ; which had for some time inca-
pacitated her from reading : to her own great grief, for she
was a woman of a serious, thoughtful turn of mind. I accor-
dingly went, and found her alone, as usual, in her little, close,
dark cottage, redolent of smoke and confined air, but as tidy
and clean as she could make it. She was seated beside her
little fire (consisting of a few red cinders and a bit of stick),
busily knitting, with a small sackcloth cushion at her feet,
placed for the accommodation of her gentle friend the cat, who
was seated thereon, with her long tail half encircling her
velvet paws, and her half -closed eyes dreamily gazing on the
low, crooked fender.
'Well, Nancy, how are you to-day ? *
* Why, middling, Miss, i'myseln — my eyes is no better,
but I'm a deal easier i'my mind nor I have been,'repUed she,
rising to welcome me with a contented smile ; which I was
glad to see, for Nancy had been somewhat afiOicted with re-
ligious melancholy. I congratulated her upon the change.
She agreed that it was a great blessing, and expressed herself
'right down thankful for it * ; adding,'If it please God to
spare my sight, and make me so as I can read my Bible
again, I think I shall be as happy as a queen.'
* 1 hope He will, Nancy,'replied I ;'and, meantime, I'll
come and read to you now and then, when I have a little
time to spare.'
With expressions of grateful pleasure, the poor woman
moved to get me a chair ; but, as I saved her the trouble, she
busied herself with stirring the fire, and adding a few more
sticks to the decaying embers ; and then, taking her well-used
441 AGNES GBET
Bible from the shelf, dusted it carefully, and gave it me. On
my asking if there was any particular part she should like
me to read, she answered —
'Well, Miss Grey, if it's all the same to you, I should like
to hear that chapter in the First Epistle of St. John, that
says,''God is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in
God, and God in him. "'
With a Uttle searching, I found these words in the fourth
chapter. When I came to the seventh verse she interrupted
me, and, with needless apologies for such a liberty, desired
me to read it very slowly, that she might take it all in, and
dwell on every word ; hoping I would excuse her, as she was
but a'simple body.'
'The wisest person,'I replied,'might think over each of
these verses for an hour, and be all the better for it ; and I
would rather read them slowly than not.'
Accordingly, I finished the chapter as slowly as need be,
and at the same time as impressively as I could ; my auditor
listened most attentively all the while, and sincerely thanked
me when I had done. I sat still about half a minute to give
her time to reflect upon it ; when, somewhat to my surprise,
she broke the pause by asking me how I liked Mr. Weston ?
'I don't know,'I replied, a little startled by the sudden-
ness of the question ;'I think he preaches very well.'
'Ay, he does so ; and talks well too.'
'Does he ?'
* He does. Maybe, you haven't seen him — ^not to talk to
him much, yet?'
'No, I never see any one to talk to — except the young
ladies of the Hall.'
'Ah ; they're nice, kind young ladies ; but they can't talk
as he does.'
'Then he comes to see you, Nancy ?'
'He does. Miss ; and I'se thankful for it. He comes to
see all us poor bodies a deal of ter nor Maister Bligh, or th'
Bector ever did; an'it's well he does, for he's always
welcome : we can't say as much for th'Bector — there is'at
AGNES GBEY 446
Bays they're fair feared on him. When he oomes into a
house, they say he's sure to find smnmut wrong, and begin
a-caUing'em as soon as he crosses th'doorstuns : but maybe
he thinks it his duty like to tell'em what's wrong. And
very oft he oomes o'purpose to reprove folk for not coming
to church, or not kneeling an'standing when other folk
does, or going to the Methody chapel, or summut o'that sort :
but I can't say'at he ever fund much fault wi'me. He came
to see me once or twice, afore Maister Weston come, when
I was so ill troubled in my mind ; and as I had only very
poor health besides, I made bold to send for him — and he
came right enough. I was sore distressed. Miss Grey — thank
Grod, it's owered now— but when I took my Bible, I could
get no comfort of it at all. That very chapter'at you've just
been reading troubled me as much as aught —''He that
loveth not, knoweth not God. " It seemed fearsome to me ;
for I felt that I loved neither God nor man as I should do,
and could not, if I tried ever so. And th'chapter afore,
where it says, —'* He that is bom of God cannot commit sin. "
And another place where it says, — ** Love is the ftdfilling of
the Law. " And many, many others. Miss: I should fair
weary you out, if I was to tell them all. But all seemed to
condemn me, and to show me'at I was not in theright way ;
and as I knew not how to get into it, I sent our Bill to beg
Maister Hatfield to be as kind as look in on me some day ;
and when he came, I telled him aU my troubles.
'And what did he say, Nancy ?'
'Why, Miss, he seemed to scorn me. I might be
mista'en — but he like gave a sort of a whistle, and I saw a
bit of a smile on his face ; and he said, " Oh, it's all stuff I
You've been among the Methodists, my good woman. "
But I telled him I'd never been near the Methodies. And
then he said, — " Well, " says he, " you must come to church,
where you'll hear the Scriptures properly explained, instead
of sitting poring over your Bible at home. "
'But I telled him I always used coming to church when
I had my health ; but this very cold winter weather I hardly
446 AGNES OBET
durst yentore bo far — and me ao bad wi'ih* rheomatiz
and all.
'But he says,''It'll do your rheumatiz good to hobble to
church: there's nothing Hke exercise for the rheumatiz.
You can walk about the house well enough ; why can't you
walk to church ? The fact is, " says he, " you're getting too
fond of your ease. It's always easy to find excuses for
shirking one's duty. "
* But then, you know, Miss Grey, it wasn't so. However,
I telled him I'd try. " But please, sir, " says I, " if I do go
to church, what the better shall I be ? I want to have my
sins blotted out, and to feel that they are remembered no
more against me, and that the love of God is shed abroad in
my heart ; and if I can get no good by reading my Bible an'
saying my prayers at home, what good shall I get by going
to church ? *
* " The church, " says he, " is the place appointed by God
for His worship. It's your duty to go there as often as you
can. If you want comfort, you must seek it in the path of
duty, " — an'a deal more he said, but I cannot remember all
his fine words. However, it all came to this, that I was to
come to church as oft as ever I could, and bring my prayer-
book with me, an'read up all the sponsers after the olerk,
an'stand, an'kneel, an'sit, an'do all as I should, and take
the Lord's Supper at every opportunity, an'hearken his
sermons, and Maister Bhgh's, an'it'ud be all right : if I
went on doing my duty, I should get a blessing at last.
* " But if you get no comfort that way, " says he, " it's
all up. "
* " Then, sir, " says I, " should you think I'm a reprobate ? "
* " Why, " says he — he says, " if you do your best to get
to heaven and can't manage it, you mus " ^ be one of those
that seek to enter in at the strait gat« and shall not be able. "
'An'then he asked me if I'd seen any of the ladies o'th*
Hall about that momin'; so I telled him where I had seen
the young misses go on th'Moss Lane ; — an'he kicked my
poor cat right across th'floor, an'went after'em as gay as a
AONES GBET 447
lark : but I was very sad. That last word o'his fair sunk
into my heart, an'lay there like a lump o'lead, till I was
weary to bear it.
'Howsever, I foUered his advice : I thought he meant it
all for th'best, though he had a queer way with him. But
you know, Miss, he's rich an'young, and such like cannot
right understand the thoughts of a poor old woman such as
me. But, howsever, I did my best to do all as he bade
me — but maybe I'm plaguing you. Miss, wi'my chatter.'
'Oh, no, Nancy ! Go on, and teU me all.'
* Well, my rheumatiz got better — I know not whether wi'
going to church or not, but one frosty Sunday I got this cold
i'my eyes. Th'inflammation didn't come on all at once
like, but bit by bit — but I wasn't going to tell you about my
eyes, I was talking about my trouble o'mind ; — and to tell
the truth, Miss Grey, I don't think it was anywajrs eased by
coming to church — nought to speak on, at least : I like got
my health better ; but that didn't mend my soul. I hearkened
and hearkened the ministers, and read an'read at my
prayer-book; but it was all like sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal : the sermons I couldn't understand, an'th'
prayer-book only served to show me how vncked I was, that
I could read such good words an'never be no better for it,
and oftens feel it a sore labour an'a heavy task beside,
instead of a blessing and a privilege as all good Christians
does. It seemed Uke as all were barren an'dark to me.
And then, them dreadful words, " Many shall seek to enter
in, and shall'not be able. " They like as they fair dried up
my sperrit.
'But one Sunday, when Maister Hatfield gave out about
the sacrament, I noticed where he said, " If there be any of
you that cannot quiet his own conscience, but requireth
further comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or some
other discreet and learned minister of God's word, and open
his grief ! " So next Sunday morning, afore service, I just
looked into the vestry, an'began a-talking to th'Bector
again. I hardly could fashion to take such a liberty, but I
4AS AGNES GEET
thought when my soul was at stake I shouldn't stick at a
trifle. But he said he hadn't time to attend to me then.
'*'And, indeed/'says he, " I've nothing to say to you but
what I've said before. Take the sacrament, of course, and
go on doing your duty ; and if that won't serve you, nothing
will. So don't bother me any more. "
'So then, I went away. But I heard Maister Weston —
Maister Weston was there, Miss — this was his first Sunday
at Horton, you know, an'he was i'th'vestry in his surplice,
helping th'Bector on with his gown'
* Yes, Nancy.'
'And I heard him ask Maister Hatfield who I was ; an'
he says, ** Oh, she's a canting old fool. "
* And I was very ill grieved, Miss Grey ; but I went to
my seat, and I tried to do my duty as aforetime : but I like
got no peace. An'I even took the sacrament ; but I felt as
though I were eating and drinking to my own damnation all
th'time. So I went home, sorely troubled.
'But next day, afore I'd gotten fettled up — for indeed.
Miss, I'd no heart to sweeping an'fettling, an'washing pots ;
so I sat me down i'th'muck — ^who should come in but
Maister Weston ! I started siding stuff then, an'sweeping
an'doing ; and I expected he'd begin a-calling me for my
idle ways, as Maister Hatfield would a'done; but I was
mista'en: he only bid me good-momin'like, in a quiet
dacent way. So I dusted him a chair, an'fettled up th'
fireplace a bit ; but I hadn't forgotten th'Hector's words, so
says I, ** I wonder, sir, you should give yourself that trouble,
to come so far to see a'canting old fool,'such as me. "
'He seemed taken aback at that ; but he would fain
persuade me'at the Bector was only in jest ; and when that
wouldn't do, he says, " Well, Nancy, you shouldn't think so
much about it : Mr. Hatfield was a little out of humour just
then : you know we're none of us perfect — even Moses spoke
unadvisedly with his lips. But now sit dovTn a minute, if
you can spare the time, and tell me all your doubts and
fears ; and I'll try to remove them. "
AGNES OBBT OS
'So I sat me down anent him. He was quite a stranger,
yon know, Miss Orey, and even yottnger nor Maister
Hatfield, I believe ; and I had thought him not so pleasant-
looking as him, and rather a bit orossish, at first, to look at ;
but he spake so civil like — and when th'oat, poor thing,
jumped on to his knee, he only stroked her, and gave a bit of
a smile : so I thought that was a good sign ; for once, when
she did so to th'Bector, he knocked her off, like as it might
be in scorn and anger, poor thing. But you can't expect a
cat to know manners like a Christian, you know, Miss Grey.'
'No ; of course not, Nancy. But what did Mr.'^eston
say then ?'
'He said nought; but he listened to me as steady an'
patient as could be, an'never a bit o'scorn about him ; so I
went on, an'tolled him all, just as I've tolled you — ^an'more
too.
'''Well, " says he, " Mr. Hatfield was quite right in
telling you to persevere in doing your duty ; but in advising
you to go to church and attend to the service, and so on, he
didn't mean that was the whole of a Christian's duty : he
only thought you might there learn what more was to be
done, and be led to take delight in those exercises, instead of
finding them a task and a burden. And if you had asked
him to explain those words that trouble you so much, I
think he would have told you, that if many shall seek to
enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able, it is their
own sins that hinder them ; just as a man with a large sack
on his back might wish to pass through a narrow doorway,
and find it impossible to do so unless he would leave his
sack behind him. But you, Nancy, I dare say, have no sins
that you would not gladly throw aside, if you knew how? "
'" Indeed, sir, you speak truth, " said I.
'" Well, " says he, " you know the first and great
commandment — and the second, which is like unto it — on
which two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets ? You say you cannot love God ; but it strikes me
that if you rightly consider who and what He is, you cannot
iSO AGNES GBEY
help it. He is your father, your beat friend : every blessing,
everything good, pleasant, or useful, comes from Him ; and
everything evil, everything you have reason to hate, to shun,
or to fear, comes from Satan — His enemy as well as ours.
And for this cause was God manifest in the flesh, that He
might destroy the works of the Devil : in one word, God is
LOVE ; and the more of love we have within us, the nearer
we are to Him and the more of His spirit we possess. "
'" Well, sir, " I said, " if I can always think on these
things, I think I might well love God : but how can I love
my neighbours, when they vex me, and be so contrairy and
sinful as some on'em is ? "
'** It may seem a hard matter, " says he, " to love our
neighbours, who have so much of what is evil about them,
and whose faults so often awaken the evil that lingers within
ourselves ; but remember that He made them, and He loves
them ; and whosoever loveth him that begat, loveth him that
is begotten also. And if God so loveth us, that He gave
His only begotten Son to die for us, we ought also to love
one another. But if you cannot feel positive afiPection for
those who do not care for you, you can at least try to do to
them as you would they should do unto you : you can
endeavour to pity their failings and excuse their offences,
and to do all the good you can to those about you. And if
you accustom yourself to this, Nancy, the very effort itself
will make you love them in some degree — to say nothing of
the goodwill your kindness would beget in them, though
they might have little else that is good about them. If we
love God and wish to serve Him, let us try to be like Him,
to do His work, to labour for His glory — which is the good
of man — to hasten the coming of His kingdom, which is the
peace and happiness of all the world : however powerless we
may seem to be, in doing all the good we can through life,
the humblest of us may do much towards it: and let us
dwell in love, that He may dwell in us and we in Him. The
more happiness we bestow, the more we shall receive, even
here ; and the greater will be our reward in heaven when we
AGNES GBEY 451
rest from our labours/'I believe, Miss, them is his very
words, for I've thought'em ower many a time. An'then he
took that Bible, an'read bits here and there, an'explained
'em as clear as the day : and it seemed like as a new Ught
broke in on my soul ; an'I felt fair aglow about my heart,
an'only wished poor Bill an'all the world oouid ha'been
there, an'heard it all, and rejoiced wi'me.
'After he was gone, Hannah Bogers, one o'th'neighbours,
came in and wanted me to help her to wash. I telled her
I couldn't just then, for I hadn't set on th'potaties for th'
dinner, nor washed up th'breakfast stuff yet. So then she
began a-ceUling me for my nasty idle ways. I was a little
bit vexed at first, but I never said nothing wrong to her : I
only telled her like all in a quiet way,'at I'd had th'new
parson to see me ; but I'd get done as quick as ever I could,
an'then come an'help her. So then she softened down ;
and my heart like as it warmed towards her, an'in a bit we
was very good friends. An'so it is. Miss Grey, " a soft
answer tumeth away wrath; but grievous words stir up
anger. " It isn't only in them you speak to, but in yourself.'
* Very true, Nancy, if we could always remember it.'
'Ay, if we could I'
'And did Mr. Weston ever come to see you again ?'
'Yes, many a time ; and since my eyes has been so bad,
he's sat an'read to me by the half -hour together : but you
know. Miss, he has other folks to see, and other things to do —
God bless him ! An'that next Sunday he preached such a
sermon I His text was, " Gome unto me all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, " and them
two blessed verses that follows. You wasn't there. Miss,
you was with your friends then — but it made me so happy !
And I am happy now, thank God! an'I take a pleasure,
now, in doing Uttle bits o'jobs for my neighbours — such as
a poor old body'at's half blind can do; and they take it
kindly of me, just as he said. You see. Miss, I'm knitting a
pair o'stockings now ; — they're for Thomas Jackson : he's a
queerish old body, an'we've had many a bout at threaping.
452 AONES OBET
one anent t'other ; an'at times we've differed sorely. So I
thought I couldn't do better nor knit him a pair o'warm
stockings ; an'I've felt to like him a deal better, poor old man,
sin'I began. It's turned out just as Maister Weston said.'
* Well, I'm very glad to see you so happy, Nancy, and
so wise : but I must go now ; I shall be wanted at the Hall,'
said I ; and bidding her good-bye, I departed, promising to
come again when I had time, and feeling nearly as happy as
herself.
At another time I went to read to a poor labourer who
was in the last stage of consumption. The young ladies
had been to see him, and somehow a promise of reading had
been extracted from them ; but it was too much trouble, so
they begged m^ to do it instead. I went, willingly enough ;
and there too I was gratified with the praises of Mr. Weston,
both from the sick man and his wife. The former told me
that he derived great comfort and benefit from the visits of
the new parson, who frequently came to see him, and was
'another guess sort of man'to Mr. Hatfield ; who, before
the other's arrival at Horton, had now and then paid him a
visit ; on which occasions he would always insist upon
having the cottage-door kept open, to admit the fresh air for
his own convenience, without considering how it might
injure the sufferer ; and having opened his prayer-book and
hastily read over a part of the Service for the Sick, would
hurry away again : if he did not stay to administer some handi
rebuke to the afflicted wife, or to make some thoughtless, not
to say heartless, observation, rather calculated to increase
than diminish the troubles of the suffering pair.
'Whereas,'said the man,'Maister Weston'ull pray with
me quite in a different fashion, an'talk to me as Idnd as
owt ; an'oft read to me too, an'sit beside me just like a
brother.'
'Just for all the world I'exclaimed his wife ;'an'about
a three wik sin', when he seed how poor Jem shivered wi'
cold, an'what pitiful fires we kept, he axed if wer stock of
ooals was nearly done. I telled him it was, an'we was ill
AGNES GBE7 463
Bet to get more : but yon know, mum, I didn't think o'him
helping us ; but, howsever, he sent us a sack o'coals next
day ; an* we've had good fires ever sin': and a great blessing
it is, this winter time. But that's his way. Miss Grey:
when he comes into a poor body's house a*seein'sick folk,
he like notices what they most stand i'need on ; an'if he
thinks they can't readily get it therseln, he never says nowt
about it, but just gets it for'em. An'it isn't everybody'at
'ud do that,'at has as little as he has : for you know, mum,
he's nowt at all to live on but what he geto fra'th'Bector,
an'that's little enough they say.'
I remembered then, with a species of exultation, that he
had frequently been styled a vulgar brute by the amiable
Miss Murray, because he wore a silver watch, and clothes
not quite so bright and fresh as Mr. Hatfield's.
In returning to the Lodge I felt very happy, and thanked
God that I had now something to think about ; something to
dwell on as a relief from the weary monotony, the lonely
drudgery, of my present life : for I was lonely. Never, from
month to month, from year to year, except during my brief
intervals of rest at home, did I see one creature to whom I
could open my heart, or freely speak my thoughts with any
hope of sympathy, or even comprehension : never one, unless
it were poor Nancy Brown, with whom I could enjoy a
single moment of real social intercourse, or whose conversa-
sation was calculated to render me better, wiser, or happier
than before ; or who, as far as I could see, could be greatly
benefited by mine. My only companions had been unamiable
children, and ignorant, wrong-headed girls; from whose
fatiguing folly, unbroken solitude was often a relief most
earnestly desired and dearly prized. But to be restricted to
such associates was a serious evil, both in its immediate
effects and the consequences that were likely to ensue-
Never a new idea or stirring thought came to me from with-
out ; and such as tose within me were, for the most part,
miserably crushed at once, or doomed to sicken or fade
away, because they could not see the light.
454 AGNES GBET
Habitual assodates are known to exercise a great influenoe
over each other's minds and manners. Those whose actions
are for ever before our eyes, whose words are ever in our
ears, will naturally lead us, albeit against our will, slowly,
gradually, imperceptibly, perhaps, to act and speak as they do.
I will not presume to say how far this irresistible power of
assimilation extends ; but if one civilised man were doomed
to pass a dozen years amid a race of intractable savages,
unless he had power to improve them, I greatly question
whether, at the close of that period, he would not have become,
at least, a barbarian himself. And I, as I could not make my
young companions better, feared exceedingly that they would
make me worse — ^would gradually bring my feelings, habits,
capacities, to the level of their own; without, however,
imparting to me their lightheartedness and cheerful vivacity.
Already, I seemed to feel my intellect deteriorating, my
heart petrifying, my soul contracting ; and I trembled lest
my very moral perceptions should become deadened, my
distinctions of right and wrong conf oimded, and all my better
faculties be sunk, at last, beneath the baneful influence of such
a mode of life. The gross vapours of e & rth were gathering
around me, and closing in upon my inward heaven ; and thus
it was that Mr. Weston rose at length upon me, appearing like
the morning star in my horizon, to save me from the fear of
utter darkness ; and I rejoiced that I had now a subject for
contemplation that was above me, not beneath. I was glad
to see that all the world was not made up of Bloomfields,
Hurrays, Hatfields, Ashbys, & c. ; and that human excellence
was not a mere dream of the imagination. When we hear a
little good and no harm of a person, it is easy and pleasant
to imagine more : in short, it is needless to analyse all my
thoughts ; but Sunday was now become a day of peculiar
delight to me (I was now almost broken-in to the back
comer in the carriage), for I liked to hear him— and I liked
to see him, too ; though I knew he was not handsome, or
even what is called agreeable, in outward aspect; bat,
certainly, he was not ugly.
AGNES GBEY 456
In Btatnre he was a little, a very little, above the middle
size ; the outline of his face would be pronounced too square
for beauty, but to me it announced decision of character ; his
dark brown hair was not carefully curled, like Mr. Hatfield's,
but simply brushed aside over a broad white forehead ; the
eyebrows, I suppose, were too projecting, but from under
those dark brows there gleamed an eye of singular power,
brown in colour, not large, and somewhat deep-set, but
strikingly brilliant, and full of expression ; there was
character, too, in the mouth, something that bespoke a man
of firm purpose and an habitual thinker; and when he
smiled — but I will not speak of that yet, for, at the time I
mention, I had never seen him smile : and, indeed, his
general appearance did not impress me with the idea of a
man given to such a relaxation, nor of such an individual
as the cottagers described him. I had early formed my
'opinion of him ; and, in spite of Miss Murray's objurgations,
was fully convinced that he was a man of strong sense, firm
faith, and ardent piety, but thoughtful and stern : and when
I found that, to his other good qualities, was added that of
true benevolence and gentle, considerate kindness, the dis-
covery, perhaps, delighted me the more, as I had not been
prepaared to expect it.
17
GHAFTEB XII
THB BHOWHU
Thb next visit I paid to Nancy Brown was in the second
week in March : for, thongh I had many spare minutes
daring the day, I seldom could look upon an hour as
entirely my own ; since, where everything was left to the
caprices of Miss Matilda and her sister, there could be no
order or regularity. Whatever occupation I chose, when
not actually busied about them or their concerns, I had, as
it were, to keep my loins girded, my shoes on my feet, and
my staff in my hand ; for not to be immediately forthcoming
when called for, was regarded as a grave and inexcusable
offence : not only by my pupils and their mother, but by the
very servant, who came in breathless haste to call me,
exclaiming,'Yoti're to go to the schoolroom directly, mum,
the young ladies is WAiriNa 1 !'Climax of horror ! actually
waiting for their governess 1 ! !
But this time I was pretty sure of an hour or two to
myself; for Matilda was preparing for a long ride, and
BosaUe was dressing for a dinner-party at Lady Ashby's : so
I took the opportunity of repairing to the widow's cottage,
where I found her in some anxiety about her cat, which had
been absent all day. I comforted her with as many
anecdotes of that animal's roving propensities as I could
recollect.'I'm feared o'th'gamekeepers,'said she :'that's
all'at I think on. If th'young gentlemen had been at home,
I should a'thought they'd been setting their dogs at her, an'
worried her, poor thing, as they did many a poor thing's
AGNES GBET 467
oat ; bnt I haven't that to be feared on now.'Nancy's eyes
were better, but stiU far from well : she had been tzying to
make a Sunday shirt for her son, but told me she ootdd only
bear to do a little bit at it now and then, so that it progressed
but slowly, though the poor lad wanted it sadly. So I pro-
posed to help her a little, after I had read to her, for I had
plenty of time that evening, and need not return till dusk.
She thankfully accepted the offer.'An'you'll be a bit o'
company for me too, Miss,'said she ;'I hke as I feel lone-
some without my cat.'But when I had finished reading,
and done the half of a seam, with Nancy's capacious brass
thimble fitted on to my finger by means of a roll of paper, I
was disturbed by the entrance of Mr. Weston, with the
identical cat in his arms. I now saw that he could smile,
and very pleasantly too.
'I've done you a piece of good service, Nancy,'he began :
then seeing me, he acknowledged my presence by a slight
bow. I should have been invisible to Hatfield, or any other
gentleman of those parts.'I've delivered your cat,'he con-
tinued,'from the hands, or rather the gun, of Mr. Murray's
gamekeeper.'
'God bless you, sir I'cried the grateful old woman,
ready to weep for joy as she received her favourite from his
arms.
'Take care of it,'said he,'and don't let it go near the
rabbit-warren, for the gamekeeper swears he'll shoot it if he
sees it there again : he would have done so to-day, if I had
not been in time to stop him. I believe it is raining, Miss
Grey,'added he, more quietly, observing that I had put aside
my work, and was preparing to depart.'Don't let me
disturb you— I shan't stay two minutes.'
'You'll both stay while this shower gets owered,'said
Nancy, as she stirred the fire, and placed another chair
beside it ;'what ! there's room for all.'
'I can see better here, thank you, Nancy,'replied I,
taking my work to the window, where she had the goodness
to suffer me to remain unmolested, while she got a brush to
468 AGNES GREY
remove the oat's hairs from Mr. Weston's coat, carefully
wiped the rain from his hat, and gave the cat its supper,
busily talking all the time : now thanking her derioal friend
for what he had done; now wondering how the cat had
found out the warren ; and now lamenting the probable
consequences of such a discovery. He listened with a quiet,
good-natured smile, and at length took a seat in compliance
with her pressing invitations, but repeated that he did not
mean to stay.
'I have another place to go to,'said he,'and I see'
(glancing at the book on the table)'someone else has been
reading to you.'
'Yes, sir ; Miss Gl'ey has been as kind as read me a
chapter ; an'now she's helping me with a shirt for our Bill
— but I'm feared she'll be cold there. Won't you come to
th'fire, Miss ?'
'No, thank you, Nancy, I'm quite warm. I must go as
soon as this shower is over.'
'Oh, Miss I You said you could stop while dusk I'
cried the provoking old woman, and Mr. Weston seized his
hat.
'Nay, sir,'exclaimed she,'pray don't go now, while it
rains so fast.'
'But it strikes me I'm keeping your visitor away from
the fire.'* "
* No, you're not, Mr. Weston,'replied I, hoping there
was no harm in a falsehood of that description.
• No, sure 1'cried Nancy. * What, there's lots o'room I'
'Miss Grey,'said he, half-jestingly, as if he felt it
necessary to change the present subject, whether he had
anything particular to say or not,'I wish you would make
my peace with the squire, when you see him. He was by
when I rescued Nancy's cat, and did not quite approve of
the deed. I told him I thought he might better spare all his
rabbits than she Ker cat, for which audacious assertion he
treated me to some rather ungentlemanly language ; and I
fear I retorted a trifle too warmly.'
AONES OBEY 469
'Oh, lawful sir I I hope yon didn't fall out wi'th* maister
for sake o'my cat 1 he cannot bide answering again — can th'
maister/
'Oh ! it's no matter, Nancy : I don't care about it, really ;
I said nothing very uncivil ; and I suppose Mr. Murray is
accustomed to use rather strong language when he's heated.'
'Ay, sir : it's a pity.'
'And now, I really must go. I have to visit a place a
mile beyond this ; and you would not have me to return in
the dark : besides, it has nearly done raining now — so good-
evening. Nancy. Good-evening, Miss Grey.'
'Oood-evening, Mr. Weston ; but don't depend upon
me for making your peace with Mr. Murray, for I never see
him — to speak to.'
'Don't you; it can't be helped then,'replied he, in
dolorous resignation: then, with a peculiar half -smile, he
added,'But never mind ; I imagine the squire has more to
apologise for than I ;'and left the cottage.
I went on with my sewing as long as J could see, and
then bade Nancy good-evening; checking her too lively
gratitude by the undeniable assurance that I had only done
for her what she would have done for me, if she had been in
my place and I in hers. I hastened back to Horton Lodge,
where, having entered the school-room, I found the tea-table
all in confusion, the tray flooded with slops, and Miss
Matilda in a most ferocious humour.
'Miss Orey, whatever have you been about ? I've had
tea half an hour ago, and had to make it myself, and drink
it all alone 1 I wish you would come in sooner !'
'I've been to see Nancy Brown. I thought you would
not be back from your ride.'
'How could I ride in the rain, I should like to know.
That damned pelting shower was vexatious enough — coming
on when I was just in full swing : and then to come and
find nobody in to tea I and you know I can't make the tea as
I Uke it.'
'I didn't think of the shower,'replied I (and, indeed,
4fi0 AGNES GBET
Che diOQi^t of itB driving her home had never entered my
head).
'No, of cooTBe ; yon were under shelter yooreelf, and
yon never thought of other people.'
I bore her coarse reproaches with astonishing equanimity,
even with cheerfulness ; for I was sensible that I had done
more good to Nancy Brown than hann to her : and peihaps
scxne other thoughts assisted to keep np my spirits, and
impart a relish to the cup of cold, overdrawn tea, and a
chann to the otherwise unsightly table ; and — I had almost
said— te Ifiss Matilda's unamiable face. But she socm
betook herself to the stablesy and left me to the quiet enjoy-
ment of my solitaiy meaL
CHAPTER XTTT
THB FRDCBOSBB
MiBB MuBRAT now always went iwioe to chnroh, for she 8o
loved admiration that she could not bear to lose a single
opportunity of obtaining it; and she was so sure of it
wherever E^e showed herself, that, whether Harry Meltham
and Mr. Oreen were there or not, there was certain to be
somebody present who would not be insensible to her charms,
besides the Eector, whose official capacity generally obliged
him to attend. Usually, also, if the weather permitted, both
she and her sister would walk home ; Matilda, because she
hated the coniinement of the carriage ; she, because she dis-
liked the privacy of it, and enjoyed the company that gene-
rally enlivened the first mile of the journey in walking from
the church to Mr. Oreen's park-gates : near which com^
menced the private road to Horton Lodge, which lay in the
opposite direction, while the highway conducted in a straight-
forward course to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh
Meltham. Thus there was always a chance of being
accompanied, so far, either by Harry Meltham, with or without
Miss Meltham, or Mr. Green, with perhaps one or both of his
sisters, and any gentlemen visitors they might have.
Whether I walked with the young ladies or rode with
their parents, depended upon their own capricious will : if
they chose to'take'me, I went ; if, for reasons best known
to tiiemselves, they chose to go alone, I took my seat in the
carriage. I liked walking better, but a sense of reluctance
to obtrude my presence on anyone who did not desire it^
462 AGNES GEEY
always kept me passive on these and similar oocasions ; and
I never inquired into the causes of their varying whims.
Indeed, this was the best poUoy — for to submit and oblige
was the governess's part, to consult their own pleasure was
that of the pupils. But when I did walk, the first half of
journey was generally a great nuisance to me. As none of
the before-mentioned ladies and gentlemen ever noticed me,
it was disagreeable to walk beside them, as if listening to
what they said, or wishing to be thought one of them, while
they talked over me, or across ; and if their eyes, in speaking,
chanced to fall on me, it seemed as if they looked on vacancy
— as if they either did not see me, or were very desirous to
make it appear so. It was disagreeable, too, to walk behind,
and thus appear to acknowledge my own inferiority ; for, in
truth, I considered myself pretty nearly as good as the best
of them, and wished them to know that I did so, and not to
imagine that I looked upon myself as a mere domestic, who
knew her avm place too well to walk beside such fine ladies
and gentlemen as they were — though her young ladies might
choose to have her with them, and even condescend to con-
verse with her when no better company were at hand.
Thus — I am almost ashamed to confess it — ^but indeed I
gave myself no little trouble in my endeavours (if I did keep
up with them) to appear perfectly unconscious or regardless
of their presence, as if I were wholly absorbed in my own
reflections, or the contemplation of surrounding objects ; or,
if I lingered behind, it was some bird or insect, some tree or
flower, that attracted my attention, and having duly ex-
amined that, I would pursue my walk alone, at a leisurely
pace, until my pupils had bidden adieu to their companions
and turned off into the quiet private road.
One such occasion I particularly well remember ; it was a
lovely afternoon about the close of March ; Mr. Green and
his sisters had sent their carriage back empty, in order to
enjoy the bright sunshine and balmy air in a sociable walk
home along with their visitors, Captain Somebody and
Lieutenant Somebody-else (a couple of military fope), and
AGNES GREY 468
the Misses Murray, who, of course, oontrived to join them.
Such a party was highly agreeable to Sosalie; but not
finding it equally suitable to my taste, I presently fell back,
and began to botanise anV[ entomologise along the green
banks and budding hedges, till the company was considerably
in advance of me, and I could hear the sweet song of the
happy lark ; then my spirit of misanthropy began to melt
away beneath the soft, pure air and genial sunshine ; but sad
thoughts of early childhood, and yearnings for departed joys,
or for a brighter future lot, arose instead. As my eyes
wandered over the steep banks covered with young grass and
green-leaved plants, and surmounted by budding hedges, I
longed intensely for some familiar flower that might recall
the woody dales or green hill-sides of home: the brown
moorlands, of course, were out of the question. Such a dis-
covery would make my eyes gush out with water, no doubt ;
but ijiat was one of my greatest enjoyments now. At
length I descried, high up between the twisted roots of an
oak, three lovely primroses, peeping so sweetly from their
hiding-place that the tears abready started at the sight ; but
they grew so high above me, that I tried in vain to gather
one or two, to dream over and to carry with me : I could not
reach them unless I climbed the bank, which I was deterred
from doing by hearing a footstep at that moment behind ftie,
and was, therefore, about to turn away, when I was startled
by the words,'Allow me to gather them for you, Miss Grey,'
spoken in the grave, low tones of a well-known voice. Im-
mediately the flowers were gathered, and in my hand. It
was Mr. Weston, of course — who else would trouble himself
to do so much for me 9
* I thanked him ; whether warmly or coldly, I cannot tell :
but certain I am that I did not express half the gratitude I
felt. It was foolish, perhaps, to feel any gratitude at all ;
but it seemed to me, at that moment, as if this were a remark-
able instance of his good-nature : an act of kindness which I
could not repay, but never should forget : so utterly
unaccustomed was I to receive such civilities, so little
«t AONES OHBT
prafNtfed to exped them irom uiyoiie within fifty mileB of
HortOQ Lodge. Yet this did not piBTent me from feeling a
little mieomfortahle in hit preeenoe; and I proceeded to
follow my papUe at a much qoicker pace than before;
thoogfa, perhaps, if Mr. Weston had taken the hint, and let
me pass without another word, I might have repented it an
hour after : but he did not. A somewhat mgii walk for me
was but an ordinary pace for him.
'Your young ladies have left yon alone/ said he.
'Yes, they are ooonpied with more agreeable company.'
'Then don't trouble yourself to overtake them.'
I slackened my pace ; but next moment regretted having
done so : my companion did not speak ; and I had nothing
in the world to say, and feared he might be in the same
predicament. At length, however, he broke the pause by
asking, with a certain quiet abruptness peculiar to himsftlf, if
I liked flowers.
'Yes ; very much,'I answered,''wild-flowers especially.'
'/ like wild-flowers,'said he ;'others I don't care about,
because I have no particular associations connected with
them— except one or two. What are your favourite flowers ?'
< Primroses, blue-bells, and heath-blossoms.'
'Not violets ?'
* No ; because, as you say, I have no particular associations
connected with them ; for there are no sweet violets among
the hills and valleys round my home.'
'It must be a great consolation to you to have a home.
Miss Grey,'observed my companion after a short pause:
'however remote, or however seldom visited, still it is
something to look to.'
'It is so much that I think I could not live without it,'
replied I, with an enthusiasm of which I immediately
repented ; for I thought it must have sounded essentially
silly.
'Oh, yes, you could,'said he, with a thoughtful smile.
'The ties that bind us to life are tougher than you imagine,
or than anyone can who has not felt how roughly they may
AONES GBET 466
be ptdled without breaking. Ton might be miserable
without a home, but even you could live; and not 90
miserably as you suppose. The human heart is like india-
rubber ; a littde swells it, but a great deal will not burst it
If " little more than nothing will disturb it, little less than all
things will suffioe " to break it. As in the outer members of
our frame, there is a vital power inherent in itself that
strengthens it against external violence. Every blow that
shakes it will serve to harden it against a future stroke ; as
constant labour thickens the skin of the hand, and strengthens
its muscles instead of wasting them away : so that a day of
arduous toil, that might excoriate a lady's palm, would make
no sensible impression on that of a hardy ploughman.
'I speak from experience — ^partly my own. There was a
time when I thought as you do— at least, I was fully
persuaded that home and its affections were the only things
that made life tolerable : that, if deprived of these, existence
would become a burden hard to be endured ; but now J have
no home — ^unless you would dignify my two hired rooms at
Horton by such a name ; — ^and not twelve months ago I lost
the last and dearest of my early friends ; and yet, not only I
live, but I am not wholly destitute of hope and comfort, even
for this life : though I must acknowledge that I can seldom
enter even an humble cottage at the dose of day, and see its
inhabitants peaceably gathered around their cheerful hearth,
without a feeling almost of envy at their domestic enjoyment.'
'You don't know what happiness lies before you yet,'
said I :'you are now only in the commencement of your
journey.
'The best of happiness,'replied he,'is mine already — ^the
power and the will to be useful.'
We now approached a stile communicating with a foot-
path that conducted to a farm-house, where, I suppose, Mr.
Weston purposed to make himself'useful ;'for he presently
took leave of me, crossed the stile, and traversed the pa^
with his usual firm, elastic tread, leaving me to ponder his
words as I continued my course alone. I had heard before
46$ AGNES GBBY
that he had lost his mother not many months before he
oame. She then was the last and dearest of his early friends ;
and he had no home. I pitied him from my heart : I almost
wept for sympathy. And this, I thought, acooonted for
the shade of premature thonghtfulness that so frequently
clouded his brow, and obtained for him the reputation of a
morose and sullen disposition with the charitable Miss
Murray and all her kin.'But/ thought I,'he is not so
miserable as I should be under such a deprivation : he leads
an active life ; and a wide field for useful exertion lies before
him. He can make friends ; and he can make a home too,
if he pleases ; and, doubtless, he will please some time. Qod
grant the partner of that home may be worthy of his choice,
and make it a happy one — such a home as he deserves to
havel And how delightful it would be to ■'But no
matter what I thought.
I began this book with the intention of concealing
nothing; that those who liked might have the benefit of
perusing a fellow-creature's heart : but we have some thoughts
that all the angels in heaven are welcome to behold, but not
our brother-men — ^not even the best and kindest amongst
them.
By this time the Greens had taken themselves to their
own abode, and the Murrays had turned down the private
road, whither I hastened to follow them. I found the two
girls warm in an animated discussion on the respective merits
of the two young officers ; but on seeing me Bosalie broke off
in the middle of a sentence to exclaim, with malicious glee —
'Oh-ho, Miss Grey I you're come at last, are you ? No
fDonder you lingered so long behiad; and no wonder you
always stand up so vigorously for Mr. Weston when I abuse
him. Ah-ha I I see it all now !'
'Now, come, Miss Murray, don't be foolish,'said I,
attempting a good-natured laugh ;'you know such nonsense
can make no impression on me.'
But she still went on talking such intolerable stuff — her
sister helping her with appropriate fiction coined for the
i
AGNES GREY 467
occasion — ^that I thought it necessary to say something in
my own justification.
• What folly all this is !'I exclaimed. * If Mr. Weston's
road happened to be the same as mine for a few yards, and if
he chose to exchange a word or two in passing, what is there
so remarkable in that ? I assure you, I never spoke to him
before : except once.'
'Where ? where ? and when ?'cried they eagerly.
'In Nancy's cottage.'
'Ah-ha! you've met him there, have you?'exclaimed
BosaUe, with exultant laughter.'Ah ! now, Matilda, I've
found out why she's so fond of going to Nancy Brown's !
She goes there to flirt with Mr. Weston.'
'Beally, that is not worth contradicting — I only saw him
there once, I tell you — and how oould I know he was
coming?'
Irritated as I was at their foolish mirth and vexatious
imputations, the uneasiness did not continue long: when
they had had their laugh out, they returned again to the
captain and heutenant ; and, while they disputed and
commented upon them, my indignation rapidly cooled ; the
cause of it was quickly forgotten, and I turned my thoughts
into a pleasanter channel. Thus we proceeded up the park,
and entered the hall ; and as I ascended the stairs to my
own chamber, I had but one thought within me : my heart
was filled to overflowing with one single earnest wish.
Having entered the room, and shut the door, I fell upon my
knees and offered up a fervent but not impetuous prayer:
'Thy will be done,'I strove to say throughout ; but, * Father,
all things are possible with Thee, and may it be Thy will,'
was sure to follow. That wish — that prayer — both men
and women would have scorned me for —'But, Father,
Thou wilt not despise I'I said, and felt that it was true. It
seemed to me that another's welfare was at least as ardently
implored for as my own ; nay, even that was the principal
object of my heart's desire. I might have been deceiving
myself ; but that idea gave me confidence to ask, and power
468 AGNES OBEY
to hope I did not aak in vain. As for the prinuoseBy I kept
two of them in a glass in my room nntil they were oompletely
withered, and the housemaid ihiew them oat; and the
petals of the other I pressed between the leases of my BiUe —
I have them still, and mean to keep them alwaya.
CHAPTBB XIV
THB BBOrOB
Thb following day was as fine as the preceding one. Soon
after breakfast Miss Matilda, having galloped and blundered
through a few unprofitable lessons, and vengeably thumped
the piano for an hour, in a terrible humour with both me and
it, because her mamma would not give her a holiday, had
betaken herself to her favourite places of resort, the yards,
the stables, and the dog-kennels ; and Miss Murray was
gone forth to enjoy a quiet ramble with a new fashionable
novel for her companion, leaving me in the schoolroom hard
at work upon a water-colour drawing which I had promised
to do for her, and which she insisted upon my finishing that
day.
At my feet lay a little rough terrier. It was the property
of Miss Matilda ; but she hated the animal, and intended to
sell it, alleging that it was quite spoiled. It was really an
excellent dog of its kind ; but she afi & rmed it was fit for
nothing, and had not even the sense to know its own
mistress.
The fact was she had purchased it when but a small
puppy, insisting at first that no one should touch it but her-
self ; but soon becoming tired of so helpless and troublesome
a nursling, she had gladly yielded to my entreaties to be
allowed to take charge of it ; and I, by carefully nursing the
little creature from infancy to adolescence, of course, had
obtained its afiFeotions : a reward I should have greatly
valued, and looked upon as far outweighing all the trouble I
470 AGNES GBET
had had wifh it, had not poor Snap's grateful feelings
exposed him to many a harsh word and many a spiteful kick
and pinch from his owner, and were he not now in danger of
being'put away'in consequence, or transferred to some
rough, stony-hearted master. But how could I help it? I
could not make the dog hate me by cruel treatment, and
she would not propitiate him by kindness.
However, while I thus sat, working away with my pencil,
Mrs. Murray came, half-sailing, half -bustling, into the room.
'Miss Grey,'she began, —'dear I how can you sit at your
drawing such a day as this ?'(She thought I was doing it
for my own pleasure.) I wonder you don't put on your
bonnet and go out with the young ladies.'
'I think, ma*am. Miss Murray is reading ; and Miss
Matilda is amusing herself with her dogs.'
'If you would try to amuse Miss Matilda yourself a little
more, I think she would not be driven to seek amusement
in the companionship of dogs and horses and grooms, so
much as she is ; and if you would be a little more cheerful
and conversable with Miss Murray, she would not so often
go wandering in the fields with a book in her hand. How-
ever, I don't want to vex you,'added she, seeing, I suppose,
that my cheeks burned and my hand trembled with some
unamiable emotion.'Do, pray, try not to be so touchy
— there's no speaking to you else. And tell me if you know
where Bosalie is gone : and why she hkes to be so much
alone ?'
'She says she likes to be alone when she has a new book
to read.'
'But why can't she read it in the park or the garden ?
— why should she go into the fields and lanes ? And how is
it that that Mr. Hatfield so often finds her out ? She told me
last week he'd walked his horse by her side all up Moss
Lane ; and now I'm sure it was he I saw, from my dressing-
room window, walking so briskly past the park-gates, and on
towards the field where she so frequently goes. I wish you
would go and see if she is there ; and just gently remind
AGNES OBEY 471
her that it is not proper for a young lady of her rank and
proepeotB to be wandering about by herself in that manner,
exposed to the attentions of anyone that presumes to address
her ; like some poor neglected girl that has no park to walk
in, and no friends to take care of her : and tell her that her
papa would be extremely angry if he knew of her treating
Mr. Hatfield in the familiar manner that I fear she does ;
and — oh ! if you — ^if awy governess had but half a mother's
watchfulness — half a mother's anxious care, I should be
saved this trouble ; and you would see at once the necessity
of keeping your eye upon her, and making your company
agreeable to Well, go — ^go ; there's no time to be lost,'
cried she, seeing that I had put away my drawing materials,
and was waiting in the doorway for the conclusion of her
address.
According to her prognostications, I found Miss Murray in
her favourite field just without the park ; and, unfortunately,
not alone ; for the tall, stately figure of Mr. Hatfield was
slowly sauntering by her side.
Here was a poser for me. It was my duty to interrupt
the tite-drtSte : but how was it to be done ? Mr. Hatfield
could not to be driven away by so insignificant a person as
I; and to go and place myself on the other side of Miss
Murray, and intrude my unwelcome presence upon her with-
out noticing her companion, was a piece of rudeness I could
not be guilty of : neither had I the courage to cry aloud from
the top of the field that she was wanted elsewhere. So I
took the intermediate course of walking slowly but steadily
towards them ; resolving, if my approach failed to scare away
the beau, to pass by and tell Miss Murray her manmia
wanted her.
She certainly looked very charming as she strolled,
lingering along under the budding horse-chestnut trees that
stretched their long arms over the park-palings ; with her
closed book in one hand, and in the other a graceful sprig of
myrtle, which served her as a very pretty plaything ; her
bright ringlets escaping profusely from her little bonnet^ and
47S AGNES GBET
gently stirred by the breeze, her fair cheek flushed with
gratified vanity, her smiliDg blue eyes, now slyly glancing
towards her admirer, now gazing downward at her myrtle
sprig. But Snap, running before me, interrupted her in the
midst of some half-pert, half-playful repartee, by catching
hold of her dress and vehemently tugging thereat ; till Mr.
Hatfield, with his cane, administered a resounding thwack
upon the animal's skull, and sent it yelping back to me with
a clamorous outcry that afforded the reverend gentleman
great amusement: but seeing me so near, he thought, I
suppose, he might as well be taking his departure ; and, as
I stooped to caress the dog, with ostentatious pity to show my
disapproval of his severity, I heard him say : * When shall
I see you again, Miss Murray ?'
'At church, I suppose,'replied she,'tmless your business
chances to bring you here again at the precise moment whan
I happen to be walking by.'
'I could always manage to have business here, if I knew
precisely when and where to find you.'
'But if I would, I could not inform you, for I am so
immethodical, I never can tell to-day what I shall do to-
morrow.'
'Then give me that, meantime, to comfort me,'said he,
half jestingly and half in earnest, extending his hand tcft the
sprig of myrtle.
'No, indeed, I shan't.'
'Do 1 pray do I I shall be the most miserable of men if
you don't. You cannot be so cruel as to deny me a & vonr
so easily granted and yet so highly prized 1'pleaded he as
ardently as if his life depended on it.
By this time I stood within a very few yards of them,
impatiently waiting his departure.
* There then t take it and go,'said Bosalie.
He joyfully received the gift, murmured something that
made her blush and toss her head, but with a little laugh that
showed her displeasure was entirely affected ; and thm vritii
a courteous salutation withdrew.
AGNES GBET 478
* Did yon ever see such a man. Miss Grey ? * said she,
burning to me ;'I'm so glad you came 1 I thought I neyer
should get rid of him ; and I was so terribly afraid of papa
seeing him.'
* Has he been with you long ?'
* No, not long, but he's so extremely impertinent : and
he's always hanging about, pretending his business or his
clerical duties require his attendance in these parts, and
really watching for poor me, and pouncing upon me where?er
he sees me.'
'Well, your maouna thinks you ought not to go beyond
the park or garden without some discreet, matronly person
like me to accompany you, and keep off all intrud^. She
descried Mr. Hatfidd hurrying past the park-gates, and
forthwith despatched me with instructions to seek you up
and to take care of you, and likewise to warn'
* Oh, mamma's so tiresome ! As if I couldn't take care
of myself. She bothered me before about Mr. Hatfield;
and I told her she might trust me : I never should forget my
rank and station for the most delightful man that ever
breathed. I wish he would go down on his knees to-morrow,
and implore me to be his wife, that I might just show her
how mistaken she is in supposing that I could eve r Oh,
it provokes me so I To think that I could be such a fool as
to fall in love / It is quite beneath the dignity of a woman
to do such a thing. Love ! I detest the word ! As applied
to one of our sex, I think it a perfect insult A preference I
wight acknowledge ; but never for one like poor Mr. Hatfield,
who has not seven hundred a year to bless himself with. I
like to talk to him, because he's so clever and amusing — I
wish Sir Thomas Ashby were half as nice ; besides, I must
have somebody to flirt with, and no one else has the sense to
come here ; and when we go out, mamma won't let me flirt
with anybody but Sir Thomas — if he's there ; and if he's not
there, I'm bound hand and foot, for fear somebody should go
and make up some exaggerated story, and put it into his head
that I'm engaged, or likely to be engaged, to somebody else ;
474 AGNES GBET
or, what is more probable, for fear his nasiy old mother
should see or hear of my ongoings, and concdnde that I'm
not a fit wife for her excellent son : as if the said son were
not the greatest scamp in Christendom ; and as if any woman
of common decency were not a world too good for him.'
'Is it really so. Miss Murray? and does your mamma
know it, and yet wish yon to marry him ?'
'To be sure, she does! She knows more against him
than I do, I believe : she keeps it from me lest I should be
discouraged; not knowing how little I care about such
things. For it's no great matter, really : hell be all right
when he's married, as mamma says ; and reformed rakes
make the best husbands, everybody knows. I only wish he
were not so ugly — that's all I think about : but then there's
no choice here in the country ; and papa wiU not let us go to
London'
< But I should think Mr. Hatfield would be far better.'
* And so he would, if he were lord of Ashby Park — ^there's
not a doubt of it : but the fact is, I must have Ashby Park,
whoever shares it with me.'
'But Mr. Hatfield thinks you like him all this time ; you
don't consider how bitterly he will be disappointed when he
finds himself mistaken.'
'No, indeed I It will be a proper punishment for his
presumption — for ever daring to think I could like him. I
should enjoy nothing so much as lifting the veil from his
eyes.'
'The sooner you do it the better then.'
''No; I tell you, I like to amuse myself with him.
Besides, he doesn't really think I like him. I take good care
of that : you don't know how cleverly I manage. He may
presume to think he can induce me to like him ; for which
I shall punish him as he deserves.'
'Well, mind you don't give too much reason for such
presumption — that's all,'replied I.
But all my exhortations were in vain : they only made
her somewhat more solicitous to disguise her wishes and her
AGNES GBEY 475
thooghto from me. She talked no more to me about the
Bector ; but I could see that her mind, if not her heart, was
fixed upon him still, and that she was intent upon obtaining
another interview: for though, in compliance with her
mother's request, I was now constituted the companion of her
rambles for a time, she still persisted in wandering in the
fields and lanes that lay in the nearest proximity to the road ;
and, whether she talked to me or read the book she carried in
her hand, she kept continually pausing to look round her, or
gaze up the road to see if anyone was coming; and if a
horseman trotted by, I could tell by her unqualified abuse of
the poor equestrian, whoever he might be, that she hated
him beccmse he was not Mr. Hatfield.
'Surely,'thought I,'she is not so indifferent to him as
she believes herself to be, or would have others to believe
her; and her mother's anxiety is not so wholly causeless
as she affirms.'
Three days passed away, and he did not make his
appearance. On the afternoon of the fourth, as we were
walking beside the park-palings in the memorable field, each
furnished with a book (for I always took care to provide
myself with something to be doing when she did not require
me to talk), she suddenly interrupted my studies by ex-
claiming —
'Oh, Miss Grey 1 do be so kind as to go and see Mark
Wood, and take his wife half-a-crown from me — I should
have given or sent it a week ago, but quite forgot. There !'
said she, throwing me her purse, and speaking very fast —
'Never mind getting it out now, but take the purse and give
them what you like ; I would go with you, but I want to
finish this volume. I'll come and meet you when I've done
it. Be quick, will you — and-— oh, wait ; hadn't you better
read to him a bit ? Bun to the house and get some sort of
a good book. Anything vTill do.'
I did as I VTas desired ; but, suspecting something from
her hurried manner and the suddenness of the request, I
just glanced back before I quitted the field, and there was
476 AGNES OBEY
Mr. Hatfield about to enter at the gate below. By sending
me to the house for a book, she had just preyented my
meeting him on the road.
'Never mind 1'thought I,'there'll be no great harm done.
Poor Mark will be glad of the half-crown, and perhaps of
the good book too; and if the Bector does steal Miss
Bosalie's heart, it will only humble her pride a little ; and
if they do get married at last, it will only save her from a
worse fate ; and she will be quite a good enough partner for
him, and he for her.'
Mark Wood was the consumptive labourer whom I men-
tioned before. He was now rapidly wearing away. Miss
Murray, by her liberality, obtained literally the blessing of
him that was ready to perish; for though the half-crown
could be of very littie service to him, he was glad of it for
the sake of his wife and children, so soon to be widowed
and fatherless. After I had sat a few minutes, and read
a little for the comfort and edification of himself and his
afflicted wife, I left them ; but I had not proceeded fifty
yards before I encotmtered Mr. Weston, apparently on hib
way to the same abode. He greeted me in his usual quiet,
unaflEected way, stopped to inquire about the condition of
the sick man and his family, and with a sort of unconscious,
brotherly disregard to ceremony took from my hand the book
out of which I had been reading, turned over its pages, made
a few brief but very sensible remarks, and restored it ; then
told me about some poor sufferer he had just been visitmg,
talked a little about Nancy Brown, made a few observaticxis
upon my little rough friend the terrier, that was frisking at
his feet, and finally upon the- beauty of the weather, and
departed.
I have omitted to give a detail of his words, from a
notion that they would not interest the reader as they did
me, and not because I have forgotten them. No ; I remember
them well ; for I thought them over and over again in the
course of that day and many succeeding ones, I know not
how often ; and recalled every intonation of his deep, clear
AONES GBBT 47T
yoioe, every flash of his quick, brown eye, and every gleam
of his pleasant, but too transient smile. Such a confession
will look very absurd, I fear: but no matter : I have written
it : and they that read it will not know the writer.
While I was walking along, happy within, and pleased
with all around. Miss Murray came hastening to meet me ;
her buoyant step, flushed cheek, and radiant smiles showing
that she, too, was happy, in her own way. Bunning up to
me, she put her arm through mine, and without waiting to
recover breath, began —'Now, Miss Grey, think yourself
highly honoured, for I'm come to tell you my news before
I've breathed a word of it to anyone else.'
'Well, what is it ? •
'Oh, stich news 1 In the first place, you must know that
Mr. Hatfield came upon me just after you were gone. I was
in such a way for fear papa or mamma should see him ; but
you know I couldn't call you back again, and so I— oh,
dear ! I can't tell you all about it now, for there's Matilda,
I see, in the park, and I must go and open my budget to her.
But, however, Hatfield was most uncommonly audacious,
unspeakably complimentary, and unprecedentedly tender —
tried to be so, at least — he didn't succeed very well in that^
because it's not his vein. I'll tell you all he said another
time.'
'But what did you say — ^I'm more interested in that ?'
* I'll tell you that, too, at some future period. I happened
to be in a very good humour just then ; but, though I was
complaisant and gracious enough, I took care not to com-
promise myself in any possible way. But, however, the
conceited wretch chose to interpret my amiability of temper
his own way, and at length presumed upon my indulgence
so far — what do you think ? — he actually made me an oflfer !'
'And you'
'I proudly drew myself up, and with the greatest coolness
expressed my astonishment at such an occurrence, and hoped
he had seen nothing in my conduct to justify his expectations.
You should have seen how his countenance fell 1 He went
478 AGNES GBET
perfectly white in the faoe. I assured him that I esteemed
him and all that, but could not possibly accede to his
proposals ; and if I did, papa and mamma could never be
brought to give their consent.'
'" But if they could/'said he,''would yours be wanting ? "
'" Certainly, Mr. Hatfield, " I replied, with a cool decision
which quelled all hope at once. Oh, if you had seen how
dreadfully mortified he was — how crushed to the earth by
his disappointment 1 really, I almost pitied him myself.
'One more desperate attempt, howeyer, he made. After
a silence of considerable duration, during which he struggled
to be calm, and I to be grave — for I felt a strong propensity
to laugh — ^which would have ruined all — he said, with the
ghost of a smile — " But tell me plainly. Miss Murray, if I
had the wealth/of Sir Hugh Meltham, or the prospects of his
eldest son, woidd you still refuse me? Answer me truly, upon
your honour. "
'" Certainly, " said I. " That would make no diflfeience
whatever. "
'It was a great lie, but he looked so confident in his own
attractions stiU, that I determined not to leave him one
stone upon another. He looked me full in the face ; but I
kept my countenance so well that he could not imagine I
was saying anything more than the actual truth.
'** Then it's all over, I suppose, " he said, looking as if he
could have died on the spot with vexation and the intensity
of his despair. But he was angry as well as disappointed.
There was he, suffering so unspeakably, and there was I, the
pitiless cause of it all, so utterly impenetrable to all the
artillery of his looks and words, so calmly cold and proud,
he could not but feel some resentment ; and with singular
bitterness he began — " I certainly did not expect this. Miss
Murray. I might say something about your past conduct,
and the hopes you have led me to foster, but I forbear, on
condition "
< < < No conditions, Mr. Hatfield I " said I, now truly
indignant at his insolence.
AGNES GREY 479
<''Then let me beg it as a favour, " he replied, lowering
hifl voice at onoe, and taking a humbler tone : ** let me
entreat that you will not mention this affair to anyone
whatever. If you will keep silence about it, there need be no
unpleasantness on either side — nothing, I mean, beyond
what is quite unavoidable: for my own feelings I will
endeavour to keep to myself, if I cannot annihilate them — ^I
will try to forgive, if I cannot forget the cause of my sufferings.
I will not suppose, Miss Murray, that you know how deeply
you have injured me. I would not have you aware of it ;
but if, in addition to the injury yon have already done me —
pardon me, but, whether innocently or not, you have done
it — and if you add to it by giving publicity to this tm-
fortunate affair, or naming it at aU, you vnll find that I too
can speak, and though you scorned my love, you vnll hardly
scorn my "
'He stopped, but he bit his bloodless lip, and looked so
terribly fierce that I was quite frightened. However, my
pride upheld me still, and I answered disdainfully ; " I do
not know what motive you suppose I could have for naming
it to anyone, Mr. Hatfield ; but if I were disposed to do so,
you would not deter me by threats ; and it is scarcely the
part of a gentleman to attempt it. "
" " Pardon me. Miss Murray, " said he, " I have loved
you so intensely — I do still adore you so deeply, that I
would not willingly offend you; but though I never have
loved, and never can love any woman as I have loved you, it
is equally certain that I never was so ill-treated by any. On
the conln*ary, I have always found your sex the kindest and
most tender and obliging of God's creation, till now. "
(Think of the conceited fellow saying thatl) " And the
novelty and harshness of the lesson you have taught me
to-day, and the bitterness of being disappointed in the only
quarter on which the happiness of my life depended, must
excuse any appearance of asperity. If my presence is dis-
agreeable to you. Miss Murray, " he said (for I was looking
about me to show how httle I cared for him, so he thought I
480 AGNES OBEY
was tired of him, I suppose) — " if my prssdnoe is disagieeaUe
to yoa, Miss Murray, you have only to promise me the fayour
I named, and I will relieve you at once. There are many
ladies — some even in this parish — ^who would be delighted
to accept what you have so scornfully trampled under your
feet. They would be naturally inclined to hate one whose
surpassing loveliness has so completely estranged my heart
from them and blinded me to their attractions ; and a single
bint of the truth from me to one of these would be sufficient
to raise such a talk against you as would seriously injure
your prospects, and diminish your chance of success with
any other gentleman you or your mamma might design to
entangle. "
'" What do your mean, sir? " said I, ready to stamp
with passion.
'** I mean that this affair from beginning to end appears
to me like a case of arrant flirtation, to say the least of it —
such a case as you would find it rather inconvenient to have
blazoned through the world : especially with the additions
and exaggerations of your female rivals, who would be loo
glad to publish the matter, if I only gave them a handle to
it. But I promise you, on the faith of a gentleman, that no
word or syllable that could tend to your prejudice shall ever
escape my lips, provided you will "
* " Well, well, I won't mention it, " said I. " You may
rely upon my silence, if that can afford you any consolation. "
'" You promise it? "
'" Yes, " I answered ; for I wanted to get rid of him now.
* " Farewell, then ! " said he, in a most doleful, heart-sick
tone ; and with a look where pride vainly struggled against
despair, he turned and went away : longing, no doubt, to get
home, that he might shut himself up in his study and cry — ^if
he doesn't burst into tears before he gets there.'
'But you have broken your promise already,'said I,
truly horrified at her perfidy.
* Oh !. it's only to you ; I know you won't repeat it'
'Certainly, I shall not : but you say you are going to tell
AGNES QBET 481
your aister ; and she will tell your biothera when they oome
home, and Brown immediately, if you do not tell her yonrBelf ;
and Brown will blazon it, or be the means of blazoning it,
ihroaghoat the ooontry.'
'No, indeed, she won't. We shall not tell her at all,
unless it be under the promise of the strictest secrecy.'
'But how can you expect her to keep her promises better
than her more enlightened mistress ?'
'Well, well, she shan't hear it then,'said Miss Murray,
somewhat snappishly.
* But you will tell your mamma, of course,'pursued I ;
'and she will tell your papa.'
'Of course I shall tell mamma — that is the very thing
that pleases me so much. I shall now be able to convince
her how mistaken she was in her fears about me.'
'Oh, that's it, is it ? I was wondering what it was that
delighted you so much.'
'Yes; and another thing is, that I've humbled Mr.
Hatfield so charmingly ; and another — ^why, you must allow
me some share of female vanity : I don't pretend to be
without that most essential attribute of our sex — ^and if you
had seen poor Hatfield's intense eagerness in making his
ardent declaration and his flattering proposal, and his agony
of mind, that no effort of pride could conceal, on being
refused, you would have allowed I had some cause to be
gratified.'
'The greater his agony, I should think, the less your
cause for gratification.'
'Oh, nonsense I'cried the young lady, shaking herself
with vexation.'You either can't understand me, or you
won't. If I had not confidence in your magnanimity, I
should think you envied me. But you will, perhaps, com-
prehend this cause of pleasure — which is as great as any —
namely, that I am delighted with myself for my prudence,
my self-command, my heartlessness, if you please. I was
not a bit taken by surprise, not a bit confused, or awkward,
or foolish ; I just acted and spoke as I ought to have done,
493 AGNES OBEY
and waB completely my own misireBB thron^oat. And
here wae a man, decidedly good-looking — Jane and Susan
Oreen call him bewitchingly handsome — I suppose they're
two of the ladies he pretends would be so glad to have him ;
but, however, he was certainly a very clever, witty, agree-
able companion — not what you call clever, but just enough
to make him entertaining; and a man one needn't be
ashamed of anywhere, and would not soon grow tired of ;
and to confess the truth, I rather liked him — better even, of
late, than Harry Meltham — and he evidently idolised me ;
and yet, though he came upon me all alone and unprepared,
I had the wisdom, and the pride, and the strength to refuse
him — and so scornfully and coolly as I did : I have good
reason to be proud of that.'
'And are you equally proud of having told him that his
having the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham would make no
difference to you, when that was not the case ; and of having
promised to tell no one of his misadventure, apparently
without the slightest intention of keeping your promise ?'
'Of course ! what else could I do ? You woiQd not have
had me — but I see, Miss Grey, you're not in a good temper.
Here's Matilda ; I'll see what she and mamma have to say
about it.'
She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, and
thinking, no doubt, that I envied her. I did not— at least, I
firmly believed I did not. I was sorry for her ; I was
amazed, disgusted at her heartless vanity ; I wondered why
so much beauty should be given to those who made so bad a
use of it, and denied to some who would make it a benefit to
both themselves and others.
But, God knows best, I concluded. There are, I sup-
pose, some men as vain, as selfish, and as heartless as she
is, and, perhaps, such women may be useful to punish them.
^
CHAPTEB XV
THB WALK
'Oh, dear I I wish Hatfield had not been so preoipitate I
said Bosalie next day at four p.m., as, with a portentous yawn,
she laid down her worsted-work and looked listlessly towards
the window.'There's no inducement to go out now ; and
nothing to look forward to. The days will be so long and
dull when there are no parties to enliven them ; and there
are none this week, or next either, that I know of/
'Pity you were so cross to him,'observed Matilda, to
whom t^is lamentation was addressed.'He'll never come
again : and I suspect you liked him after all. I hoped you
would have taken him for your beau, and left dear Harry to
me.'
'Humph 1 my beau must be an Adonis indeed, Matilda,
the admired of all beholders, if I am to be contented with
him alone. I'm sorry to lose Hatfield, I confess ; but the
first decent man, or number of men, that come to supply his
place, will be more than welcome. It's Sunday to-morrow —
I do wonder how he'll look, and whether he'll be able to go
through the service. Most likely he'll pretend he's got a cold,
and make Mr. Weston do it all.'
'Not he 1'exclaimed Matilda, somewhat contemptuously.
'Fool as he is, he's not so soft as that comes to.'
Her sister was slightly offended; but the event proved
Matilda was right: the disappointed lover performed his
pastoral duties as usual. Bosalie, indeed, affirmed he looked
481 AGNES OBBT
very pale and dejeeted : he mig^t be a litde paler ; but the
dififerenoe, if any, was scaroely perceptible. Ab for his
dejection, I certainly did not hear his laugh ringing from the
vestry as osnal, nor his voice loud in hilarious discourse ;
though I did hear it uplifted in rating the sexton in a
manner that made the congregation stare ; and, in his transits
to and from the pulpit and the communion-table, there
was more of solemn pomp, and less of that irreverent, self-
confident, or rather self -delighted imperiousness with which
he usually swept along — that air that seemed to say,'You
all reverence and adore me, I know ; but if anyone does not,
I defy him to the teeth 1'But the most remarkable change
was, that he never once su£Eered his eyes to wander in the
direction of Mr. Murray's pew, and did not leave the church
till we were gone.
Mr. Hatfield had doubtless received a very severe blow ;
but his pride impelled him to use every effort to conceal the
effects of it. He had been disappointed in his certain hope
of obtaining not only a beautiful, and, to him, highly attrac-
tive wife, but one whose rank and fortune might give bril-
liance to far inferior charms: he was likewise, no doubt,
intensely mortified by his repulse, and deeply offended at
the conduct of Miss Murray throughout. Ic would have
given him no little consolation to have known how disap-
pointed she was to find him apparently so little moved, and
to see that he was able to refrain from casting a single glance
at her throughout both services; though, she declared, it
showed he was thinking of her all the time, or his eyes would
have fallen upon her, if it were only by chance : but if they
had so chanced to fall, she would have affirmed it was because
they could not resist the attraction. It might have pleased
him, too, in some degree, to have seen how dull and dissatisfied
she was throughout that week (the greater part of it, at least),
for lack of her usual source of excitement ; and how often
she regretted having'used him up so soon,'like a child that,
having devoured its plumcake too hastily, sits sucking its
fingers, and vainly lamenting its greediness.
AONES OBEY 485
At lengih I was called upon, one fine morning, to accom-
pany her in a walk to the village. Ostensibly she went to
get some shades of Berlin wool, at a tolerably respectable
shop that was chiefly supported by the ladies of the yioinity :
really — ^I trost there is no breach of charity in supposing tbftt
she went with the idea of meeting either with the Eector
himself, or some other admirer by the way ; for as we went
along, she kept wondering'what Hatfield would do or say,
if we met him,'te. te. ; as we passed Mr. Green's park-
gates, she'wondered whether he was at home — great stupid
blockhead'; as Lady Meltham's carriage passed us, she
* wondered what Mr. Harry was doing this fine day'; and
then began to abuse his elder brother for being'such a fool
as to get married and go and Uve in London.'
'Why,'said I,'I thought you wanted to live in London
yourself.'
'Yes, because it's so dull here : but then he makes it still
duller by taking himself ofif : and if he were not married I
might have him instead of that odious Sir Thomas.'
Then, obeerving the prints of a horse's feet on the
somewhat miry road, she'wondered whether it was a
gentleman's horse,'and finally concluded it was, for the
impressions were too small to have been made by a'great
clumsy cart-horse'; and then she * wondered who the rider
could be,'and whether we should meet him coming back, for
she was sxure he had only passed that morning ; and lastly,
when we entered the village and saw only a few of its humble
inhabitants moving about, she * wondered why the stupid
people couldn't keep in their houses ; she was sure she
didn't want to see their ugly faces, and dirty, vulgar clothes
— ^it wasn't for that she came to Horton !'
Amid all this, I confess, I wondered, too, in secret,
whether we should meet, or catch a glimpse of somebody
else ; and as we passed his lodgings, I even went so far as to
wonder whether he was at the window. On entering the
shop, Miss Murray desired me to stand in the doorway while
she transacted her business, and tell her if anyone passed.
486 AONE8 OBEY
But alas t there was no one yisibie besides ihe viUagers,
except Jane and Susan Green coming down the single street,
apparently returning from a walk.
'Stupid things 1'muttered she, as she came out after
having concluded her bargain.'Why couldn't they have
their dolt of a brother with them? even he would be better
than nothing.'
She greeted them, however, with a cheerful smile, and
protestations of pleasure at the happy meeting equal to their
own. They placed themselves one on each side of her, and
all three walked away chatting and laughing as young ladies
do when they get together, if they be but on tolerably intimate
terms. But I, feeling myself to be one too many, left them
to their merriment and lagged behind, as usual on such
occasions : I had no relish for walking beside Miss Green or
Miss Susan like one deaf and dumb, who could neither
speak nor be spoken to.
But this time I was not long alone. It struck me, at
first, as very odd, that just as I was thinking about Mr.
Weston he should come up and accost me ; but afterwards,
on due reflection, I thought there was nothing odd about it,
unless it were the fact of his speaking to me ; for on such a
morning and so near his own abode, it was natural enough
that he should be about ; and as for my thinking of him, I had
been doing that, with little intermission, ever since we set out
on our journey ; so there was nothing remarkable in that.
'You are sklone again, Miss Grey,'said he.
'Yes.'
'What kind of people are those ladies — the Misses Green?'
'I really don't know.'
'That's strange — ^when you live so near and see them so
often 1'
'Well, I suppose they are lively, good-tempered girls ;
but I imagine you must know them better than I do, your-
self, for I never exchanged a word with either of them.'
'Indeed? They don't strike me as being particularly
reserved.'
" 7
I
AGNBS GBBT 487
'Very likely they are not so to people of their own cImb ;
but they consider themselyes as moving in qtiite a difibrent
sphere from me I'
He made no reply to this : but after a short pause, he
saidy —'I suppose it's these things, Miss Grey, that make you
think you could not live without a home ?'
'Not exactly. The fact is I am too socially disposed to
be able to live contentedly without a friend ; and as the only
friends I have, or am likely to have, are at home, if it — or
rather, if they were gone — I will not say I could not live —
but I would rather not live in such a desolate world.'
*But why do you say the only friends you are likely
to have? Are you so unsociable that you cannot make
friends ?'
'No, but I never made one yet; and in my present
position there is no possibility of doing so, or even of forming
a common acquaintance. The fault may be partly in myself,
but I hope not altogether.'
'The fault is partly in society, and partly, I should think,
in your immediate neighbours : and partly, too, in yourself ;
for many ladies, in your position, would make themselves be
noticed and accounted of. But your pupils should be com-
panions for you in some degree ; they cannot be many years
younger than yourself.'
'Oh, yes, liiey are good company sometifbes ; but I can-
not call them friends, nor would they think of bestowing
such a name on me — they have other companions better
suited to their tastes.'
'Perhaps you are too virise for them. How do you amuse
yourself when alone— do you read much ?'
'Beading is my favourite occupation, when I have leisure
for it and books to read.'
From speaking of books in general, he passed to dififerent
books in particular, and proceeded by rapid transitions from
topic to topic, till several matters, both of taste and opinion,
had been discussed considerably within the space of half an
hour, but without the embellishment of many observations
z8
488 AONES OBET
from himself ; he bemg evidently less bent upon communi-
cating his own thoughts and predilections, than on disoover-
ing mine. He had not the tact, or the art, to effect such a
purpose by skilfully drawing out my sentiments or ideas
through the real or apparent statement of his own, or
leading the conversation by imperceptible gradations to
such topics as he wished to advert to : but such gentle
abruptness, and such single-minded straightforwardness,
could not possibly offend me.
'And why should he interest himself at all in my moral
and intellectual capacities : what is it to him what I think or
feel ?'I asked myself. And my heart throbbed in answer to
the question.
But Jane and Susan Green soon reached their home. As
they stood parleying at the park-gates, attempting to per-
suade Miss Murray to come in, I wished Mr. Weston would
go, that she might not see him with me when she turned
round ; but, unfortunately, his business, which was to pay
one more visit to poor Mark Wood, led him to pursue the
same path as we did, till nearly the close of our journey.
When, however, he saw that Rosalie had taken leave of her
friends and I was about to join her, he would have left me
and passed on at a quicker pace ; but, as he civilly lifted his
hat in passing her, to my surprise, instead of returning the
salute with a stiff, ungracious bow, she accosted him with
one of her sweetest smiles, and, walking by his side, began
to talk to him with all imaginable cheerfulness and affability ;
and so we proceeded all three together.
After a short pause in the conversation, Mr. Weston
made some remark addressed particularly to me, as referring
to something we had been talking of before ; but before I
could answer. Miss Murray replied to the observation and
enlarged upon it : he rejoined ; and, from thence to the close
of the interview, she engrossed him entirely to herself. It
might be partly owing to my own stupidity, my want of tact
> nd assurance : but I felt myself wronged : I trembled with
apprehension ; and I listened with envy to her easy, rapid
AONES OBET 489
flow of Qtteranoe, and saw with anxiety the bright smile with
whioh she looked into his face from time to time : for she
was walking a little in advance, for the purpose (as I judged)
of being seen as well as heard. If her conversation was
light and trivial, it was amusing, and she was never at a loss
for something to say, or for suitable words to express it in.
There was nothing pert or flippant in her manner now, as
when she walked with Mr. Hatfield ; there was only a gentle,
playful kind of vivacity, which I thought must be peculiarly
pleasing to a man of Mr. Weston's disposition and tempera-
ment.
When he was gone she began to laugh, and muttered to
herself,'I thought I could do it 1'
'Do what ?'I asked.
'Fix that man.'
'What in the world do you mean ?'
'I mean that he will go home and dream of me. I have
shot him through the heart !'
'How do you know ?'
'By many infallible proofs : more especially the look he
gave me when he went away. It was not an impudent look
— I exonerate him from that — ^it was a look of reverential,
tender adoration. Ha, ha ! he's not quite such a stupid
blockhead as I thought him !'
I made no answer, for my heart was in my throat, or
something like it, and I could not trust myself to speak.
'God, avert it t'I cried, internally —'for his sake, not for
mine!'
Miss Murray made several trivial observations as we passed
up the park, to which (in spite of my reluctance to let one
glimpse of my feelings appear) I could only answer by
monosyllables. Whether she intended to torment me, or
merely to amuse herself, I could not tell — and did not much
care ; but I thought of the poor man and his one lamb, and
the rich man with his thousand flocks ; and I dreaded I
knew not what for Mr. Weston, independently of my own
blighted hopes.
490 AONEB OBET
Bight glad was I to get into the house, and find my-
self alone onoe more in my ovm room. My first impulse
was to sink into the ohair beside the bed ; and laying my
head on the pillow, to seek relief in a passionate burst of
tears : there was an imperative craving for such an indul-
gence ; but, alas ! I must restrain and swallow back my
feelings still: there was the bell — the odious bell for the
schoolroom dinner ; and I must go down with a calm face,
and smile, and laugh, and talk nonsense — ^yes, and eat, too,
if possible, as if all was right, and I was just returned from
a pleasant walk.
CHAPTER XVI
THE SUBSTITUTION
Nbxt Sunday was one of the gloomiest of April days — a day
of thick, dark clouds, and heavy showers. None of the
Murrays were disposed to attend church in the afternoon,
excepting Rosalie : she was bent upon going as usual ; so
she ordered the carriage, and I went with her : nothing loth,
of course, for at church I might look without fear of scorn or
censure upon a form and face more pleasing to me than the
most beautiful of God's creations ; I might listen without
disturbance to a voice more charming than the sweetest
music to my ears ; I might seem to hold communion with
that soul in which I felt so deeply interested, and imbibe its
purest thoughts B,nd holiest aspirations, with no alloy to
such felicity except the secret reproaches of my conscience,
which would too often whisper that I was deceiving my own
self, and mocking God with the service of a heart more bent
npon the creature than the Creator.
Sometimes such thoughts would give me trouble enough ;
but sometimes I could quiet them with thinking — it is not
the man, it is his goodness that I love.'Whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things
are honest and of good report, think on these things.'We
do well to worship God in His works ; and I know none of
them in which so many of His attributes — so much of His
own spirit shines, as in this His faithful servant ; whom to
know and not to appreciate, were obtuse insensibility in me,
who have so little else to occupy my heart.
193 AGNES GBET
Almost immediately after the eoncltision of the service,
Miss Murray left the ohurch. We had to stand in the
porch, for it was raining, and the carriage was not yet come.
I wondered at her coming forth so hastily, for neither young
Meltham nor Squire Green was there ; but I soon found it
was to secure an interview with Mr. Weston as he came out,
which he presently did. Having saluted us both, he would
have passed on, but she detained him ; first with observa-
tions upon the disagreeable weather, and then with asking
if he would be so kind as to come some time to-morrow to
see the granddaughter of the old woman who kept the
porter's lodge, for the girl was ill of a fever, and wished to
see him. He promised to do so.
'And at what time will you be most likely to come, Mr.
Weston ? The old woman will like to know when to expect
you — you know such people think more about having their
cottages in order when decent people come to see them than
we are apt to suppose.'
Here was a wonderful instance of consideration from the
thoughtless Miss Murray. Mr. Weston named an hour in
the morning at which he would endeavour to be there.- By
this time the carriage was ready, and the footman was
waiting, with an open umbrella, to escort Miss Murray
through the churchyard. I was about to follow; but Mr.
Weston had an umbrella too, and offered me the benefit of
its shelter, for it was raining heavily.
'No, thank you, I don't mind the rain,'I said. I always
lacked common sense when taken by surprise.
'But you don't Uke it, I suppose ? — an umbrella will do
you no harm at any rate,'he replied, with a smile that
showed he was not offended ; as a man of worse temper or
less penetration would have been at such a refusal of his aid.
I could not deny the truth of his assertion, and so went with
him to the carriage ; he even offered me his hand on getting
in : an unnecessary piece of civility, but I accepted that too,
for fear of giving offence. One glance he gave, one little
smile at parting — ^it was but for a moment ; but therein I
AGNES GBET 49S
lead, or thought I read, a meaning that kindled in my heart
a brighter flame of hope than had ever yet arisen
'I would have sent the footman back for you, MiBS Grey,
if you'd waited a moment — you needn't have taken Mr.
Weston's umbrella/ observed Bosalie, with a very unamiaUe
oloud upon her pretty face.
'I would have come without an umbrella, but Mr. Weston
offered me the benefit of his, and I could not have refused
it more than I did without offending him,'repUed I, smiling
placidly; for my inward happiness made that amusing,
which would have wounded me at another time.
The carriage was now in motion. Miss Murray bent
forwards, and looked out of the window as we were passing
Mr. Weston. He was pacing homewards along the causeway,
and did not turn his head.
'Stupid ass !'cried she, throwing herself back again in
the seat.'You don't know ivhat you've lost by not looking
this way I'
* What has he lost ?'
'A bow from me, that would have raised him to the
seventh heaven !'
I made no answer. I saw she was out of humour, and I
derived a secret gratification from the fact, not that she was
vexed, but that she thought she had reason to be so. It
made me think my hopes were not entirely the offspring of
my wishes and imagination.
'I mean to take up Mr. Weston instead of Mr. Hatfield,'
said my companion, after a short pause, resuming something
of her usual cheerfulness.'The ball at Ashby Park takes
place on Tuesday, you know; and mamma thinks it very
likely that Sir Thomas will propose to me then : such things
are often done in the privacy of the ball-room, when gentle-
men are most easily ensnared, and ladies most enchanting.
But if I am to be married so soon, I must make the best of
the present time: I am determined Hatfield shall not be
the only man who shall lay his heart at my feet, and implore
me to accept the worthless gift in vain.'
494 AONES GBET
'If you mean Mr. Weston to be one of your viotiins/ said
I, with affected indifference,'you will have to make such
overtures yourself that you will find it difficult to draw back
when he asks you to fulfil the expectations you have raised/
'I don't suppose he will ask me to marry him, nor should
I desire it : that would be rather too much presumption 1
but I intend him to feel my power. He has felt it already,
indeed : but he shall achncnvledge it too ; and what visionary
hopes he may have, he must keep to himself, and only amuse
me with the result of them — for a time.'
'Oh ! that some kind spirit would whisper those words
in his ear,'I inwardly exclaimed. I was far too indignant
to hazard a reply to her observation aloud; and nothing
more was said about Mr. Weston that day, by me or in my
hearing. But next morning, soon after breakfast. Miss
Murray came into the schoolroom, where her sister was
employed at her studies, or rather her lessons, for studies
they were not, and said,'Matilda, I want you to take a walk
with me about eleven o'clock.'
'Oh, I can't, Bosalie I I have to give orders about my
new bridle and saddle-cloth, and speak to the rat-catcher
about his dogs : Miss Grey must go with you.'
'No, I want you,* said Bosalie ; and calling her sister to
the window, she whispered an explanation in her ear ; upon
which the latter consented to go.
I remembered that eleven was the hour at which Mr.
Weston proposed to come to the porter's lodge ; and remem-
bering that, I beheld the whole contrivance. Accordingly,
at dinner, I was entertained with a long account of how lb*.
Weston had overtaken them as they were walking along the
road ; and how they had had a long walk and talk with him,
and really found him quite an agreeable companion ; and
how he must have been, and evidently was, delighted with
them and their amaring condescension, Ac. Ac
CHAPTEB XVn
CX)KFES8I0NB
As I am in the way of confessions, I may as well acknowledge
that, about this time, I paid more attention to dress than
ever I had done before. This is not saying much; for
hitherto I had been a littie neglectful in that particular ; but
now, also, it was no uncommon thing to spend as much as
two minutes in the contemplation of my own image in the
glass; though I never could derive any consolation from
such a study. I could discover no beauty in those marked
features, that pale hollow cheek, and ordinary dark brown
hair ; there might be intellect in the forehead, there might be
expression in the dark grey eyes, but what of that ? — a low
Grecian brow, and large black eyes devoid of sentiment
would be esteemed far preferable. It is foolish to wish for
beauty. Sensible people never either desire it for themselves
or care about it in others. If the mind be but well
cultivated, and the heart well disposed, no one ever cares for
the exterior. So said the teachers of our childhood ; and so
say we to the children of the present day. All very judicious
and proper, no doubt ; but are such assertions supported by
actual experience ?
We are naturally disposed to love what gives us pleasure,
and what more pleasing than a beautiful face — when we know
no harm of the possessor at least? A httie girl loves her
bird — Why? Because it lives and feels; because it is
helpless and harmless? A toad, likewise, lives and feels,
and is equally helpless and harmless ; but though she would
not hurt a toad, she cannot love it like the bird, with its
496 AONES GBET
graceful form, soft feathers, and bright, spealdiig eyes. If a
woman is fair and amiable, she is praised for both qualities,
but especially the former, by the bulk of mankind : if, on the
other hand, she is disagreeable in person and character, her
plainness is commonly inveighed against as her greatest
crime, because, to common observers, it gives the greatest
ofifence ; while, if she is plain and good, provided she is a
person of retired manners and secluded life, no one ever
knows of her goodness, except her immediate connections.
Others, on the contrary, are disposed to form unfavourable
opinions of her mind and disposition, if it be but to excuse
themselves for their instinctive dislike of one so unfavoured
by nature; and vice versd with her whose angel form
conceals a vicious heart, or sheds a false, deceitful charm
over defects and foibles that would not be tolerated in
another. They that have beauty, let them be thankful for it,
and make a good use of it, like any other talent ; they that
have it not, let them console themselves, and do the best they
can without it : certainly, though liable to be over-estimated,
it is a gift of God, and not to be despised. Many will feel
this who have felt that they could love, and whose hearts tell
them that they are worthy to be loved again ; while yet they
are debarred, by the lack of this or some such seeming trifle,
from giving and receiving that happiness they seem almost
made to feel and to impart. As well might the humble
glowworm despise that power of giving light without which
the roving fly might pass her and repass her a thousand
tunes, and never rest beside her : she might hear her winged
darling buzzing over and around her ; he vainly seeking her,
she longing to be foxmd, but with no power to make her
presence known, no voice to call him, no wings to follow his
flight ; — the fly must seek another mate, the worm must live
and die alone.
Such were some of my reflections about this period. I
might go on prosing more and more, I might dive much
deeper, and disclose other thoughts, propose questions the
reader might be puzzled to answer, and deduce arguments
^
AGNES GREY 497
that might startle his prejudices, or, perhaps, provoke his
ridicnle, because he could not comprehend them ; but I for-
bear.
Now, therefore, let us return to Miss Murray. She
accompanied her mamma to the ball on Tuesday ; of (^ourse
splendidly attired, and delighted with her prospects and her
channs. As Ashby Park was nearly ten miles distant from
Horton Lodge, they had to set out pretty early, and I
intended to have spent the evening with Nancy Brown,
whom I had not seen for a long time ; but my kind pupil
took care I should spend it neither there nor anywhere else
beyond the limits of the schoolroom, by giving me a piece of
music to copy, which kept me closely occupied till bed-time.
About eleven next morning, as soon as she had left her room,
she came to tell me her news. Sir Thomas had indeed pro-
posed to her at the ball ; an event which reflected great credit
on her mamma's sagacity, if not upon her skill in contri-
vance. I rather incline to the belief that she had first laid
her plans, and then predicted their success. The offer had
been accepted, of course, and the bridegroom elect was
coming that day to settle matters with Mr. Murray.
Bosalie was pleased with the thoughts of becoming
mistress of Ashby Park ; she was elated with the prospect of
the bridal ceremony and its attendant splendour and ^lat,
the honeymoon spent abroad, and the subsequent gaieties
she expected to enjoy in London and elsewhere ; she appeared
pretty well pleased too, for the time being, with Sir Thomas
himself, because she had so lately seen him, danced with
him, and been flattered by him ; but, after all, she seemed to
shrink from the idea of being so soon united : she wished
the ceremony to be delayed some months, at least; and I
wished it too. It seemed a horrible thing to hurry on the
inauspicious match, and not to give the poor creature time to
think and reason on the irrevocable step she was about to
take. I made no pretension to * a mother's watchful, anxious
care,'but I was amazed and horrified at Mrs. Murray's
heartlessness, or want of thought for the real good of her
498 AONE8 OBET
child; and by my unheeded warnings and exhortations, I
▼ainly strove to remedy the evil Miss Murray only laughed
at what I said ; and I soon found that her reluctance to an
immediate union arose chiefly from a desire to do what
execution she could among the young gentlemen of her
acquaintance, before she was incapacitated from further
mischief of the kind. .It was for this cause that, before con-
fiding to me the secret of her engagement, she had extracted
a promise that I would not mention a word on the subject to
any one. And when I saw this, and when I beheld her
plunge more recklessly than ever into the depths of heartless
coquetry, I had no more pity for her. * Gome what will,'I
thought,'she deserves it. Sir Thomas cannot be too bad for
her ; and the sooner she is incapacitated from deceiving and
injuring others the better.'
The wedding was fixed for the first of June. Between
that and the critical ball was little more than six weeks ; but,
with Bosalie's accomplished skill and resolute exertion, much
might be done, even within that period; especially as Sir
Thomas spent most of the interim in London ; whither he
went up, it was said, to settle afifairs with his lawyer, and
make other preparations for the approaching nuptials. He
endeavoured to supply the want of his presence by a pretty
constant fire of biUets-doux ; but these did not attract the
neighbours'attention, and open their eyes, as personal visits
would have done ; and old Lady Ashby's haughty, sour spirit
of reserve withheld her from spreading the news, while her
indifferent health prevented her coming to visit her future
daughter-in-law ; so that, altogether, this afiEair was kept far
closer than such things usually are.
Bosalie would sometimes show her lover's epistles to me,
to convince me what a kind, devoted husband he would
make. She showed me the letters of another individual, too,
the unfortunate Mr. Green, who had not the courage, or, as
she expressed it, the'spxmk,'to plead his cause in person,
but whom one denial would not satisfy : he must write again
and again. He would not have done so if he could have
AGNES GBEY 499
seen the grimaoes his fair idol made over his moving appeals
to her feelings, and heard her scornful laughter, and the
opprobrious epithets she heaped upon him for his per-
severance.
'Why don't you tell him, at onoe, that you are engaged ?*
I asked.
'Oh, I don't want him to know that,'replied she.'If he
knew it, his sisters and everybody would know it, and then
there would be an end of my — aheml And, besides, if I
told him that, he would think my engagement was the only
obstacle, and that I would have him if I were free ; which I
could not bear that any man should think, and he, of all
others, at least. Besides, I don't care for his letters,'she
added, contemptuously ; he may write as often as he pleases,
and look as great a caJf as he likes when I meet him ; it only
amuses me.'
Meantime, young Meltham was pretty frequent in his visits
to the house or transits past it ; and, judging by Matilda's
execrations and reproaches, her sister paid more attention to
him than civility required ; in other words, she carried on as
animated a flirtation as the presence of her parents would
admit. She made some attempts to bring Mr. Hatfield once
more to her feet ; but finding them unsuccessful, she repaid
his haughty indifference with still loftier scorn, and spoke of
him with as much disdain and detestation as she had formerly
done of his curate. But, amid all this, she never for a
moment lost sight of Mr. Weston. She embraced every
opportunity of meeting him, tried every art to fascinate him,
and pursued him with as much perseverance as if she really
loved him and no other, and the happiness of her Ufe
depended upon eliciting a return of affection. Such conduct
was completely beyond my comprehension. Had I seen it
depicted in a novel, I shotdd have thought it imnatural ; had
I heard it described by others, I should have deemed it a
mistake or an exaggeration ; but when I saw it with my own
eyes, and suffered from it too, I could only conclude that
excessive vanity, like drunkenness, hardens the heart,
600 AGNES OBEY
eiiBlaves the facilities, and pervertB the feelrngs; and that
dogs are not the only creatures which, when gorged to the
throat, will yet gloat over what they cannot devour, and
grudge the smallest morsel to a starving brother.
She now became extremely beneficent to the poor
cottagers. Her acquaintance among them was more widely
extended, her visits to their humble dwellings were more
frequent and excursive than they had ever been before.
Hereby, she earned among them the reputation of a con-
descending and very charitable young lady; and their
encomiums were sure to be repeated to Mr. Weston : whom
also she had thus a daily chance of meeting in one or other
of their abodes, or in her transits to and fro ; and often, like-
wise, she could gather, through their gossip, to what places
he was likely to go at such and such a time, whether to
baptize a child, or to visit the aged, the sick, the sad, or the
dying; and most skilfully she laid her plans accordingly.
In these excursions she would sometimes go with her sister
— ^whom, by some means, she had persuaded or bribed to
enter into her schemes — sometimes alone, never, now, with
me ; so that I was debarred the pleasure of seeing Mr. Weston,
or hearing his voice even in conversation with another:
which would certainly have been a very great pleasure, how-
ever hurtful or however fraught with pain. I could not even
see him at church : for Miss Murray, under some trivial pre-
text, chose to take possession of that comer in the family
pew which had been mine ever since I came ; and, unless I
had the presumption to station myself between Mr. and Mrs*
Murray, I must sit with my back to the pulpit, which I
accordingly did.
Now, also, I never walked home with my pupils : they
said their mamjna thought it did not look well to see three
people out of the family walking, and only two going in the
carriage; and, as they greatly preferred walking in fine^
weather, I should be honoured by going with the seniors.
'And besides,'said they,'you can't walk as fast as we do ;
you know you're always lagging behind.'I knew these were
AGNES GBET 601
false excuses, bnt I made no objections, and never, contra-
dicted sach assertions, well knowing the motives which
dictated them. And in the afternoons, daring those six
memorable weeks, I never went to church at all. If I had a
cold, or any slight indisposition, they took advantage of that
to make me stay at home ; and often they would tell me
they were not going again that day, themselves, and then
pretend to change & eir minds, and set ofiT without telling
me : so managing their departure that I never discovered the
change of purpose till too late. Upon their return home, on
one of these occasions, they entertained me with an animated
account of a conversation they had had with Mr. Weston as
they came along.'And he asked if you were ill. Miss Grey,'
said Matilda ;'but we told him you were quite well, only
you didn't want to come to church — so he'll think you're
turned wicked.'
All chance meetings on week-days were likewise carefully
prevented ; for, lest I should go to see poor Nancy Brown or
any other person. Miss Murray took good care to provide
sufiBdent employment for all my leisure hours. There was
always some drawing to finish, some music to copy, or some
work to do, sufficient to incapacitate me from indulging in
anything beyond a short walk about the grounds, however
she or her sister might be occupied.
One morning, having sought and waylaid Mr. Weston,
they returned in high glee to give me an account of their
interview.'And he asked after you again,'said Matilda, in
spite of her sister's silent but imperative intimation that she
should hold her tongue. * He wondered why you were never
with us, and thought you must have delicate health, as you
came out so seldom.'
'He didn't Matilda — what nonsense you're talking !'
* Oh, Rosalie, what a lie ! He did, you know ; and you
said — Don't, Bosalie — ^hang it! — I won't be pinched so!
And, Miss Grey, Rosalie told him you were quite well, but
you were always so buried in your books that you had no
pleasure in anything else.'
602 AGNES OBET
'Wbat an idea he must have of me t'I thought.
'And/ I asked,'does old Nancy ever inquire about
me?'
'Yes; and we tell her you are so fond of reading and
drawing that you can do nothing else.'
'That is not the case though ; if you had told her I was
BO busy I coiUd not come to see her, it would have been
nearer the truth.'
* I don't think it would/ replied Miss Murray, suddenly
kindling up ;'I'm sure you have plenty of time to yourself
now, when you have so little teaching to do.'
It was no use beginning to dispute with such indulged,
unreasoning creatures: so I held my peace. I was
accustomed, now, to keeping silence when things distasteful
to my ear were uttered ; and now, too, I was used to wearing
a placid smiling countenance when my heart was bitter
witiiin me. Only those who have felt the like can imagine
my feelings, as I sat with an assumption of smiling indiffer-
ence, listening to the accounts of those meetings and inter-
views with Mr. Weston, which they seemed to find such
pleasure in describing to me ; and hearing things asserted of
him which, from the character of the man, I knew to be ex-
aggerations and perversions of the truth, if not entirely false —
things derogatory to him, and flattering to them — especially
to Miss Murray — ^which I burned to contradict, or, at least,
to show my doubts about, but dared not ; lest, in expressing
my disbelief, I should display my interest too. Other things
I heard, which I felt or feared were indeed too true : but I
must still conceal my anxiety respecting him, my indignation
against them, beneath a careless aspect ; others, again, mere
hints of something said or done, which I longed to hear more
of, but could not venture to inquire. So passed the weary
time. I could not even comfort myself with saying,'She will
soon be married ; and then there may be hope.'
Soon after her marriage the holidays would come ; and
when I returned from home, most likely, Mr. Weston would
be gone, for I was told that he and the Beotor could not
AONBS GREY 508
agree (the Beotor's fatilt, of course), and he was aboat to
remove to another plaoe.
No — besicies my hope in Grod, my only consolation was
in thinking that, though he knew it not, I was more worthy
of his love than Bosahe Murray, charming and engaging as
she was ; for I could appreciate his excellence, which she
could not : I would devote my life to the promotion of his
happiness ; she would destroy his happiness for the momen-
tary gratification of her own vanity.'Oh, if he could but
know the difference t'I would earnestly exclaim.'But no !
I would not have him see my heart: yet, if he could but
know her hollowness, her worthless, heartless frivolity, he
would then be safe, and I should be — almost happy, though I
might never see him more !'
I fear, by this time, the reader is well nigh disgusted
with the folly and weakness I have so freely laid before him.
I never disclosed it then, and would not have done so had
my own sister or my mother been with me in the house. I
was a dose and resolute dissembler— in this one case at
least. My prayers, my tears, my wishes, fears, and lamenta-
tions, were witnessed by myself and heaven alone.
When we are harassed by sorrows or anxieties, or long
oppressed by any powerful feelings which we must keep to
ourselves, for which we can obtain and seek no sympathy
from any living creature, and which yet we cannot, or will
not wholly crush, we often naturally seek relief in poetry —
and often find it, too— whether in the effusions of others,
which seem to harmonize with our existing case, or in our
own attempts to give utterance to those thoughts and feelings
in strains less musical, perchance, but more appropriate, and
therefore more penetrating and sympathetic, and, for the time,
more soothing, or more powerful to rouse and to unburden
the oppressed and swollen heart. Before this time, at
Wellwood House and here, when suffering from home-sick
melancholy, I had sought relief twice or thrice at this secret
source of consolation ; and now I flew to it again, with
greater avidity than ever, because I seemed to need it more.
504 AONBB OBET
I sidll preserve fhose relioB of past stdferings and ezperienoe,
like pillars of witness set up in travelling through the vale of
life, to mark particular ooourrenoes. The footsteps are
obliterated now ; the faoe of the country may be changed ;
but the pillar is still there, to remind me how all things were
when it was reared. Lest the reader should be curious to
see any of these effusions, I will favour him with one short
specimen : cold and languid as the lines may seem, it web
almost a passion of grief to which they owed their being : —
Oh, they have robbed me of the hope
My spirit held so dear ;
They will not let me hear that yoioe
My soul delights to hear.
Tfa^ will not let me see that faoe
I so delight to see ;
And they have taken all thy smiles,
And sJl thy loye from me.
Well, lei them eeise on all they oaa ; —
One treasore still is mine, —
A heart that loves to think on thee.
And feels the worth Df thine.
Yes, at least, they could not deprive me of that : I could
think of him day and night ; and I could feel that he was
worthy to be thought of. Nobody knew him as I did;
nobody could appreciate him as I did ; nobody could love
him as I — could, if I might : but there was the evil. What
business had I to think so much of one that never thought of
me? Was it not foolish? was it not wrong? Tet, if I found
such deep delight in thinking of him, and if I kept those
thoughts to myself, and troubled no one else with them,
where was the harm of it ? I would ask myself. And such
reasoning prevented me from making any sufficient effort to
shake off my fetters.
But, if those thoughts brought delight, it was a painful,
troubled pleasure, too near akin to anguish ; and one that
did me more injury than I was aware of. It was an indul-
^
AONE8 OBEY 605
gence that a person of more wisdom or more experience
would doubtless have denied herself. And yet, how dreary
to turn my eyes from the contemplation of that bright object
and force them to dwell on the dull, grey, desolate prospect
around : the joyless, hopeless, solitary path that lay before
me. It was wrong to be so joyless, so desponding ; I should
have made God my friend, and to do His will the pleasure
and the business of my life ; but faith was weak, and passion
was too strong.
In this time of trouble I had two other causes of affiction.
The first may seem a trifle, but it cost me many a tear :
Snap, my little dumb, rough- visaged, but bright-eyed, warm-
hearted companion, the only thing I had to love me, was
taken away, and delivered over to the tender mercies of the
villGige rat-catcher, a man notorious for his brutal treatment
of his canine slaves. The other was serious enough; my
letters from home gave intimation that my father's health
was worse. No boding fears were expressed, but I was grown
timid and despondent, and could not help fearing that some
dreadful calamity awaited us there. I seemed to see the
black clouds gathering round my native hills, and to hear
the angry muttering of a storm that was about to burst, and
desolate our hearth.
CHAPTBB XVm
MIBTH AND MOUBMINa
Thb Ist of June arrived at last: and Bosalie Mnrra^ wms
transmuted into Lady Ashby. Most splendidly beautiful she
looked in her bridal costume. Upon her return from church,
after the ceremony, she capie flying into the schoolroom,
flushed with excitement, and laughing, half in mirth, and
half in reckless desperation, as it seemed to me.
'Now, Miss Grey, I'm Lady Ashby 1'she exclaimed.
'It's done, my fate is sealed : there's no drawing back now.
I'm come to receive your congratulations and bid you good-
by ; and then I'm off for Paris, Bome, Naples, Switzerland,
London — oh, dear ! what a deal I shall see and hear before I
come back again. But don't forget me : I shan't forget you,
though I've been a naughty girl. Gome, why don't you con-
gratulate me?'
'I cannot congratulate you,'I replied, * till I know whether
this change is really for the better : but I sincerely hope it is ;
and I wish you true happiness and the best of blessings.'
'Well, good-by, the carriage is waiting, and they're call-
ing me.'
She gave me a hasty kiss, and was hurrying away ; but,
suddenly returning, embraced me with more affection than I
thought her capable of evincing, and departed with tears in
her eyes. Poor girl ! I really loved her then ; and forgave
her from my heart all the injury she had done me — and
others also : she had not half known it, I was sure ; and I
prayed God to pardon her too.
During the remainder of that day of festal sadness, I was
AGNES GREY 507
left to my own devioes. Being too much unhinged for any
steady occupation, I wandered about with a book in my hand
for several hours, more thinking than reading, for I had many
things to think about. In the evening, I made use of my
liberty to go and see my old friend Nancy once again ; to
apologize for my long absence (which must have seemed so
neglectful and unkind) by telling her how busy I had been ;
and to talk, or read, or work for her, whichever might be
most acceptable, and also, of course, to tell her the news of
this important day : and perhaps to obtain a little imforma-
tion from her in return, respecting Mr. Weston's expected
departure. But of this she seemed to know nothing, and I
hoped, as she did, that it was all a false report. She was
very glad to see me; but, happily, her eyes were now so
nearly well that she was almost independent of my services.
She was deeply interested in the wedding; but while I
amused her with the details of the festive day, the splendours
of the bridal party and of the bride herself, she often sighed
and shook her head, and wished good might come of it ; she
seemed, like me, to regard it rather as a theme for sorrow
than rejoicing. I sat a long time talking to her about that
and other things — but no one came.
Shall I confess that I sometimes looked towards the door
with a half -expectant wish to see it open and give entrance
to Mr. Weston, as had happened once before? and that,
returning through the lanes and fields, I often paused to look
round me, and walked more slowly than was at all necessary
— ^for, though a fine evening, it was not a hot one — and,
finally, felt a sense of emptiness and disappointment at having
reached the house without meeting or even catching a distant
glimpse of any one, except a few labourers returning from
their work ?
Sunday, however, was approaching: I should see him
then : for now that Miss Murray was gone, I could have my
old comer again. I should see hinl, and by look, speech,
and manner, I might judge whether the circumstance of her
marriage had very much afflicted him. Happily I could
606 AONBS OBEY
perceive no shadow of a diCFerenoe: he wore the same
aspect as be had worn two months ago — ^voice, look, manner,
all alike unchanged: there was the same keen-sighted,
unclouded truthfulness in his discourse, the same forcible
clearness in his style, the same earnest simplicity in all he
said and did, that made itself, not marked by the eye and
ear, but felt upon the hearts of his audience.
I walked home with Miss Matilda ; but he did not join
us, Matilda was now sadly at a loss for amusement, and
wofuUy in want of a companion : her brothers at school, her
sister married and gone, she too young to be admitted into
society ; for which, from Rosalie's example, she was in some
degree beginning to acquire a taste — a taste at least for the
company of certain classes of gentlemen ; at this dull time
of year — no hunting going on, no shooting even — ^for, though
she might not join in that, it was something to see her father
or the gamekeeper go out with the dogs, and to talk with
them on their return, about the different birds they had bagged.
Now, also, she was denied the solace which the companion-
ship of the coachman, grooms, horses, greyhounds, and
pointers might have afforded; for her mother having,
notwithstanding the disadvantages of a country life, so
satisfactorily disposed of her elder daughter, the pride of her
heart had begun seriously to turn her attention to the
younger ; and, being truly alarmed at the roughness of her
manners, and thinking it high time to work a reform, had
been roused at length to exert her authority, and prohibited
entirely the yards, stables, kennels, and coachhouse. Of
course, she was not implicitly obeyed ; but, indulgent as she
had hitherto been, when once her spirit was roused, her
temper was not so gentle as she required that of her
governesses to be, and her will was not to be thwarted with
impunity. After many a scene of contention beween mother
and daughter, many a violent outbreak which I was ashamed
to witness, in which the father's authority was often called
in to confirm with oaths and threats the mother's slighted
prohibitions — for even he could see that'Tilly, though she
AGNES GBEY 609
would have made a fine lad, was not quite what a young lady
ought to be'— Matilda at length found that her easiest plan
was to keep clear of the forbidden regions ; unless she could
now and then steal a visit without her watchful mother's
knowledge.
Amid all this, let it not be imagined that I escaped with-
out many a reprimand, and many an implied reproach, that
lost none of its sting from not being openly worded; but
rather wounded the more deeply, because, from that very
reason, it seemed to preclude self-defence. Frequently, I
was told to amuse Miss Matilda with other things, and to
remind her of her mother's precepts and prohibitions. I did
so to the best of my power : but she would not be amused
against her will, and could not against her taste ; and though
I went beyond mere reminding, such gentle remonstrances
as I could use were utterly ineffectual.
'Dear Miss Grey 1 it is the strangest thing. I suppose
you can't help it, if it's not in your nature — but I wonder
you can't win the confidence of that girl, and make your
society at lea^t as agreeable to her as that of Eobert or
Joseph !'
'They can talk the best about i^e things in which she is
most interested,'I replied.
'Well ! that is a strange confession, however, to come
from her governess ! Who is to form a young lady's tastes,
I wonder, if the governess doesn't do it? I ha/oe known
governesses who have so completely identified themselves
with the reputation of their young ladies for elegance and
propriety in mind and manners, that they would bhish to
speak a word against them ; and to hear the slightest blame
imputed to their pupils was worse than to be censured in
their own persons — and I really think it very natural, for my
part.'
'Do you, ma'am ?'
'Yes, of course : the young lady's proficiency and
elegance is of more consequence to the governess than her
own, as well as to the world. If she vnshes to prosper in
610 AGNES GBET
her Tooation she must devote all her energies to her
business : all her ideas and all her ambition will tend to the
acoomplishment of that one object. When we wish to
decide upon the merits of a governess, we naturally look at
the young ladies she professes to have educated, and judge
accordingly. The judicious governess knows this : she
knows that, while she lives in obscurity herself, her pupils'
virtues and defects will be open to every eye; and that,
unless she loses sight of herself in their cultivation, she need
not hope for success. You see. Miss Grey, it is just the
same as any other trade or profession : they that wish to
prosper must devote themselves body and soul to their
calling ; and if they begin to yield to indolence or self-indul-
gence l^ey are speedily distanced by wiser competitors : there
is little to choose between a person that ruins her pupils by
neglect, and one that corrupts them by her example. Tou
will excuse my dropping these little hints : you know it is
all for your own good. Many ladies would speak to you much
more strongly ; and many would not trouble themselves to
speak at all, but quietly look out for a substitute. That, of
course, would be the easiest plan : but I know the advan-
tages of a place like this to a person in your situation ; and I
have no desire to part with you, as I am sure you would do
very well if you will only think of these things and try to
exert yourself a little more: then, I am convinced, you
would soon acquire that delicate tact which alone is want-
ing to give you a proper influence over the mind of your
pupil.'
I was about to give the lady some idea of the fallacy of
her expectations ; but she sailed away as soon as she had
concluded her speech. Having said what she wished, it was
no part of her plan to await my answer : it was my business
to hear, and not to speak.
However, as I have said, Matilda at length yielded in
some degree to her mother's authority (pity it had not been
exerted before) ; and being thus deprived of almost every
source of amusement, there was nothmg for it but to take
AGNES GBBY 611
long zideB mth the groom uid li»ig wftUn mth the gowneas,
and io visit the oottages and hnnhonseB on her fftther's
estate, to kill time in chatting mth the old men and nomen
that inhahited theoL In one of these walkSy it was oar
ohanoe to meet Mr. Weston. This was ^riiAt I had long
desired ; but now, for a moment, I wished either he or I
were away : I felt my heart throb so violently that I dreaded
lest some outward signs of emotion should appear ; but I
think he hardly glanoed at me, and I was soon calm enough.
After a brief salutation to both, he asked Matilda if she had
lately heard from her sister.
'Tes,'replied she.'She was at F^ris when she wrote,
and very well, and very happy.'
She spoke the last word emphatically, and with a glanoe
impertinently sly. He did not seem to notice it, but replied,
with equal emphasis, and very seriously —
'I hope she will continue to be so.'
'Do you think it likely?'I ventured to inquire : for
Matilda had started off in pursuit of her dog, that was chas-
ing a leveret.
'I cannot tell,'replied he.'Sir Thomas may be a better
man than I suppose ; but, from all I have heard and seen, it
seems a pity that one so young and gay, and — ^and intereiiing,
io express many things by one word — ^wbose greatest, if not
her only fault, appears to be thoughtlessness — ^no trifling
fault to be sure, since it renders the possessor liable to almost
every other, and exposes him to so many temptations — but
it seems a pity that she should be thrown away on such a
man. It was her mother's wish, I suppose ?'
'Yes ; and her own too, I think, for she always laughed
at my attempts to dissuade her from the step.'
'You did attempt it ? Then, at least, you will have the
satisfaction of knowing that it is no fault of yours, if any
harm should come of it. As for Mrs. Murray, I don't know
how she can justify her conduct : if I had sufficient acquaint-
ance with her, I'd ask her.'
'It seems unnatoral: but some people think rank and
513 AONES GBBT
wealth the chief good; and, if they can aeotire that for
their children, they think they have done their duty/
'Tme : bat is it not strange that persons of experience,
who have been married themselves, should judge sofalsely ?'
Matilda now came panting back, with the lacerated body
of the young hare in her hand.
'Was it your intention to kill that hare, or to save it.
Miss Murray?'asked Mr. Weston, apparently puzzled at
her gleeful countenance.
'I pretended to want to save it,'she answered, honestly
enough, * as it was so glaringly out of season ; but I was
better pleased to see it killed. However, you can both
witness that I couldn't help it: Prince was determined to
have her ; and he clutched her by the back, and killed her in
a minute ! Wasn't it a noble chase ?'
* Very ! for a young lady after a leveret.'
There was a quiet sarcasm in the tone of his reply which
was not lost upon her ; she shrugged her shoulders, and,
turning away with a significant'Humph !'asked me how I
had enjoyed the fun. I replied that I saw no fun in the
matter ; but admitted that I had not observed the transaction
very narrowly.
'Didn't you see how it doubled — ^just like an old hare ?
and didn't you hear it scream ?'
'I'm happy to say I did not.'
* It cried out just like a child.'
* Poor little thing I What will you do with it ?'
'Come along — I shall leave it in the first house we come
to. I don't want to take it home, for fear papa should scold
me for letting the dog kill it.'
Mr. Weston was now gone, and we too went on our way ;
but as we returned, after having deposited the hare in a
farm-house, and demolished some spice-cake and currant-
wine in exchange, we met him returning also from the
execution of his mission, whatever it might be. He
carried in his hand a cluster of beautiful bluebells, which he
offered to me ; observing, with a smile, that though he had
AONES GBEY 51S
Been ao little of me for the last two months, he had not for-
gotten that blue-bells were nmnbered among my favourite
flowers. It was done as a simple act of goodwill, without
compliment or remarkable courtesy, or any look that could
be construed into'reverential, tender adoration'{vide
Rosalie Murray) ; but still, it was something to find my un-
important saying so well remembered: it was something
that he had noticed so accurately the time I had ceased to be
visible.
'I was told,'said he,'that you were a perfect bookworm,
Miss Orey : so completely absorbed in your studies that you
were lost to every other pleasure.'
'Tes, and it's quite true !'cried Matilda.
'No, Mr. Weston : don't believe it : it's a scandalous
libel. These young ladies are too fond of making random
assertions at the expense of their friends ; and you ought to
be careful how you listen to them.'
'I hope this assertion is groundless, at any rate.'
* Why ? Do you particularly object to ladies studying ?'
* No ; but I object to anyone so devoting himself or her-
self to study, as to lose sight of everything else. Except
under peculiar circumstances, I consider very close and con-
stant study as a waste of time, and an injury to the mind as
well as the body.'
'Well, I have neither the time nor the inclination for
such transgressions.'
We parted again.
'Well 1 what is there remarkable in all this ? Why
have I recorded it? Because, reader, it was important
enough to give me a cheerful evening, a night of pleasing
dreams, and a morning of felicitous hopes. Shallow-brained
cheerfulness, foolish dreams, unfounded hopes, you would
say ; and I will not venture to deny it : suspicions to that
effect arose too frequently in my own mind. But our wishes
are like tinder : the flint and steel of circumstances are con-
tinually striking out sparks, which vanish immediately^
unless they chance to fall upon the tinder of our
614 AONEB OBET
then, tixej instantly ignite, and the flame of hope is kindled
in a moment.
But alas t that very morning, my flickering flame of hope
was dismally quenched by a letter from my mother, which
spoke so seriously of my father's increasing illness, that I
feared there was little or no chance of his recovery; and,
close at hand as the holidays were, I almost trembled lest
they should come too late for me to meet him in this world.
Two days after, a letter from Mary told me his life was de-
spaired of, and his end seemed fast approaching. Then,
immediately, ISsought permission to anticipate the vacation,
and go without delay. Mrs. Murray stared, and wondered at
the unwonted energy and boldness with which I urged the
request, and thought there was no occasion to hurry ; but
Anally gave me leave : stating, however, that there was'no
need to be in such agitation about the matter — it might prove
a false alarm after all ; and if not — ^why, it was only in the
common course of nature : we must all die some time ; and
I was not to suppose myself the only afflicted person in the
world ;'and concluding with saying I might have the
phaeton to take me to O .'And instead of repining,
Miss Orey, be thankful for Hie privUegea you enjoy. There's
many a poor clergyman whose family would be plunged into
ruin by the event of his death; but you, you see, have
influential friends ready to continue their patronage, and to
show you every consideration.'
I thanked her for her'consideration,'and flew to my
room to make some hurried preparations for my departure.
My bonnet and shawl being on, and a few things hastily
crammed into my largest trunk, I descended. But I might
have done the work more leisurely, for no one else was in a
hurry; and I had still a considerable time to wait for the
phaeton. At length it came to the door, and I was off :
but, oh, what a dreary journey was that ! how utterly
different from my former passages homewards! Being
too late for the last coach to , I had to hire a cab for
ten miles, and then a car to take me over the rugged hills.
AQNES 6BET 616
It was halt-past ten before I reached home. They were
not in bed.
My mother and sister both met me in the passage— sad
— silent — pale ! I was so much shocked and terror-stricken
that I could not speak, to ask the information I so much
longed yet dreaded to obtain.
'Agnes 1'said my mother, struggling to repress some
strong emotion.
'Oh, Agnes 1'cried Mary, and burst into tekrs.
* How is he ?'I asked, gasping for the answer.
'Dead!'
It was the reply I had anticipated : but the shock seemed
none the less tremendous.
CHAPTER XIX
THB IiETTEB
My father's mortal remains ha.d been consigned to the tomb ;
and we, with sad faces and sombre garments, sat lingering
over the frugal breakfast-table, revolving plans for our
future life. My mother's strong mind had not given way
beneath even this affliction : her spirit, though crushed, was
not broken. Mary's wish was that I should go back to
Horton Lodge, and that our mother should come and live
with her and Mr. Richardson at the vicarage : she affirmed
that he wished it no less than herself, and that such an
arrangement could not fail to benefit all parties ; for my
mother's society and experience would be of inestimable
value to them, and they would do all they could to make her
happy. But no arguments or entreaties could prevail : my
mother was determined not to go. Not that she questioned,
for a moment, the kind wishes and intentions of her daughter ;
but she afi & rmed that so long as God spared her health and
strength, she would make use of them to earn her own liveli-
hood, and be chargeable to no one ; whether her dependence
would be felt as a burden or not. If she could afford to
reside as a lodger in vicarage, she would choose that
house before all others as the place of her abode; but not
being so circumstanced, she would never come under its roof ,
except as an occasional visitor : unless sickness or calamity
should render her assistance really needful, or until age or
infirmity made her incapable of maintaining herself.
'No, Mary,'said she,'if Richardson and yon have
AGNES QBBY 517
ftDything to spare, yoa must lay i( aaide for your family ; and
Agnes and I most gamier honey for oorselTes. Thuiks to
my having had daughters to educate, I have not forgotten
my aooomplishments. God willing, I will check this vain
repining,'she said, while the tears coursed one anotherdown
her cheeks in spite of her efiForts ; bat she wiped them away,
and resolately shaking back her head, continaed, *I wUl
exert myself, and look oat for a small house, oommodiously
situated in some populous but healthy district, where we
will take a few young ladies to board and educate — ^if we can
get them — and as many day pupils as will come, or as we
can manage to instruct Your father's relations and old
friends will be able to send us some pupils, or to assist us
with their recommendations, no doubt : I sludl not apply to
my own. What say you to it, Agnes ? will you be willing
to leave your present situation and try ?'
'Quite willing, mamma ; and the money I have saved
will do to famish the house. It shall be taken from the bank
directly.'
'When it is wanted : we must get the house, and settle
on preliminaries first.'
Mary offered to lend the little she possessed; but my
mother declined it, saying that we must begin on an
economical plan ; and she hoped that the whole or part of
mine, added to what we could get by the sale of the furniture,
and what little our dear papa had contrived to lay aside for
her since the debts were paid, would be sufficient to last us
till Christmas ; when, it was hoped, something would accrue
from our united labours. It was finally settled that this
should be our plan; and that inquiries and preparations
should immediately be set on foot ; and while my mother
busied herself with these, I should return to Horton Lodge
at the dose of my four weeks'vacation, and give notice for
my final departure when things were in train for the speedy
commencement of our schooL
We were discussing these afiiairs on the morning I have
mentioned, about a fortnight after my father's death, when
518 AQNEB GHEY
a letter was brought in for my mother, on beholding iivfaioh
the coloor mounted to her face — ^lately pale enough mth
anxious watohings and excessive sorrow. * From my father 1'
murmured she, as she hastily tore off the oover. It was
many years since she had heard from any of her own
relations before. Naturally wondering what the letter might
contain, I watched her countenance while she read it, and
was somewhat surprised to see her bite her lip and knit her
brows as if in anger. When she had done, she somewhat
iireverently cast it on the table, saying with a scornful smile,
— * Tour grandpapa has been so kind as to write to me. He
says he has no doubt I haye long repented of my " unfortunate
marriage, " and if I will only acknowledge this, and confess I
was wrong in neglecting his adyiee, and that I have justly
sufiEsred for it, he will make a lady of me once again — ^if that
be possible after my long degradation — and remember my
girls in his will. Qet my desk, Agnes, and send these
things away : I will answer the letter directly. But first, as
I may be depriving you both of a legacy, it is just that I
should tell you what I mean to say. I shall say that he is
mistaken in supposing that I can regret the birth of my
daughters (who have been the pride of my life, and are likely
to be the comfort of my old age), or the thirty years I have
passed in the company of my best and dearest friend ; — that,
had our misfortunes been three times as great as they were
(unless they had been of my bringing on), I should stiU the
more rejoice to have shared them with your father, and
administered what consolation I was able; and, had his
sufferings in illness been ten times what they were, I could
not regret having watched over and laboured to relieve
them; — ^that, if he had married a richer wife, misfortunes
and trials would no doubt have come upon him still ; while
I am egotist enough to imagine that no other woman could
have cheered him through them so well: not that I am
superior to the rest, but I was made for him, and he for me ;
and I can no more repent the hours, days, years of happiness
we have spent together, and which neither could have had
AQNBS GBEY 519
without the other, than I can the privilege of having been
his nurse in sickness, and his comfort in afiSiction.
'Will this do, children ? — or shall I say we are all very
sorry for what has happened during the last thirty years, and
my daughters wish they had never been bom ; but since
they have had that misfortune, they will be thankful for any
trifle their grandpapa will be kind enough to bestow ?'
Of course, we both applauded our mother's resolution ;
Mary cleared away the breakfast things ; I brought the desk ;
the letter was quickly written and despatched; and, from
tihat day, we heard no more of our grandfather, till we saw
nis death announced in the newspaper a considerable time
after — ^all his worldly possessions, of course, being left to oui*
wealthy unknown cousihs.
< 9
CHAPTEB XX
THB FABBWBLL
A HOUSE in A , the fashionable watering-place, was
hired for our seminary ; and a promise of two or three pupils
was obtained to commence with. I returned to Horton
Lodge about the middle of July, leaving my mother to
conclude the bargain for the house, to obtain more pupils, to
sell off the furniture of our old abode, and to fit out the new
one.
We often pity the poor, because they have no leisure to
mourn their departed relatives, and necessity obliges them
to labour through their severest afflictions : but is not active
employment the best remedy for overwhelming sorrow — ^the
surest antidote for despair ? It may be a rough comforter :
it may seem hard to be harassed with the cares of life when
we have no relish for its enjoyments ; to be goaded to labour
when the heart is ready to break, and the vexed spirit
implores for rest only to weep in silence : but is not labour
better than the rest we covet? and are not those petty,
tormenting cares less hurtful than a continual brooding over
the great affliction that oppresses us ? Besides, we cannot
have cares, and anxieties, and toil, without hope — if it be but
the hope of fulfilling our joyless task, accomplishing some
needful project, or escaping some further annoyance. At any
rate, I was glad my mother had so much employment for
every faculty of her action-loving frame. Our kind
neighbours lamented that she, once so exalted in wealth and
station, should be reduced to such extremity in her time of
sorrow ; but I am persuaded that she would have suffered
AGNES OBEY 621
thrice as much had she been left in affluence, with liberty to
remain in that house, the scene of her early happiness and
late affliction, and no stem necessity to prevent her from
incessantly brooding over and lamenting her bereavement.
I will not dilate upon the feelings with which I left the
old house, the well-known garden, the little village church —
ihen doubly dear to me, because my father, who, for thirty
years, had taught and prayed within its walls, lay slumbering
now beneath its flags — and the old bare hills, delightful in
their very desolation, with the narrow vales between,
smiling in green wood and sparkling water — the house where
I was born, the scene of all my early associations, the place
where throughout life my earthly affections had been centred ;
— ^and left them to return no more ! True, I was going back
to Horton Lodge, where, amid many evils, one source of
pleasure yet remained : but it was pleasure mingled with
excessive pain ; and my stay, alas ! was limited to six weeks.
And even of that precious time, day after day slipped by and
I did not see him : except at church, I never saw him for a
fortnight after my return. It seemed a long time to me :
and, as I was often out with my rambUng pupil, of course
hopes would keep rising, and disappointments would ensue ;
and then, I would say to my own heart, * Here is a convincing
proof — ^if you would but have the sense to see it, or the
candour to acknowledge it — that he does not care for you.
If he only thought half as much about you as you do about
him, he would have contrived to meet you many times ere
this : you must know that, by consulting your own feelings.
Therefore, have done with this nonsense : you have no
ground for hope: dismiss, at once, these hurtful thoughts
and foolish wishes from your mind, and turn to your own
duty, and the dull blank Hf e that lies before you. You might
have knoton such happiness was not for you.'
But I saw him at last. He came suddenly upon me as I
was crossing a field in returning from a visit to Nancy Brown,
which I had taken the opportunity of paying while Matilda
Hurray was riding her matchless mare. He nmst have
522 AGNES OBEY
heard of the heavy loss I had sustained: he expressed no
sympathy, offered no condolence : but ahnost the first words
he uttered were, —'How is your mother ?'And this was no
matter-of-course question, for I never told him that I had a
mother : he must have learned the fact from others, if he
knew it at all ; and, besides, there was sincere goodwill, and
even deep, touching, unobtrusive sympathy in the tone and
manner of the inquiry. I thanked him wiUi due civility, and
told him she was as well as could be expected.'What will
she do ?'was the next question. Many would have deemed
it an impertinent one, and given an evasive reply ; but such
an idea never entered my head, and I gave a brief but plain
statement of my mother's plans and prospects.
'Then you will leave this place shortly ?'said he.
'Yes, in a month.'
He paused a minute, as if in thought. When he spoke
again, I hoped it would be to express his concern at my
departure ; but it was only to say, — * I should think you wiU
be willing enough to go ?'
'Yes — for some things,'I replied.
'For scrnie things only — ^I wonder what should make you
regret it ?'
I was annoyed at this in some degree ; because it embar-
rassed me : I had only one reason for regretting it ; and that
was a profound secret, which he had no business to trouble
me about.
* Why,'said I — * why should you suppose that I dislike
the place ?'
'You told me so yourself,'was the decisive reply.'You
said, at least, that you could not live contentedly, without a
friend ; and that you had no friend here, and no possibility
of making one — and, besides, I know you tn/ust dislike it.'
'But if you remember rightly, I said, or meant to say, I
could not Uve contentedly without a friend in the world : I
was not so imreasonable as to require one always near me.
I think I could be happy in a house full of enemies, if'
but no ; that sentence munt not be continued — I paused, and
AONES OBET 628
hastily added, —'And, besides, we cannot well leave a place
where we have lived for two or three years, without some
feeling of regret.'
* Will you regret to part with Miss Murray, your sole
remaining pupil and companion?'
'I dare say I shall in some degree : it was not without
sorrow I parted with her sister.'
* I can imagine that.'
* Well, Miss Matilda is quite as good — ^better in one
respect.'
'What is that?'
'She's honest.'
'And the other is not?'
'I should not call her dishonest ; but it must be confessed
she's a little artful.'
'Artful is she ? — I saw she was giddy and vain — ^and now,'
he added, after a pause,'I can well believe she was artful
too ; but so excessively so as to assume an aspect of extreme
simplicity and unguarded openness. Yes,'continued he,
musingly,'that accounts for some little things that puzzled
me a trifle before.'
After that, he turned the conversation to more general
subjects. He did not leave me till we had nearly reached the
park-gates : he had certainly stepped a little out of his way
to accompany me so far, for he now went back and dis-
appeared down Moss Lane, the entrance of which we had
passed some time before. Assuredly I did not regret this
circumstance : if sorrow had any place in my heart, it was
that he was gone at last — that he was no longer walking by
my side, and that that short interval of delightful intercourse
was at an end. He had not breathed a word of love, or
dropped one hint of tenderness or affection, and yet I had
been supremely happy. To be near him, to hear him talk as
he did talk, and to feel that he thought me worthy to be so
spoken to — capable of understanding and duly appreciating
such discourse — ^was enough.
'Tes, Edward Weston, I could indeed be happy in a
624 AGNES OBEY
house full of enemies, if I had but one friend, who truly,
deeply, and faithfully loved me ; and if that friend were you
— ^though we might be far apart — seldom to hear from eaoh
other, still more seldom to meet — though toil, and trouble,
and vexation might surround me, still — it would be too muoh
happiness for me to dream of I Yet who can tell,'said I
within myself, as I proceeded up the park, — * who can tell
what this one month may bring forth ? I have hved nearly
three-and-twenty years, and I have suffered much, and tasted
little pleasure yet ; is it likely my life all through will be so
clouded ? Is it not possible that God may hear my prayers,
disperse these gloomy shadows, and grant me some beams of
heaven's sunshine yet ? Will He entirely deny to me those
blessings which are 90 freely given to others, who neither ask
them nor acknowledge them when received? May I not
still hope and trust ? I did hope and trust for a while : but,
alas, alas ! the time ebbed away : one week followed another,
and, excepting one distant glimpse and two transient
meetings — during which scarcely anything was said — while
I was walking with Miss Matilda, I saw nothing of him :
except, of course, at church.
And now, the last Sunday was come, and the last service.
I was often on the point of melting into tears during the
sermon — the last I was to hear from him : the best I should
hear from anyone, I was well assured. It was over — the
congregation were departing; and I must follow. I had
then seen him, and heard his voice, too, probably for the
last time. In the churchyard, Matilda was pounced upon by
the two Misses Green. They had many inquiries to make
about her sister, and I know not what besides. I only vdshed
they would have done, that we might hasten back to Horton
Lodge : I longed to seek the retirement of my own room, or
some sequestered nook in the grounds, that I might dehver
myself up to my feelings — to weep my last fsurewell, and
lament my false hopes and vain delusions. Only this once»
and then adieu to fruitless dreaming — thenceforth, only sober,
solid, sad reality should occupy my mind. But while I thus
AONES OBEY 635
resolyed, a low yoioe dose beside me said —'I suppose you
are going this week, Miss Grey ?''Tes/ I replied. I was
yery much startled; and had I been at all hysterically
hioUned, I certainly should haye committed myself in some
way then. Thank God, I was not.
* Well/ said Mr. Weston, • I want to bid you good-bye — it
is not likely I shall see you again before you go.'
'Good-bye, Mr. Weston,'I said. Oh, how I struggled to
say it calmly I I gaye him my hand. He retained it a few
seconds in his.
'It is possible we may meet again,'said he ;'will it be
of any consequence to you whether we do or not ?'
'Yes, I should be yery glad to see you again.'
I could say no less. He kindly pressed my hand, «nd
went. Now, I was happy again — though more inclined to
burst into tears than eyer. If I had been forced to speak at
that moment, a succession of sobs would haye ineyitably
ensued ; and as it was, I could not keep the water out of my
eyes. I walked along with Miss Murray, turning aside my
face, and neglecting to notice seyeral successiye remarks, till
she bawled out that I was either deaf or stupid ; and then
(haying recoyered my self-possession), as one awakened from
a fit of abstraction, I suddenly looked up and asked what she
had been saying.
i
i

CHAPTBB XXI
THB BOHOOIi
I iiBFT Horton Lodge, and went to join my mother in our
new abode at A . I found her well in health, resigned in
spirit, and even cheerful, though subdued and sober, in her
general demeanour. We had only three boarders and half a
dozen day-pupils to commence with ; but by due care and
diligence we hoped ere long to mcrease the number of both.
I set myself with befitting energy to discharge the duties
of this new mode of life. I call it new, for there was, indeed,
a considerable difference between working with my mother
in a school of our own, and working as a hireling among
strangers, despised and trampled upon by old and young ;
and for the first few weeks I was by no means unhappy.'It
is possible we may meet again,'and'will it be of any
consequence to you whether we do or not ?'— ^Those wordB
still rang in my ear and rested on my heart : they were my
secret solace and support.'I shall see him again. — He wiU
come; or he will write.'No promise, in fact, was too
bright or too extravagant for Hope to whisper in my ear. I
did not believe half of what she told me : I pretended to
laugh at it aU ; but I was far more credulous than I myself
supposed; otherwise, why did my heart leap up when a
knock was heard at the front door, and the maid, who
opened it, came to tell my mother a gentleman wished to see
her ? and why was I out of humom: for the rest of the day,
because it proved to be a music-master come to offer his
services to our school ? and what stopped my breath for a
moment, when the postman having brought a couple of
AGNES OBEY 627
letters, my mother said,'Here, Agnes, this is for you,'and
threw one of them to me? and what made the hot blood
rush into my faoe when I saw it was directed in a gentle-
man's hand? and why — oh! why did that cold, sickening
sense of disappointment fall upon me, when I had torn open
the cover and fomid it was only a letter from Mary, which,
for some reason or other, her husband had directed for her ?
Was it then come to this — that I should be disappointed
to receive a letter from my only sister : and because it was
not written by a comparative stranger? Dear Mary I and
she had written it so kindly — and thinking I should be so
pleased to have it ! — I was not worthy to read it ! And I
believe, in my indignation against myself, I should have put
it aside till I had schooled myself into a better frame of mind,
and was become more deserving of the honour and privilege
of its perusal: but there was my mother looking on, and
wishful to know what news it contained ; so I read it and
delivered it to her, and then went into the schoolroom to
attend to the pupils : but amidst the cares of copies and
sums — in the intervals of correcting errors here, and reprov-
ing dereUctions of duty there, I was inwardly taking myself
to task with far sterner severity.'What a fool you must
be,'said my head to my heart, or my sterner to my softer
self ; —'how could you ever dream that he woold^ write to
you t What grounds have you for such a hope — or that he
will see you, or give himself any trouble about you — or even
think of you again ?''What grounds ?'— ^and then Hope
set before me that last, short interview, and repeated the
words I had so faithfully treasured in my memory.'Well,
and what was there in that ? — Who ever hung his hopes
upon so frail a twig? What was there in those words ttiat
any common acquaintance might not say to another? Of
course, it was possible you might meet again : he might
have said so if you had been going to New Zealand ; but
that did not imply any intention of seeing you — and then, as
to the question that followed, anyone might ask that : and
how did you answer ? — Merely with a stupid, commonplace
628 AGNEB GBBT
reply, saoh as you would have giyen to Master Murray, or
anyone else you had been on tolerably dyil terms with.'
'But, then/ persisted Hope,'the tone and manner in which
he spoke/'Oh, that is nonsense 1 he always speaks im-
pressively ; and at that moment there were the Greens and
Miss Matilda Murray just before, and other people passing
by, and he was obliged to stand close beside you, and to
speak very low, unless he wished everybody to hear what he
said, which — though it was nothing at all particular — of
course, he would rather not/ But then, above all, that
emphatic, yet gentle pressure of the hand, which seemed to
say,'Trust me ;'and many other things besides — ^too delight-
ful, almost too flattering, to be repeated even to one's self.
'Egregious folly— too absurd to require contradiction — mere
inventions of the imagination, which you ought to be ashamed
of. If you would but consider your own unattractive exterior,
your unamiable reserve, your foolish diffidence — which must
make you appear cold, dull, awkward, and perhaps ill-
tempered too ; — ^if you had but rightly considered these from
the beginning, you would never have harboured such pre-
sumptuous thoughts : and now that you have been so foolish,
pray repent and amend, and let us have no more of it I'
I cannot say that I implicitly obeyed my own injunctions :
but such reasoning as this became more and more effective
as time wore on, and nothing was seen or heard of Mr.
Weston ; until, at last, I gave up hoping, for even my heart
acknowledged it was all in vain. But still, I would think of
him : I would cherish his image in my mind ; and treasure
every word, look, and gesture that my memory could retain ;
and brood over his excellences and his peculiarities, and, in
fact, all I had seen, heard, or imagined respecting him.
'Agnes, this sea air and change of scene do you no good,
I thiilk : I never saw you look so wretched. It must be that
you sit too much, and allow the cares of the schoolroom to
worry you. You must learn to take things easy, and to be
more active and cheerful ; you must take exercise whenever
you can get it, and leave the most tiresome duties to me :
AGNES OKfiY 529
ihey will only serve to exerdse my patience, and, perhapBi
jbry my temper a little.'
So said my mother, as we sat at work one morning
dnring the Easter holidays. I assured her that my employ-
ments were not at all oppressive ; that I was well ; or, if
there was anything amiss, it would be gone as soon as the
trying months of spring were over: when summer came I
should be as strong and hearty as she could wish to see me :
but inwardly her observation startled me. I knew my
strength was declining, my appetite had failed, and I was
grown listless and desponding; — and if, indeed, he could
never care for me, and I could never see him more — if I was
forbidden to minister to his happiness — forbidden, for ever,
to taste the joys of love, to bless, and to be blessed — then, Ufe
must be a burden, and if my Heavenly Father would call me
away, I should be glad to rest. But it would not do to die
and leave my mother. Selfish, unworthy daughter, to forget
her for a moment ! Was not her happiness committed in a
great measure to my charge ? — and the welfare of our young
pupils too ? Should I shrink from the work that God had
set before me, because it was not fitted to my taste? Did
not He know best what I should do, and where I ought to
labour ? — and should I long to quit His service before I had
finished my task, and expect to enter into His rest without
having laboured to earn it ?'No ; by His help I will arise
and address myself diligently to my appointed duty. If happi-
ness in this world is not for me, I will endeavour to promote
the welfare of those around me^and my reward shall be here-
after.'So said I in my heart ; and from that hour I only per-
mitted my thoughts to wander to Edward Weston — or at least
to dwell upon him now and then — as a treat for rare occasions :
and, whether it was really the approach of summer or the
effect of these good resolutions, or the lapse of time, or all
together, tranquillity of mind was soon restored ; and bodily
health and vigour began likewise, slowly, but surely, to return.
Early in June, I received a letter from Lady Ashby, late
Hurray. She had written to me twice or thrice before,
530 AGNES OBBT
from the different stages of her bridal tour, always in good
spirits, and professing to be very happy. I wondered every
time that she had not forgotten me, in the midst of so much
gaiety and variety of scene. At length, however, there was
a pause ; and it seemed she had forgotten me, for upwards
of seven months passed away and no letter. Of course, I
did not break my heart about that, though I often wondered
how she was getting on ; and when this last epistle so
unexpectedly arrived, I was glad enough to receive it. It was
dated from Ashby Park, where she was come to settle down at
last, having previously divided her time between the continent
and the metropoUs. She made many apologies for having
neglected me so long, assured me she had not forgotten me,
and had often intended to write, & o. & c., but had always been
prevented by something. She acknowledged that she had
been leading a very dissipated life, and I should think her
very wicked and very thoughtless ; but, notwithstanding that,
she thought a great deal, and, among other things, that she
should vastly Uke to see me.'We have been several days
here already,'wrote she.'We have not a single friend with
us, and are likely to be very dull. You know I never had a
fancy for living with my husband like two turtles in a nest,
were he the most delightful creature that ever wore a coat ;
so do take pity upon me and come. I suppose your Mid-
sunmier holidays commence in June, the same as other
people's ; therefore you cannot plead want of time ; and you
must and shall come — ^in fact, I shall die if you don't. I
want you to visit me as a friend, and stay a long time. There
is nobody with me, as I told you before, but Sir Thomas and
old Lady Ashby : but you needn't mind them — they'll trouble
us but little with their company. And you shall have a
room to yourself, whenever you like to retire to it, and plenty
of books to read when my company is not sufficiently amusing.
I forget whether you like babies ; if you do, you may have
the pleasure of seeing mine — the most charming child in the
world, no doubt ; and all the more so, that I am not troubled
with nursing it — I was determined I wouldn't be bothered
AGNES GEEY 631
with that. Unfortunately, it is a girl, and Sir Thomas has
never forgiven me : but, however, if you will only come, I
promise you shall be its governess as soon as it can speak ;
and you shall bring it up in the way it should go, and make
a better woman of it than its mamma. And you shall see
my poodle, too : a splendid little charmer imported from
Paris : and two fine Italian paintings of great value— I forget
the artist. Doubtless you will be able to discover prodigious
beauties in them, which you must point out to me, as I only
admire by hearsay; and many elegant curiosities besides,
which I purchased at Borne and elsewhere ; and, finally, you
shall see my new home — the splendid house and grounds I
used to covet so greatly. Alas ! how far the promise of
anticipation exceeds the pleasure of possession 1 There's a
fine sentiment 1 I assure you I am become quite a grave old
matron : pray come, if it be only to witness the wonderful
change. Write by return of post, and tell me when your
vacation commences, and say that you will come the day
after, and stay till the day before it closes — in mercy to
'Yours afiPectionately,
'Rosalie Ashby.'
I showed this strange epistle to my mother, and consulted
her on what I ought to do. She advised me to go ; and I
went — willing enough to see Lady Ashby, and her baby, too,
and to do anything I could to benefit her, by consolation or
advice ; for 1 imagined she must be unhappy, or she would
not have appHed to me thus — but feeling, as may readily be
conceived, that, in accepting the invitation, I made a great
sacrifice for her, and did violence to my feelings in many
ways, instead of being delighted with the honourable dis-
tinction of being entreated by the baronet's lady to visit her
as a friend. However, I determined my visit should be only
for a few days at most ; and I will not deny that I derived
some consolation from the idea that, as Ashby Park was not
very far from Horton, I might possibly see Mr. Weston, or
at least, hear something about him. t
CHAPTER XXn
THB VISIT
AsHBY Pabx was certainly a very delightful residence. The
mansion was stately without, commodious and elegant
within; the park was spacious and beautiful, chiefly on
account of its magnificent old trees, its stately herds of deer,
its broad sheet of water, and the ancient woods that
stretched beyond it : for there was no broken ground to give
variety to the landscape, and but very little of that undulat-
ing swell which adds so greatly to the charm of park
scenery. And so, this was the place Bosalie Murray had so
longed to call her own, that she must have a share of it, on
whatever terms it might be offered — ^whatever price was to be
paid for the title of mistress, and whoever was to be her
partner in the honour and bliss of such a possession 1 Well 1
I am not disposed to censure her now.
She received me very kindly ; and, though I was a poor
clergyman's daughter, a governess, and a schoolmistress, she
welcomed me with unaffected pleasure to her home ; and —
what surprised me rather — took some pains to make my visit
agreeable. I could see, it is true, that she expected me to be
greatly struck with the magnificence that surrounded her ;
and, I confess, I was rather annoyed at her evident efforts to
reassure me, and prevent me from being overwhelmed by
so much grandeur — too much awed at the idea of encounter-
ing her husband and mother-in-law, or too much ashamed of
my own humble appearance. I was not ashamed of it at all ;
for, though plain, I had taken good care not to be shabby or
mean, and should have been pretty considerably at my ease^
AONES GBET 633
if my oondesoending hostess had not tftken such manifest
pains to make me so; and, as for the magnifioence that
surrounded her, nothing that met my eyes stniok me or
afifeoted me half so much as her own altered appearance.
Whether from the influenoe of fashionable dissipation, or
some other evil, a space of little more than twelve months
had had the eflfect that might be expected from as many years,
in reducing the plumpness of her form, the freshness of her
complexion, the vivacity of her movements, and the exuber-
ance of her spirits.
I wished to know if she was unhappy ; but I felt it was
not my province to inquire : I might endeavour to win her
confidence; but, if she chose to conceal her matrimonial
cares from me, I would trouble her with no obtrusive
questions. I, therefore, at first, confined myself to a few
general inquiries about her health and welfare, and a few
commendations on the beauty of the park, and of the little
girl that should have been a boy: a small delicate infant
of seven or eight weeks old, whom its mother seemed to
regard with no remarkable degree of interest or affection,
though fuU as much as I expected her to show.
Shortly after my arrival, she commissioned her maid to
conduct me to my room and see that I had everything I
wanted ; it was a small, unpretending, but sufficiently
comfortable apartment. When I descended thenoe — having
divested myseU of all travelling encumbrances, and arranged
my toilet with due consideration for the feelings of my lady
hostess, she conducted me herself to the room I was to occupy
when I chose to be alone, or when she was engaged with
visitors, or obliged to be with her mother-in-law, or otherwise
prevented, as she said, from enjoying the pleasure of my
society. It was a quiet, tidy little sitting-room ; and I was
not sorry to be provided with such a harbour of refuge.
'And some time,'said she,'I will show you the library :
I never examined its shelves, but, I daresay, it is full of wise
books ; and you may go and burrow among them whenever
you please* And now you shall have some tea — ^it will soon
684 AGNES GBET
be dinner-tiine, but I thought, as you were aocostomed to
dine at one, you would perhaps like better to have a cup of
tea about this time, and to dine when we lunch : and then,
you know, you can have your tea in this room, and that will
save you from having to dine with Lady Ashby and Sir
Thomas: which would be rather awkward — ^at least, not
awkward, but rather — a — ^you know what I mean. I
thought you mightn't like it so well — especially as we may
have other ladies and gentlemen to dine with us occasionally.'
'Certainly,'said I, * I would much rather have it as you
say, and, if you have no objection, I should prefer having all
my meals in this room.'
'Why so ? •
'Because, I imagine, it would be more agreeable to Lady
Ashby and Sir Thomas.'
'Nothing of the kind.'
'At any rate, it would be more agreeable to me.'
She made " Some faint objections, but soon conceded ; and
I could see that the proposal was a considerable relief to her.
'Now, come into the drawing-room,'said she.'There's
the dressing bell ; but I won't go yet : it's no use dressing
when there's no one to see you ; and I want to have a little
discourse.'
The drawing-room was certainly an imposing apartment,
and very elegantly furnished ; but I saw its young mistress
glance towards me as we entered, as if to notice how I was
impressed by the spectacle, and accordingly I determined to
preserve an aspect of stony indifiPerence, as if I saw nothing
at all remarkable. But this was only for a moment:
immediately conscience whispered, * Why should I disappoint
her to save my pride ? No — ^rather let me sacrifice my pride
to give her a little innocent gratification.'And I honestly
looked round, and told her it was a noble room, and very
tastefully furnished. She said little, but I saw she was
pleased.
She showed me her fat French poodle, that lay curled up
on a silk cushion, and the two fine Italian paintings : which,
AONES OBET 635
however, she wonld not give me time to examine, but, saying
I must look at them some other day, insisted upon my
admiring the little jewelled watch she had purchased in
Geneva ; and then she took me romid the room to point out
sundry articles of vertu she had brought from Italy: an
elegant little timepiece, and several busts, small graceful
figures, and vases, all beautifully carved in white marble.
She spoke of these with animation, and heard my admiring
ooomients with a smile of pleasure : that soon, however,
vanished, and was followed by a melancholy sigh ; as if in
consideration of the insufficiency of all such baubles to the
happiness of the human heart, and their woeful inability to
supply its insatiate demands.
Then, stretching herself upon a couch, she motioned me
to a capacious easy-chair that stood opposite — ^not before the
fire, but before a wide open window ; for it was summer, be
it remembered ; a sweet, warm evening in the latter half of
June. I sat for a moment in silence, enjoying the still, pure
air, and the delightful prospect of the park that lay before
me, rich in verdure and foliage, and basking in yellow sun-
shine, relieved by the long shadows of declining day. But I
must take advantage of this pause : I had inquiries to make,
and, like the substance of a lady's postscript, the most
important must come last. So I began with asking after
Mr. and Mrs. Murray, and Miss Matilda and the young
gentlemen.
I was told that papa had the gout, which made him very
ferocious ; and that he would not give up his choice wines,
and his substantial dinners and suppers, and had quarrelled
with his physician, because the latter had dared to say that
no medicine could cure him while he lived so freely ; that
mamma and the rest were well. Matilda was still wild and
reckless, but she had got a fashionable governess, and was
considerably improved in her manners, and soon to be intro-
duced to the world ; and John and Charles (now at home for
the holidays) were, by all accounts,'fine, bold, unruly,
mischievous boys.'
886 AONE8 OBEY
'And how ftre the other peopb getting on?* sud I —'the
(Greens, for instance ?'
'Ah i Mr. Qreen is heart-broken, you know/ replied she,
with a languid smile :'he hasn't got over his disappointment
yet, and never will, I suppose. He's doomed to be an old
baohelor ; and his sisters are doing their best to get married.'
'AndtheMelthams?'
'Oh, they're jogging on as usual, I suppose : but I know
Tery little about any of them — except Harry,'said she,
blushing slightly, and smiling again.'I saw a great deal of
him while we were in London ; for, as soon as he heard we
were there, he came up under pretence of visiting his brother,
and either followed me, like a shadow, wherever I went, or
met me, like a reflection, at every turn. You needn't look
so shocked, Miss Grey ; I was very discreet, I assure you :
bat, you know, one can't help being admired. Poor fellow 1
He was not my only worshipper ; though he was certainly
the most conspicuous, and, I think, the most devoted among
them alL And that detestable— ahem — and Sir Thomas
chose to take offence at him — or my profuse expenditure, or
something— I don't exactly know what — ^and hurried me
down to the country at a moment's notice; where I'm to
play the hermit, I suppose, for life.'
And she bit her lip, and frowned vindictively upon the
fair domain she had once so coveted to call her own.
'And Mr. Hatfield,'said I,'what is become of him ?'
Again she brightened up, and answered gaily —'Oh 1 he
made up to an elderly spinster, and married her, not long
since ; weighing her heavy purse against her faded charms,
and expecting to find that solace in gold which was denied
him in love — ha, ha I'
'Well, and I think that's all — except Mr. Weston : what
is he doing ?'
'I don't know, I'm sure. He's gone from Horton.'
'How long since ? and where is he gone to ?'
'I know nothing about him,'replied she, yawning —
'except that he went about a month ago—I never asked
AQNES GBBT 6S7
where'(I would have aaked whether it was to a living or
merely another curacy, but thought it better not) ;'and the
people made a great rout about his leaving/ continued she,
'muoh to Mr. Hatfield's displeasure; for Hatfield didn't
like him, because he had too much influence with the
common people, and because he was not sufficiently tract-
able and submissive to him — and for some other tmpardon-
able sins, I don't know what. But now I positively must go
and dress : the second bell will ring direcdy, and if I come
to dinner in this guise, I shall never hear the end of it
from Lady Ashby. It's a strange thing one can't be
mistress in one's own house I Just ring the bell, and I'll
send for my maid, and tell them to get you some tea. Only
think of that intolerable woman —'
* Who — your maid ?'
'No ; — my mother-in-law — ^and my unfortunate mistake I
Instead of letting her take herself o£F to some other house, as
she offered to do when I married, I was fool enough to ask
her to live here still, and direct the afiEBurs of the house for
me ; because, in the first place^ I hoped we should spend
the greater part of the year in town, and in the second
place, being so yoimg and iiiexperienced, I was frightened at
the idea of having a houseful of servants to manage, and
dinners to order, and parties to entertain, and all the rest ot
it, and I thought she might assist me with her experience ;
never dreaming she would prove a usurper, a tyrant, an
incubus, a spy, and everything else that's detestable. I
wish she was dead 1'
She then turned to give her orders to the footman, who
had been standing bolt upright within the door for the last
half minute, and had heard the latter part of her animad-
versions; and, of course, made his own reflections upon
them, notwithstanding the inflexible, wooden countenance
he thought proper to preserve in the drawing-room. On my
remarking afterwards that he must have heard her, she
replied —'Oh, no matter 1 I never care about the footmen ;
they're mere automatons: it's nothing to them what their
638 AGNES OBEY
superiors say or do ; they won't dare to repeat it ; and as to
what they think — ^if they presume to think at ail — of course,
nohody cares for that. It would be a pretty thing indeed, if
we were to be tongue-tied by our servants !'
So saying, she ran off to make her hasty toilet, leaving
me to pilot my way back to my sitting-room, where, in due
time, I was served with a cup of tea. After that, I sat
musing on Lady Ashby's past and present condition ; and
on what little information I had obtained respecting Mr.
Weston, and the small chance there was of ever seeing or
hearing anything more of him throughout my quiet, drab-colour
life : which, henceforth, seemed to offer no alternative between
positive rainy days, and days of dull grey clouds without
downfall. At length, however, I began to weary of my
thoughts, and to wish I knew where to find the library my
hostess had spoken of; and to wonder whether I was to
remain there doing nothing till bedtime.
As I was not rich enough to possess a watch, I could not
tell how time was passing, except by observing the slowly
lengthening shadows from the window ; which presented a
side view, including a comer of the park, a dump of trees
whose topmost branches had been colonized by an innumer-
able company of noisy rooks, and a high wall with a mass-
ive wooden gate : no doubt communicating with the stable-
yard, as a broad carriage-road swept up to it from the park.
The shadow of this wall soon took posesssion of the whole
of the ground as far as I could see, forcing the golden sun-
light to retreat inch by inch, and at last take refuge in the
very tops of the trees. Ere long, even they were left in
shadow — the shadow of the distant hills, or of the earth itself ;
and, in sympathy for the busy citizens of the rookery, I
regretted to see their habitation, so lately bathed in glorious
light, reduced to the sombre, work-a-day hue of the lower
world, or of my own world within. For a moment, such
birds as soared above the rest might still receive the lustre
on their wings, which imparted to their sable plumage the
hue and brilliance of deep red gold; at last, that too
AONEB OBBT 539
departed. Twilight oame stealing on ; tihe rooks became
more quiet ; I beoame more weary, and wished I were going
home to*morrow. At length it grew dark ; and I was think-
ing of ringing for a candle, and betaking myself to bed«
when my hostess appeared, with many apologies for having
neglected me so long, and laying all the blame npon that
'nasty old woman,'as she called her mother-in-law.
'If I didn't sit with her in the drawing-room while Sir
Thomas is taking his wine/ said she,'she would never
forgive me * and then, if I leave the room the instant he comes
— as I have done once or twice — it is an unpardonable offence
against her dear Thomas. She never showed such disrespect
to her husband : and as for affection, wives never think of
that now-a-days, she supposes : but things were different in
her time — ^as ^ there was any good to be done by staying in
the room, when he does nothing but grumble and scold when
he's in a bad hxmiour, talk disgusting nonsense when he's in
a good one, and go to sleep on the sofa when he's too stupid
for either ; which is most frequently the case now, when he
has nothing to do but to sot over his wine.'
'But could you not try to occupy his mind with some-
thing better ; and engage him to give up such habits ? I'm
sure you have powers of persuasion, and qualifications for
amusing a gentleman, which many ladies would be glad to
possess.'
'And so you think I would lay myself out for his amuse-
ment 1 No : that's not my idea of a wife. It's the husband's
part to please the wife, not hers to please him ; and if he
isn't satisfied with her as she is — and thankful to possess her
too— he isn't worthy of her, that's all. And as for persuasion,
I assure you I shan't trouble myself with that : I've enough
to do to bear with him as he is, without attempting to work a
reform. But I'm sorry I left you so long alone, Miss Grey.
How have you passed the time ?'
'Chiefly in watching the rooks.'
'Mercy, how dull you must have been t I really must
show you the library ; and you must ring for everything you
640 AQNBS GBET
want, jast as you would in an inn, and make yonrBelf
comfortable. I have selfish reasons for wishing to make yon
happy, because I want yon to stay with me, and not fulfil
your horrid threat of nmning away in a day or two.'
'Well, don't let me keep you out of the drawing-room
any longer to-night, for at present I am tired and wish to go
to bed.'
OHAPTEB XXm
THB PABK
I OAMB down a little before eight, next morning, as I knew
by the striking of a distant dock. There was no appearanoe
of breakfast. I waited above an hoar before it came, still
yainly longing for aooess to the library; and, after that
lonely repast was concluded, I waited again about an hour
and a half in great suspense and discomfort, uncertain what
to do. At length Lady Ashby came to bid me good-morning.
She informed me she had only just breakfasted, and now
wanted me to take an early walk with her in the park. She
asked how long I had been up, and on receiving my answer,
expressed the deepest regret, and again promised to show
me the library. I suggested she had better do so at once,
and then there would be no further trouble either with
remembering or forgetting. She complied, on condition that
I would not think of reading, or bothering with the books
now ; for she wanted to show me the gardens, and take a
walk in the park with me, before it became too hot for enjoy-
ment ; which, indeed, was nearly the case already. Of course
I readily assented ; and we took our walk accordingly.
As we were strolling in the park, talking of what my
companion had seen and heard during her travelling experi-
ence, a gentleman on horseback rode up and passed us. As
he turned, in passing, and stared me full in the face, I had a
good opportunity of seeing what he was tike. He was tall,
thin, and wasted, with a slight stoop in the shoulders, a pale
face, but somewhat blotchy, and disagreeably red about the
eyelids, plain features, and a general appearanoe of languor
542 AGNES OBBT
and flatneBB, relieved by a sinister ezpression in the numtti
and the dull, soulless eyes.
'I detest that man 1'whispered Lady Ashby, with bitter
emphasis, as he slowly trotted by.
'Who is it ?'I asked, unwilling to suppose that she
should so speak of her husband.
'Sir Thomas Ashby/ she replied, with dreary compo-
sure.
'And do you detest him, Miss Murray?'said I, for I was
too much shocked to remember her name at the moment.
'Yes, I do. Miss Grey, and despise him too ; and if you
knew him you would not blame me.'
'But you knew what he was before you married him.'
'No ; I only thought so : I did not half know him really.
I know you warned me against it, and I wish I had listened
to you : but it's too late to regret that now. And besides,
mamma ought to have known better than either of us, and
she never said anything against it— quite the contrary. And
then I thought he adored me, and would let me have my
own way : he did pretend to do so at first, but now he does
not care a bit about me. Yet I should not care for that : he
might do as he pleased, if I might only be free to amuse
myself and to stay in London, or have a few friends down
here : but he wUl do as he pleases, and I must be a prisoner
and a slave. The moment he saw I could enjoy myself with-
out him, and that others knew my value better than himself,
the selfish wretch began to accuse me of coquetry and
extravagance ; and to abuse Harry Meltham, whose shoes he
was not worthy to clean. And then he must needs have me
down in the country, to lead the life of a nun, lest I should
dishonour him or bring him to ruin ; as if he had not been
ten times worse every way, with his betting-book, and his
gaming-table, and his opera-girls, and his Lady This and
Mrs. That — yes, and his bottles of wine, and glasses of
brandy-and-water tool Oh, I would give ten thousand
worlds to be Miss Murray again ! It is too bad to feel life,
health, and beauty wasting away, unfelt and unenjoyed, for
AONES OBBT 648
saeh a brnte as that I'exclaimed she, fairly burstii^ into
tears in the bitterness of her vexation.
Of coarse, I pitied her exceedingly ; as well for her false
idea of happiness and disregard of duty, as for the wretched
partner with whom her hte was linked. I said what I conld
to comfort her, and offered such counsels as I thought she
most required : advising her, first, by gentle reasoning, by
kindness, example, and persuasion, to try to ameliorate her
husband ; and then, when she had done all she could, if she
still found him incorrigible, to endeavour to abstract herself
from him — ^to wrap herself up in her own integrity, and
trouble herself as little about him as possible. I exhorted
her to seek consolation in doing her duty to God and man,
to put her trust in Heaven, and solace herself with the care
and nurture of her Utile daughter ; assuring her she would
be amply rewarded by witnessing its progress in strength and
wisdom, and receiving its genuine affection.
'But I can't devote myself entirely to a child,'said she ;
'it may die — which is not at all improbable.'
'But, with care, many a delicate infant has become a
strong man or woman.'
'But it may grow so intolerably like its father that I
shall hate it.'
'That is not likely ; it is a little girl, and strongly
resembles its mother.'
'No matter ; I should like it better if it were a boy — only
that its father will leave it no inheritance that he can possibly
squander away. What pleasure can I have in seeing a girl
grow up to eclipse me, and enjoy those pleasures that I am
for ever debarred from ? But supposing I could be so
generous as to take delight in this, still it is only a child ;
and I can't centre all my hopes in a child : that is only one
degree better than devoting oneself to a dog. And as for
^11 the wisdom and goodness you have been trying to instil
into me— that is all very right and proper, I daresay, and if
I were some twenty years older, I might fructify by it:
but people must eujoy themselves when they are young;
644 AGNES OBBY
and if othan won*i let them — ^why, ihey miisfc hate tbeoi
for it !'
'The best way to enjoy yonraelf is to do what is right
and hate nobody. The end of Beligion is not te teaoh tis
how te die, bat how te live ; and the earlier yon beoome wise
and good, the more of happiness yon secnre. And now.
Lady Ashby, I have one more piece of advice to offer yon,
which is, that yon will not make an enemy of yonr mother-
in-law. Don't get into the way of holding her at arms'
length, and regarding her with jealons distmst. I never saw
her, bnt I have heard good as well as evil respecting her ;
and I imagine that, though cold and haughty in her general
demeanour, and even exacting in her requiremento, she has
strong affections for those who can reach them ; and, though
so blindly attached to her son, she is not without good
principles, or incapable of hearing reason. If you would but
conciliate her a little, and adopt a friendly, open manner —
and even confide your grievances to her — real grievances, such
as you have a right to complain of — ^it is my firm belief that
she would, in time, become your faithful friend, and a comfort
and support to you, instead of the incubus you describe her.'
But I fear my advice had little effect upon the unfortu-
nate young lady ; and, finding I could render myself so little
serviceable, my residence at Ashby Park became doubly
painful. But still, I must stey out that day and the following
one, as I had promised to do so: though, resisting all
entreaties and inducemente to prolong my visit further, I
insisted upon departing the next morning; affirming that
my mother would be lonely without me, and that she
impatiently expected my return. Nevertheless, it was with
a heavy heart that I bade adieu to poor Lady Ashby, and
left her in her princely home. It was no slight additional
proof of her unhappiness, that she should so cling to the con-
solation of my presence, and earnestly desire the company
of one whose general tastes and ideas were so little congenial
to her own — whom she had completely forgotten in her hour
of prosperity, and whose presence would be rather a nuisance
than a pleasure, if she could but have half her heart's desins.
CHAPTBB XXIV
THft BANDS
OuB school was not situated in the heart of the town : on
entering A ^from the north-west there is a row of respect-
able-looking houses, on each side of the broad, white road,
with narrow slips of garden-ground before them, Venetian
blinds to the windows, and a flight of steps leading to each
trim, brass-handled door. In one of the largest of these
habitations dwelt my mother and I, with such young ladies
as our friends and the public chose to commit to our charge.
Consequently, we were a considerable distance from the sea,
and divided from it by a labyrinth of streets and houses.
But the sea was my delight; and I would often gladly
pierce the town to obtain the pleasure of a walk beside it,
whether with the pupils, or alone with my mother during
the vacations. It was delightful to me at all times and
seasons, but especially in the wild commotion of a rough
sea-breeze, and in the brilliant freshness of a summer
morning.
I awoke early on the third morning after my return from
Ashby Park — the sun was shining through the blind, and I
thought how pleasant it would be to pass through the quiet
town and take a solitary ramble on the sands while half the
world was in bed. I was not long in forming the resolution,
nor slow to act upon it. Of course I would not disturb my
mother, so I stole noiselessly downstairs, and quietly
unfastened the door. I was dressed and out, when the
church clock struck a quarter to six. There was a feeling of
freshness and vigour in the very streets ; and when I got
646 AONES GBET
free of the town, when myKoot was on the sands and my faoe
towards the broad, bright bay, no language can describe the
effect of the deep, clear azure of the sky and ocean, the bright
morning sunshine on the semicircular barrier of craggy clifib
surmounted by green swelling hills, and on the smooth,
wide sands, and the low rocks out at sea — ^looking, with
their clothing of weeds and moss, like little grass-grown
islands — and above all, on the brilliant, sparkling waves.
And then, the unspeakable purity and freshness of the air I
There was just enough heat to enhance the value of the
breeze, and just enough wind to keep the whole sea in
motion, to make the waves come bounding to the shore,
foaming and sparkling, as if wild with glee. Nothing else
was stirring — no living creature was visible besides myself.
My footsteps were the first to press the firm, unbroken
sands ; — nothing before had trampled them since last night's
flowing tide had obliterated the deepest marks of yesterday,
and left them fair and even, except where the subsiding
water had left behind it the traces of dimpled pools and little
running streams.
Refreshed, delighted, invigorated, I walked along, forget-
ting all my cares, feeling as if I had vvings to my feet, and
could go at least forty miles without fatigue, and experienc-
ing a sense of exhilaration to which I had been an entire
stranger ^ce the days of early youth. About half-past
six, however, the grooms began to come down to air their
nuMters'horses — first one, and then another, till there were
some dozen horses and five or six riders : but that need not
trouble me, for they would not come as far as the low rocks
which I was now approaching. When I had readied theee,
and walked over the moist, slippery sea-weed (at the risk of
floundering into one of the numerous pools of clear, salt
water that lay between them), to a little mossy promontory
vrith the sea splashing round it, I looked back again to see
who next was stirring. Still, there were only the early
grooms with their horses, and one gentleman with a little
dark speck of a dog running before him, and one water-oarl
AGNES GREY 547
ooming out of the town to get water for the baths. Id
another minute or two, the distant bathing machines would
begin to move, and then the elderly gentlemen of regular
habits and sober qnaker ladies woold be ooming to take their
salutary morning walks. Bnt howerer interestiiig snob a
scene might be, I oould not wait to witness it, for the son
and the sea so dazzled my eyes in that direction, that I ooold
but afford one glance ; and then I turned again to delight
myself with the sight and the sound of the eea dwhlng
against my promontory — with no prodigious force, for the
swell was broken by the tangled sea-weed and the unseen
rocks beneath ; otherwise I should soon have been deluged
with spray. But the tide was coming in ; the vrater was
rising ; the gulfs and lakes were filling ; the straits were
widening : it was time to seek some safer footing ; so I walked,
skipped, and stomblad back to the smooth, wide sands, and
reaolved to proceed to a certain bold projection in the oli & ,
and then return.
Presently, 1 heard a snuffling sound behind me and then
a dog came frisking and wriggling to my feet. It was my
own Snap — the little dark, wire-haired terrier I When I
spoke his name, he leapt up in my face and yelled for joy.
Almost as much dehghted as himself, I caught the little
creature in my arms, and kissed him repeatedly. But how
oame he to be there ? He could not have dropped from the
sky, or come all that way alone : it must be either his master,
the rat-catcher^ or somebody else that h & d brought him ; so,
repressing my extravagant caresses, and endeavouring to
reitress his likewise, I looked round, and beheld — Mr. Weston I
'Your dog remembers you well. Miss Qrey,'said he,
warmly grasping the hand I offered him without cleulj
knowing what I was about.'You rise early.'
'Not often so early as this,'I replied, with amazing oom-
poeure, omiaidering all the oiTcumstances of the case.
'How far do yon purpose to extend your walk 7'
'I wae thinking of returning — it must ba almost time, I
648 AONBB OBBT
He consulted his watoh — a gold one now — ^and told me it
was only five minutes past seven.
'But, doubtless, you have had a long enough walk,'said
he, turning towards the town, to which I now proceeded
leisurely to retrace my steps ; and he walked beside me.
'In what part of the town do you live ?'asked he.'I
never could discover.'
Never could discover? Had he endeavoured to do so
then? I told him the place of our abode. Heaskedhowwe
prospered in our affairs. I told him we were doing very
well — that we had had a considerable addition to our pupils
after the Christmas vacation, and expected a still further
increase at the close of this.
'You must be an accomplished instructor,'he observed.
'No, it is my mother,'I replied;'she manages things
so well, and is so active, and clever, and kind.'
'I should like to know your mother. Will you introduce
me to her some time, if I call ?'
'Yes, willingly.'
'And will you allow me the privilege of an old friend, of
looking in upon you now and then ?'
'Yes, if — I suppose so.'
This was a very fooUsh answer, but the truth was, I con •
sidered that I had no right to invite anyone to my mothei's
house without her knowledge ; and if I had said,'Yes, if my
mother does not object,'it would appear as if by his question
I understood more than was expected; so, suppcmng she
would not, I added,'I suppose so :'but of course I should
have said something more sensible and more polite, if I had
had my wits about me. We continued our walk for a minute
in silence ; which, however, was shortly relieved'(no small
relief to me) by Mr. Weston commenting upon the brightness
of the morning and the beauty of the bay, and then upon the
advantages A possessed over many other fashionable
places of resort.
'You don't ask what brings me to A ,'said he.'You
can't suppose I'm rich enough to come for my own pleasure.'
AGNES GBET 549
I heard you had left Horton/
*Yott didn't hear, then, that I had got the living of
— ?'
F was a village about two miles distant from
A-
'No/ said I ;'we live so completely out of the world,
even here, that news seldom reaches me through any quarter ;
except through the medium of the Oazette. But I
hope you like your new parish ; and that I may congratulate
you on the acquisition ?'
'I expect to like my parish better a year or two hence,
when I have worked certain reforms I have set my heart
upon — or, at least, progressed some steps towards such an
achievement. But you may congratulate me now ; for I iind
it very agreeable to h(we a parish all to myself, with nobody
to interfere with me — to thwart my plans or cripple my exer-
tions : and besides, I have a respectable house in a rather
pleasant neighbourhood, and three himdred pounds a year ;
and, in fact, I have nothing but solitude to complain of, and
nothing but a companion to wish for.'
He looked at me as he concluded : and the flash of his
dark eyes seemed to set my face on fire ; greatly to my own
discomfiture, for to evince confusion at such a juncture was
intolerable. I made an effort, therefore, to remedy the evil,
and disclaim all personal application of the remark by a
hasty, ill-expressed reply, to the effect that, if he waited till
he was well known in the neighbourhood, he might have
numerous opportunities for supplying his want among the
residents of F and its vicinity, or the visitors of A ,
if he required so ample a choice : not considering the com-
pliment implied by such an assertion, till his answer made
me aware of it.
'I am not so presumptuous as to believe that,'said he,
'though you tell it me; but if it were so, I am rather
particular in my notions of a companion for life, and perhaps
I might not find one to suit me among the ladies you
mention.'
5fi0 AGNES GBEY
'U joxx require perfection, yon never wilL'
'I do not — I have no right to require it^ ae being so far
from perfect myself/
Here the conversation was inteimpted by a water-cart
lumbering past us, for we were now come to the busy part of
the sands ; and, for the next eight or ten minutes, between
carts and horses, and asses, and men, there was little room
for social intercourse, till we had turned our backs upon the
sea, and begun to ascend the precipitous road leading into
the town. Here my companion offered me his arm, which I
accepted, though not with the intention of using it as a
support.
'You don't often come on to the sands, I think,'said he
'for I have walked there many times, both morning and
evening, since I came, and never seen you till now; and
several times, in passing through the town, too, I have looked
about for your school — but I did not think of the Boad ;
and once or twice I made inquiries, but without obtaining
the requisite information.'
When we had surmounted the acclivity, I was about to
withdraw my arm from his, but by a slight tightening of the
elbow was tacitly informed that such was not his will, and
accordingly desisted. Discoursing on different subjects, we
entered the town, and passed through several streets. I saw
that he was going out of his way to accompany me, notwith-
standing the long walk that was yet before him ; and, fearing
that he might be^ inconveniencing himself from motives of
poUteness, I observed — * I fear I am taking you out of your
way, Mr. Weston — I believe the road to F Ues quite in
another direction.'
'I'll leave you at the end of the next street,'said he.
'And when will you come to see mamma ?'
'To-morrow — God willing.'
The end of the next street was nearly the conclusion
of my journey. He stopped there, however, bid me
good-morning, and called Snap, who seemed a little
doubtful whether to follow his old mistress or his new
AONES^ GBET 661
maBter, but trotted away upon being snmmoned by the
latter.
'I won't offer to restore him to you, Miss Orey/ said Mr.
Weston, smiling,'because I like him.'
'Oh, I don't want him,'replied I,'now that he has a
good master ; I'm quite satisfied.'
'You take it for granted that I am a good one, then?'
The man and the dog departed, and I returned home, full
of gratitude to heaven for so much bliss, and praying that
my hopes might not again be crushed.
CHAPTEB XXV
OONOLUBIOM
'Wbll, Agne8 > you most not take snch long walks again
before breakfast/ said my mother, observing that I drank
an extra cup of coffee and ate nothing — ^pleading the heat of
the weather, and the fatigue of my long walk as an excuse.
I certainly did feel feverish and tired too.
'Tou always do things by extremes: now, if you had
taken a short walk every morning, and would continue to do
so, it would do you good.'
* Well, mamma, I will.'
'But this is worse than lying in bed or bending over your
books : you have quite put yourself into a fever.'
* I won't do it again,'said I.
I was racking my brains with thinking how to tell her
about Mr. Weston, for she must know he was coming to-
morrow. However, I waited till the breakfast things were
removed, and I was more calm and cool ; and then, having
sat down to my drawing, I began —'I met an old friend on
the sands to-day, mamma.'
'An old friend 1 Who could it be ?'
'Two old friends, indeed. One was a dog ;'and then I
reminded her of Snap, whose history I had recounted before,
and related the incident of his sudden appearance and
remarkable recognition ;'and the other,'continued I,'was
Mr. Weston, the curate of Horton.'
'Mr. Weston 1 I never heard of him before.'
'Yes, you have: I've mentioned him several times, I
believe : but you don't remember.'
AONES GBEY 568
Tve heard you speak of Mr. Hatfield.'
'Mr. Hatfield was the reotor, and Mr. Weston the
onrate : I used to mention him sometimes in contradistinction
to Mr. Hatfield, as being a more efficient clergyman. How-
ever, he was on the sands this morning with the dog — he
had bought it, I suppose, from the rat-catcher; and he
knew me as well as it did — ^probably through its means : and
I had a little conversation with him, in the course of which,
as he asked about our school, I was led to say something
about you, and your good management; and he said he
should like to know you, and asked if I would introduce
him t6 you, if he should take the liberty of calling to-monrow ;
so I said I would. Was I right ?'
* Of course. What kind of a man is he ?'
'A very respectaile man, I think : but you will see him
to-morrow. He is the new vicar of F , and as he has
only been there a few weeks, I suppose he has made no
friends yet, and wants a Uttle society.'
The morrow came. What a fever of anxiety and
expectation I was in from breakfast till noon — at which
time he made his appearance 1 Having introduced him
to my mother, I took my work to the window, and sat
down to await the result of the interview. They got on
extremely well together — greatly to my satisfaction, for I
had felt very anxious about what my mother would think of
him. He did not stay long that time : but when he rose to
take leave, she said she should be happy to see him, when-
ever he might find it convenient to call again ; and when he
was gone, I was gratified by hearing her say, —'Well 1 I
think he's a very sensible man. But why did you sit back
there, Agnes,'she added,'and talk so litde?'
'Because you talked so well, mamma, I thought you
required no assistance from me : and, besides, he was your
visitor, not mine.'
After that, he often called upon us — several times in the
course of a week. He generally addressed most of his
conversation to my mother : and no wonder, for she could
664 AONES OBET
oonverse. I almost envied the unfettered, yigoroag flaenoy
of her diflcourse, and the strong sense evinoed by everything
she said — and yet, I did not; for, though I oooadonally
regretted my own defioiencies for his sake, it gave me very
great pleasure to sit and hear the two beings I loved and
honoured above every one else in the world, disooursing
together so amioably, so wisely, and so well. I was not
always silent, however ; nor was I at all neglected. I was
quite as much noticed as I would wish to be : there was no
lack of kind words and kinder looks, no end of delicate
attentions, too fine and subtle to be grasped by words, and
therefore indescribable — but deeply felt at heart
Ceremony was quickly dropped between us : Mr. Weston
came as an expected guest, welcome at all times, and never
deranging the economy of our household aflhirs. He ev^n
called me'Agnes:'the name had been timidly spoken at
first, but, finding it gave no offence in any quarter, he seemed
greatly to prefer that appellation to'Miss Grey ;'and so did
I. How tedious and gloomy were those days in which he
did not come t And yet not miserable ; for I had still the
remembrance of the last visit and the hope of the next to
cheer me. But when two or three days passed without my
seeing him, I certainly felt very anxious — absurdly, un-
reasonably so ; for, of course, he had his own business and
the affairs of his parish to attend to. And I dreaded the
dose of the holidays, when rwy business also would begin,
and I should be sometimes unable to see him, and some-
times — ^when my mother was in the schoolroom — obliged to
be with him alone : a position I did not at all desire, in the
house ; though to meet him out of doors, and walk beside
him, had proved by no means disagreeable.
One evening, however, in the last week of the vacation^
he arrived — ^unexpectedly: for a heavy and protracted
thunder-shower during the afternoon had almost destroyed
my hopes of seeing him that day ; but now the storm was
over, and the sun was shining brightly.
'A beautiful evening, Mrs. Grey !'said he, as he enteved.
AONBS OBET 665
'Agnee, I want you to take a walk with me to * (he
named a oertain part of the coast — a bold hill on the luid
side, and towards the sea a steep precipice, from the summit
of which a glorious view is to be had).'The rain has laid
the dust, and cooled and cleared the air, and the prospect will
be magnificent. Will you come ?'
'Can I go, manmia ?'
'Yes ; to be sure.'
I went to get ready, and was down again in a few
minutes ; though, of course, I took a httle more pains with
my attire than if I had merely been going out on some
shoppmg expedition alone. The thunder-shower had certainly
had a most beneficial effect upon the weather, and the evening
was most delightful. Mr. Weston would have me to take his
arm ; he said little during our passage through the crowded
streets, but walked very fast, and appeared grave and
abstracted. I wondered what was the matter, and felt an
indefinite dread that something unpleasant was on his mind ; .
and vague surmises, concerning what it might be, troubled
me not a little, and made me grave and silent enough. But
these fantasies vanished upon reaching the quiet outskirts
of the town ; for as soon as we came within sight of the
venerable old church, and the hill, with the deep blue
sea beyond it, I found my companion was cheerful enough.
'I'm afraid I've been walking too fast for you, Agnes,'said
he :'in my impatience to be rid of the town, I forgot to
consult your convenience ; but now we'll walk as slowly as
you please. I see, by those light clouds in the west, there
will be a briUiant sunset, and we shall be in time to witness
its effect upon the sea, at the most moderate rate of
progression.'
When we had got about half-way up the hill, we fell into
silence again ; which, as usual, he was the first to break.
'My house is desolate yet, Miss Grey,'he smilingly
observed,'and I am acquainted now with all the ladies in
my parish, and several in this town too ; and many others I
know by sight and by report ; but not one of them will suit
