






^JPfi.
M
Si/^
NEW CENTURY LTBRAKY
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
AGNES GREY
and
POEMS
Uniform with this
Volume.
Bronte Sisters.
JANE EYRE.
SHIRLEY.
WILDFELL HALL,
etc.
VILLETTE.

" / wish I con Id hold you, " she continued bitter iy, ^^ till u < e
were both dead.''
Page 157.
h WUTHEMNG HEIGITS ,
\ AGNES GMEY
»
POEMS
1^'
k
HT w^
^H BMONtE SISTERS
THOMAS r^El-3::Wij5. soiH£ >'
m. M

WUTMEMNGr IffilGlTS
AGNES GMEY

^uthering Heights
Agnes Grey
afid
Foefns
By
The Bronte Sisters
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London^ Edinburgh^ and New York
igos
IVuthering Heights
Agnes Grey
and
Poems
By
The Bronte Sisters
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London, Edinburgh, and New York
19^5
'uthering Heights
Emily Bronte
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London^ Edinburgh^ and New York
1905
Xll CONTENTS.
The Night-Wind,
" Ay, there it is I It wakes tp:night "
Love and Friendship, ...
The Elder's Rebuke, ....
The Wanderer from the Fold, ....
Wg,ming and Reply, ...
L,ast Words, ...
The Lady to Her Guitar,
Tlie Two Children,
** Child of delight, with sun-bright hair,^^
The Visionary, ... ...
Encouragement, ... ...
Stanzas, ... ... ... . ...
* * No coward soul is mine, "
SELECTIONS FROM POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
Despondency, ... ... ...
A Prayer, ... " ...
In Memory of a HcLppy Day in February,
Confidence, ... ... ...'...
Lines Written from Home,
The Narrow Way, ... ... \\.
Domestic Pecue,'... ... ...
The Thred Guides, ...'...
" / hoped thai with the brave and strong ^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER I.
1801. — I HAVE just returned from a visit to my landlord
-the solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled with.
This is certainly a beautiful country. In all England
I do not believe that I could have fixed on a situation
so completely removed from the stir of society — a per-
fect misanthropist's heaven ; and Mr. Heathcliff and I
|are such a suitable pair to divide the desolation between
rOs. A capital fellow! He little imagined how my
-keart warmed towards him when I beheld his black
eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as I
rode up, and when his fingers sheltered themselves, with
I jealous resolution, still further in his waistcoat, as I
announced my name.
" Mr. Heathcliff ? " I said.
A nod was the answer.
" Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir. I do myself
the honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival,
to express the hope that I have not inconvenienced you
my perseverance in soliciting the occupation of
Tiunsjicrpss Grange. I heard yesterday you had had
some thoughts **
" Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir, " he interrupted,
vincing. " I should not allow any one to inconvenience
ne, if I could hinder it. Walk in ! "
The " walk in " was uttered with clos»^A \.^fc^^ ^cc^^
the sentiment, " Go to tYve devxc^r " ^m^x^ ^
2 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
gate over which he leant manifested Ho S5nnpathizin,
movement to the words ; and I think that circumstanc
determined me to accept the invitation. I felt interested
in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved tha ^
myself. ^
When he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing th^^
barrier, he did put out his hand to unchain it, and the:^
sullenly preceded me up the causeway, ealling,- as w-^
entered the court, " Joseph, take Mr. Lockwood's hors^^
and bring up some wine.'* I
" Here we have the whole estabUshment of domesticsj
I suppose,** was the reflection suggested by this com3|
pound order. " No wonder the grass grows up between
the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters. "
Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man — ^very old^
perhaps, though hale and sinewy. " The Lord help us ! "
he soliloquized in an undertone of peevish displeasure,
while relieving me of my horse, looking, meantime, in^
my face so sourly that I charitably conjecturied he must 1
have need of divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious j
ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected advent.'
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathcliff s |
dwelling, " wuthering " being a significant provincial ]
adjective, descriptive of the atmospheric tumult to which \
its station is exposed in stormy weather. Pure, bracing i
ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed. \
One may guess the power of the north wind blowings
over the edge by the excessive slant of a few stunted
firs at the end of the house, and by a range of gaunt
thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving
alms of the sun. Happily the architect had foresight
to build it strong. The narrow windows are deeply set
in the wall, and the corners defended with large jutting
stones.
Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a
quantity of grotesque carving lavished ovef the front,
and especially about the principal door ; above which,
among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shamdess
/iWe boys, I defer ted the date " 1500, " and the name
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3
" Hareton Eamshaw. " I would have made a few com-
ments, and requested a short history of the place from
the surly owner ; but his attitude at the door appeared
to demand my speedy entrance or complete departure,
and I had no desire to aggravate his impatience previous
,to inspecting the penetralium.
, One step brought us into the family sitting-room,
without any introductory lobby or passage. They call
it here *'the house ** pre-eminently. It includes kitchen
ind parlour generally. But, I believe, at Wuthering
'Heights the latchen is forced to retreat altogether into
mother quarter — at least I distinguished a chatter of
tongues and a clatter of culinary utensils deep within ;
and I observed no signs of roasting, boihng, or baking
about the huge fireplace, nor any glitter of copper
saucepans and tin cullenders on the walls. One end,
indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat from
ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver
jugs and tankards, towering row after row, on a vast
(^ dresser, to the very roof. The latter had never
been underdrawn ; its entire anatomy lay bare to an
inquiring eye, except where a frame of wood laden with
oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham
concealed it. Above the chimney were sundry villainous
old guns and a couple of horse-pistols, and, by way of
ornament, three gaudily painted canisters disposed along
Its ledge. The floor was of smooth, white stone ; the
i^hairs, high-backed, primitive structures painted green,
Mie or two heavy black ones lurking in the shade. In
in arch under the dresser reposed a huge liver-coloured
bitch pointer surrounded by a swarm of squealing
puppies, and other dogs haunted other recesses.
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing
extraordinary as belonging to a homely, northern farmer,
with a stubborn countenance and stalwart limbs set out
to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters. Such an
individual seated in his armchair, his mug of ale frothing
on the round table before him, is to be se^^ m ^\i^ cv^^^xsh^
of five or SIX miles among these YdWs, \i ^ons^ %^ " ^ " ^ *^
4 WUTHERING HEIGHTS*
right time after dinner. But Mr. Heathcliff forms
singular contrast to his abode and style of living. H
is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and mannei
a gentleman — that is, as much a gentleman as many
country squire ; rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not lool
ing amiss with his negligence, because he has an ere <
and handsome figure, and rather morose. PossiW;
some people might suspect him of a degree of unde
bred pride ; I have a sympathetic chord within thj
tells me it is nothing of the sort. I know, by instihc
his reserve springs from an aversion to showy display
of feeling, to manifestations of mutual kindliness. He'
love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it
species of impertinence to be loved or hated again. N <
I'm running on too fast. I bestow my own attribute
over liberally on him. Mr. HeathcUff may have entire]
dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the wa
when he meets a would-be acquaintance to those whic
actuate me. Let me hope my constitution is almo
Eeculiar. My dear mother used to say I should nev <
ave a comfortable home, and only last summer I prove
myself perfectly unworthy of one.
While enjo5dng a month of fine weather at the s«
coast, I was thrown into the company of a most fasc
nating creature — a real goddess in my eyes, as long j
she took no notice of me. I ** never told my love
vocally ; still, if looks have language, the merest idi <
might have guessed I was over head and ears. S]
understood me at last, and looked a return — the sweete
of all imaginable looks. And what did I do ? I confe
it with shame — shrank icily into myself, like a snai
at every glance retired colder and farther, till finally tl
poor innocent was led to doubt her own senses, an
overwhelmed with confusion at her supposed mistak
persuaded her mamma to decamp. By this curious tu:
of disposition I have gained the reputation of delibera
heartlessness ; how undeserved 1 a\oivft eaxv ^-^v^^^*^^^
/ took a seat at the end ot tYie Yie^iV^vsVoxifc o^^
tAat towards which my landlord adv^LtvceA. " ax\^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. S
up an interval of silence by attempting to caress the
canine mother, who had left her nursery, and was sneak-
ing wolfishly to the back of my legs, her Up curled up.
and her white teeth watering for a. snatch. My caress
provoked a long, guttural gnarl.
" You*d better let the dog alone,'* growled Mr. Heath-
cliff, in imison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a
punch of his foot. " She's not accustomed to be spoiled
— ^not kept for a pet. " Then, striding to a side door,
he shouted again, " Joseph ! "
Joseph mimibled indistinctly in the depths of the
cellar, but gave no intimation of ascending ; so his
master dived down to him, leaving me vis-it-vis th€
rufl & ajily bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all
my movements. Not anxious to come in contact witl:
their fangs, I sat still ; but, imagining they woulc
scarcely understand tacit insults, I unfortunately in-
dulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and
some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam thai
she suddenly broke into a fury and leapt on my knees
I flung her back, and hastened to interpose the tabl <
between us. This proceeding roused the whole hive
Half a dozen four-footed fiends, of various sizes anc
ages, issued from hidden dens to the common centre
I felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault
and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually aj
I could with the poker, I was constrained to demand
aloud, assistance from some of the household in re
estabUshing peace.
Mr. Heathchff and his nian climbed the cellar stepj
with vexatious phlegm. I don't think they moved on <
second faster, than usual, though, the hearth was ai
absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. Happily, ai
inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch. A. basifc'
dame, with tucked-up gown, bare aiin.^, ^xvA. ivx^-^^^
cheeks, rushed into the midst of us fto\m^vcv% ^ ^T
pan, and used that weapon and Yi«i \oiv:g^^ ^^
Purpose that the storm subsided magvcaWv . ^^ " ^^ ^'
6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
remained, heaving like a sea after a high wind, wh
master entered on the scene.
" What the devil is the matter ? " he asked, •
me in a manner that I could ill endure after t]
hospitable treatment.
'■'What the devil, indeed J " I muttered. " Th
of possessed swine could have had no worse spi:
them than those animals of yours, sir. Yoii mi|
well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers ! "
" They won't meddle with persons who touch not
he remarked, putting the bottle before me, and res
the displaced table. *'The dogs do right to be vi;
Take a glass of wine. "
" No, thank you. "
" Not bitten, are you ? "
'* If I had been, I would have set my signet <
biter. "
Heathcliff's countenance relaxed into a grin.
'* Come, come, " he said;'* you are flurried, Mr.
wood. Here, take a little wine. Guests are so e
ingly rare in this house that I and my dogs, I am'^
to own, hardly know how to receive them. Your 1
sir! "
I bowed arid returned ihe pledge, beginning t
ceive that it would be foolish to sit sulking for th
behaviour of a pack of curs ; besides, I felt \oi
yield the fellow further amusement at my expense
his humour took that turn. He — ^probably swa};
prudential consideration of the folly of offending i
tenant — relaxed a little in the laconic style of ch
off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs, and intrc
what he supposed would be a subject of interest to
a discourse on the advantages and disadvantages
present place of retirement. I found him very :
gent on the topics we touched ; and before I went
I was encouraged so far as to volunteer anothe
to-morrow. He evidently wished no repetition
intrusion. I shall go, notwithstanding. It is asl
jji^ how sociable J feel myself i compared with him.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER II.
'Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I had half
1 mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading
%irough heath and mud to Wuthering Heights. On
Homing up from dinner, however {N.B. — I dine between
Kwelve and one o'clock. The housekeeper, a matronly
Jady, taken as a fixture along with the house, could not,
Wk would not, comprehend my request that I might be
iierved at five), on mounting the stairs with this lazy
I intention, and stepping into the room, I saw a servant
I girl on her knees surroimded by brushes and coal-scuttles,
I and raising an infernal dust as she extinguished the
I flames with heaps of cinders. This spectacle drove me
back immediately. I took my hat, and after a four
miles'walk, arrived at HeathcUfiE's garden gate just in
time to escape the first feathery flakes of a snow-shower.
On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black
frost, and the air made me shiver through every Hmb.
Being unable to remove the chain, I jumped over, and
ramiing up the flagged causeway bordered with stragghng
gooseberry bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, tiD
my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.
" Wretched inmates ! " I ejaculated mentally, " you
deserve perpetual isolation from your species for your
churlish inhospitality. At least, I would not keep my
doors barred in the daytime. I don't care; I will get
in ! " So resolved, I grasped the latch and shook it
vehemently. Vinegar-faced Joseph projected his head
from a round window of the bam.
" What are ye for? " he shouted. " T'maister's
down i't'fowld. Go round by th'end of laith, if
ye went to spake to him. "
" Is there nobody inside to open the door ? " I hallooed
responsively.
" There's nobbut t'missis, and shoo'll not oppen't an
ye mak yer flaysome dins till neeght. "
" Why ? Cannot yon tell her who \ astv. f?^,'\^q5«:^ " ^'
8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Nor-ne me I Til hae no hend wi*t, " muttered th€
head, vanishing.
The snow began to drive thickly. I seized the handk
to essay another trial, when a young man without coat,
and shouldering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind,
He hailed me to follow him ; and, after marching througt
a wash-house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed,
pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge,
warm, cheerf lU apartment where I was formerly received.
It glowed dehghtfully in the radiance of an immense fire,
compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and near th€
table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased
to observe the " missis, " an individual whose existence
1 had never previously suspected. I bowed and waited,
thinking she would bid me take a seat. She looked a1
me, leaning back in her chair, and remained motionless
and mute.
*'Rough weather ! " I remarked. " Tm afraid, Mrs
Heathcliff, the door must bear the consequence of youi
servants'leisure attendance. I had hard work to make
them hear me. "
She never opened her mouth. I stared — ^she starec
also. At any rate, she kept her eyes on me in a cool
regardless manner, exceedingly embarrassing and dis
agreeable.
" Sit down, " said the young man gruffly.'* He'll be
in soon. "
I obeyed, and hemmed, and called the villain Juno
who deigned, at this second interview, to move the ex
treme tip of her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance
" A beautiful animal ! " I commenced again. *'Dc
you intend parting with the little ones, madam ? "
" They are not mine, " said the amiable hostess, mon
repellingly than Heathcliff himself could have replied.
" Ah, your favourites are among these ? " I continued
turning to an obscure cushion full of something like oats
" A strange choice of favourites ! " she observed scorn
Unluckilv it was a heat > of dead T2lVWv\s. \ \\e.TM»ft <
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
once more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating r
comment on the wildness of the-evening.
" You should not have come out,'* she said, risi
and reaching from the chimney-piece two of the paint
canisters.
. Her position before was sheltered from the Ught ; no
1 ihad a. distinct view of her whole figure and coun
nance. She was. slender, and apparently scarcely pj
girlhood ; : an admirable form, and the most exquis
fittle face that I have ever had the pleasure of beho!
ing ; small features, very fair ; flaxen ringlets, or rati
golden, hanging loose on her dehcate neck ; and ey
had they been agreeable in expression, that would ha
been irresistible. Fortunately for my susceptible hea
the only sentiment they evinced hovered between sec
and a kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to
detected there; The canisters were almost out of 1:
reach; I made a motion to aid her; She turned up
mc as a miser might turn if any one attempted to ass
him in counting his gold.
" I don't want your help,'* she snapped. " I can §
them for myself. "
" I beg your pardon, " I hastened to reply.
" Were you asked to tea ? " she demanded, tying
apron over her neat black frock, and standing with
spoonful of the leaf poised over the pot.
" I shall be glad to have a cup, " I answered.
" Were you asked ? " she repeated.
" No, " I said, half smiling. " You are the prop
person to ask me. "
She flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resum
her chair in a pet. Her forehead corrugated, and 1:
red under-Up pushed out, Hke a child's ready to cry.
Meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his pers
a decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting hii
self before the blaze, looked down on mie from the con
of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some mon
\ feud unavenged between us; I began to Ao\5^:iV h^V^'C
I be were a servant or not: His dress ^xld s^^OiOsv ^
lO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
both rude, entirely devoid of the superiority observ
in Mr. and Mrs. HeathchfE. His thick brown curls ^
rough and imcultivated, his whiskers encroached I
ishly over his cheeks, and his hands were embrov
Uke those of a common labourer. Still his bearing
free, almost haughty, and he showed none of a domes
assiduity in attending on the lady of the house. Ir
absence of clear proofs of his condition, I deemed it
to abstain from noticing his curious conduct ; and,
minutes afterwards, the entrance of HeathclifE relit
me, in some measure, from my uncomfortable state.
" You see, sir, I am come, according to prom
I exclaimed, assuming the cheerful ; " and I fear I :
be weather-boimd for half an hour, if you can afforc
shelter during that space. "
" Half an hour ? " he said, shaking the white fl
from his clothes. " I wonder you should select the t
of a snowstorm to ramble about in. Do you know
you run a risk of being lost in the marshes ? Pc
familiar with these moors often miss their road on
evenings ; and I can tell you there is no chance
change at present. "
''* Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, an
might stay at the Grange till morning. Could you s
me one ? "
" No, I could not. "
*'Oh, indeed ! Well, then, I must trust to my
sagacity. "
" Umph! "
** Are you going to mak th'tea ? " demanded 1
the shabby coat, shifting his ferocious gaze from n
the young lady.
" Is he to have any ? " she asked, appealing to He
cHff.
" Get it ready, will you ? " was the answer, uti
so savagely that I started. The tone in which the ¥
were said revealed a genuine bad nature. I no Ic
felt inclined to call Heathcliff a capital fellow. \
the preparations were finished, he invited me wi
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. II
" Now, sir, bring forward your chair. " And we all,
including the rustic youth, drew round the table, an
austere ^ence prevailing while we discussed our meal.
I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty
to make an effort to dispel it. They could not every
day sit so grim and taciturn ; and it was impossible,
however ill-tempered they mig^t. be, that the tmiversal
scowl they wore was their everyday countenance.
*'It is strange, " I began, in the interval of swallowing
one cup of tea and receiving another — " it is strange
how custom can mould our tastes and ideas. Many
could not imagine the existence of happiness in a Ufe
of such complete exile from the world as you spend,
Mr. HeathcHff ; yet Til venture to say that, surrounded
by your family, and with your amiable lady as the
presiding genius over your home and heart "
" My amiable lady ! " he interrupted, with an almost
diabolical sneer on his face. ** Where is she — my amiable
lady? "
" Mrs. Heathcliff, your wife, I mean. "
" Well, yes Oh, you would intimate that her spirit
has taken the post of ministering angel, and guiards the
fortunes of Wuthering Heights even when her body is
gone. Is that it ? "
Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct
it. I might have seen there was too great a disparity
between the ages of the parties to mike it Ukely that
they were man and wife. One was about forty — ^a period
of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delu-
sion of being married for love by girls. That dream is
reserved for the solace of our declining years. The other
did not look seventeen.
Then it flashed upon me-^ " The down at my elbow,
who is drinking his tea but of a basin and eating his
bread with unwashed hands, may be her husband —
Heathcliff, junior, of course. Here is the consequence
of being buried alive. She has thrown herself awai^
npoQ that boor from sheer ignorance \5Qa.\. Vjfc\.\«t Sss^
viduals existed ! A sad pity. 1 must \iew^ax^ \vS3W
12 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
cause her to regret her choice/'The last refl€
seem conceited. It was not. My neighbour
as bordering on repulsive. I knew, through €
that I was tolerably attractive.
" Mrs. HeathcHff is my daughter-in-law/'s£
cliff, corroborating my surmise. He turned, as
a pecuhar look in her direction— a look of hat:
he has a most perverse set of faicial muscles
not, like those of other people, interpret the h
his soul.
*'.Ah,. certainly; I see now. You are the
possessor of the beneficent fairy, " I remarke
to my neighbour.
Tlus was worse than before. The youth §
son, and clenched his fist, with every appeal
meditated assault. But he seemed to recolk
presently, and smothered the storm in a bn
muttered on my behalf, which, however, I too
to notice,
" Unhappy in your conjectures, sir,'* observe'
'* We neither of us have the privilege of owning
fairy. Her mate is dead. I said she was my
in-law ; therefore she must have married my s <
" And this young man is "
" Not my son, assuredly. "
Heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rathe
a jest to attribute the paternity of that bear t <
" My name is Hareton Earnshaw, " growled
*'and I'd counsel you to respect it I "
*'I've shown no disrespect, " was my reply
internally at the dignity with which he announc
He fixed his eye on me longer than I cared
the stare, for fear I might be tempted either
ears or render my hilarity audible. I began
mistakably out of place in that pleasant far
The dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame,
than neutralized, the glowing physical comf <
me ; and I resolved to be cautious how I venti
those rafters a third time.
im
f
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Ibe business of eating being concluded, and no one
: i«lteing a word of sociable conversation, I approached
nee, window to examine the weather. A sorrowful sight
saw — dark night coming down prematurely, and sky
atlt d hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocat-
316, snow,'
iJes " I don't think it possible for me to get home now
win thout a guide, " I could not help exclaiming. " The
2 ol ids will be buried already ; and, if they were bare,
jould scarcely distinguish a foot in advance. "
red " Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the bam
in{ ich. They'll be covered if left in the fold all night.
Id put a plank before them, " said Heathcliff.
" How must I do ? " I continued, with rising irritation,
Ihere was no reply to my question ; and on looking
> et fcnd I saw only Joseph bringing in a pail of porridge
" se, r the dogs, and Mrs. Heathchff leaning over the fire,
'ioi rcrting herself with burning a bimdle of matches which
d fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the
St. a-canister to its place. The former, when he had
od posited his burden, took a critical survey of the room,
sr- d in cracked tones grated out, —
" Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear
idleness iin war, when all on'em's goan out ! Bud
fch're a nowt, and it's no use talking ; yah'U niver mend
Idlyer ill ways, but goa raight to t'divil, like yer mother
bre ye ! "
; I imagined for a moment that this piece of eloquence
te addressed to me ; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped
Nrards the aged rascal with an intention of kicking
im out of the door. Mrs. Heathcliff, however, checked
le by her answer.
" You scandalous old hypocrite 1 " she repHed. ** Are
ou not afraid of being carried away bodily, whenever
on mention the devil's name ? I warn you to refrain
fern provoking me, or I'll ask your abduction as a
^af favour. Stop ! Look here, Joseph, " she con-
tnined, taking a long, dark book from a shell\ " I'Vi^^o^
fBu how far I've prog:^ressed in the blacV. ^1. \ ^^
I
14 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
soon be competent to make a clear house o:
red cow didn't die by chance, and your rheum
hardly be reckoned among providential visitati-
■* Oh, > wicked, wicked ! •'gasped the elder ;'
•Lord deliver us from evil 1 " .
" No, reprobate ; you are a castaway. Be <
hurt you seriously. I'll have you all modelle
and clay ; and the first who passes the limits'.
r^rn not say what he shall be done to, but 5
Go! Tm looking at you. "
iThe little witch put a mock malignity into
tifal «yes, and Joseph, trembling with sincei
hurried oiit, pirayihg and ejaculating ** wicke <
went.'■ I thought her: conduct must be promj
Species of dreary fun ; and, now that we wer
endeavoured to interest her in my distress.
" Mrs. HeatlwJiff, " I said earnestly, " you mi
me for troubling you. I presume, because, "
face, I'm sure you cannot help being good-hea:
jpoiht out some landmarks by which I may
way home. I have no more idea how to get t
you would have how to get to London. "
•'-'Take the road you came, " she answered, e
herself in a chair, with a candle, and the long I
before her* " It is brief advice, but as s6und as I «
" Then; if you'hear of me being discovered
bog or a pit full of snow, your conscience won'
that it is partly your fault ? "
V How so ? I cannot escort you. They wo
me go to the end of the garden wall. "
^* Youf I should be sorry to ask you to
threshold for my convenience on such a night,
" I want you to tell rtie my way, not to skow il
to persuade Mr; Heathcliff to give me a guide. "
''.'Who ? There is himself, Eamshaw, Zillal
and I. Which would you have ? "
" Are there no bovs at the farm ? "
" No; those are all. "
'* Tbeny it follows that I iam compelled to sta
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" That you may settle with your host. I have nothing
do with it. "
" I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more
ish journeys on these hills, " cried Heathdiff's stem
Bice from the kitchen- entrance. " As to staying here,
don't keep accommodations for visitors. You must
are a bed with Hareton or Joseph, if you do. "
" I can sleep on a chair in this room, " I replied.
" No, no ! A stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor,
will not suit me to permit any one the range of the
ace while I am off guard ! " said the unmannerly wretch.
With this insult, my patience was at an end. I
tared an expression of disgust, and pushed past him
to the yard, running against Eamshaw in my haste.
i was so dark that I coiild not see the means of exit ;
ad, as I wandered round, I heard another specimen of
• civil behaviour amongst each other. At first the
Dong man appeared about to befriend me.
" I'll go with him as far as the park, " he said.
" You'll go with him to hell ! " exclaimed his master,
whatever relation he bore* ** And who is to look
fter the horses, eh ? "
" A man's life is of more consequence than one even-
Bg's neglect of the horses. Somebody must go, " mur-
mred Mrs. Heathcliff, more kindly than I expected.
Not at your command ! " retorted Hareton. *• If
Du set store on him, you'd better be quiet. "
Then I hope his ghost will haunt you ; and I hope
Heathcliff will never get another tenant till the
irange is a ruin ! " she answered sharply.
" Hearken, hearken ; shoo's cursing on'em ! " muttered
oseph, towards whom I had been steering.
He sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light
lof a lantern, which I seized unceremoniously, and call-
ling out that I would send it back on the morrow, rushed
I to the nearest postern.
" Maister, maister, he's staling f lanthem 1 " shouted
►the ancient, pursuing my retreat. *'Hey, Gnasbsx'w
Hey, dig 1 Hey, Wolf, holld him, lioM\i\m\ "
'|6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
On opening the little door, two hairy monsters f
at my throat, bearing me down and extinguishing
light; while a mingled guffaw from Heathcliff 2
Hareton put the copestorie on my rage and humiliati
Fortimately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretch
their paws and yawning, and flourishing their tails, tl
devouring " me alivTB ; but they would suffer no res
rection, and I was forced to lie till their malign;
masters pleased to deliver me. Then, hatless and in
bling with wrath, I ordered the miscreants to let
out — on their peril to keep me one minute longer — yi
several incoherent threats of retaliation that, inti
indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of King LeJar.
. The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copi <
bleeding at the nose; and still Hcathcliff laughed, s
still I scolded. I don't know what would have c
eluded the scene had there not been one person
hand rather more rational than myself and more bene
lent than my entertainer: This was Zillah, .the st <
housewife, who at length issued forth to inquire into
nature of the uproar. She thought that some of th
had been laying violent hands on me ; and, not dar
to attack her master, she turned her vocal artill
against the younger sicoundrel:
" Well, Mr. Earnshaw, " she cried, " I wonder wl
you'll have agait next ! Are we going to murder, f
on our very door-stones ? I see this house will ne
do for me. Look at t'poor lad; he's fair choking! —'Wis
wisht ! you munn't go on so. Come in, and. I'll c
that. There now, hold ye still. "
With these words she suddenly splashed a piint of
water down my neck, and pulled me into the kitch
Mr. Heathcliff followed, his accidental merriment exj
ing quickly in his habitual moroseness.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy and faint, and tl
compelled perforce to accept lodgings under his re
He told Zillah to give me a glass of brandy, and tl
" ^assed on to the inner room ; while she condoled w
? on my sorry predicament, and having Ob^re < }
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I
^^Ifiiders, whereby I was somewhat revived, ushered me t
CHAPTER III.
(hile leading the way upstairs, she recommended the
'^^ should hide the candle, and not make a noise, for he
^ kaster had an odd notion about the chamber she woul^
sui
la
•ei
> 10l
inn
ller
" It me in, and never let anybody lodge there willingl)
?J asked the reason. She did not know, she answerec
^r'« had only lived there a year or two ; and thiey ha
-^^ \ many queer goings on, she could not begin to b
urious.
Too stupefied to be curious myself, I fastened m
^ " KMT and glanced round for the bed. The whole fum:
^^\ me consisted of a chair, a clothes-press, and a larg
^ * Bk case, with squares cut out near the top resemblin
toi
^ Dach windows. Having approached this structure,
loked inside, and perceived it to be a singular sort c
, Id-fashioned couch, very conveniently designed to obv
^^ te the necessity for every member of the family havin
loom to himself. In fact, it formed a Uttle closet
lad the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served a
V table. I sHd back the panelled sides, got in with m
\ ? SJit, pulled them together again, and felt secure agains
^^ le vigilance of Heathcliff and every one else.
The ledge where I placed my candle had a few mi
ed books piled up in one comer, and it was co's
1 with writing scratched on the paint. This writing
ever, was nothing but a name repeated in all kind
characters, large and small — Catherine Earnshaw, hei
d there varied to Catherine Heaihcliffy and then agai
[to Catherine Linton.
In vapid listlessness I leant my head against th
^?|inndow, and continued spelhng over Catherine Earr
^ Isliaw — ^Heathchff — Linton, till my eyes closed. Br
^ " Ithey had not rested five minutes when a glare of whit
Jlrtters started from the dark as vivid as sp^oXx^'s* — ^
^mk Bwanned with Catherines ; and towsVtve; T^vv:^^^^
lUSl
1 8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
dispel the obtrusive ndme, I discovered my cane
reclining on one of the antique volumes, and pei
the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin. I
it ofif, and, very ill at ease under the influence
and Hngering nausea, sat up and spread open the
tome on my knee. It was a Testament, in lea
and smelling dreadfully musty. A fly-leaf bore
scription, " Catherine Earashaw, her book, " and
some quarter of a century back. I shut it, ar
up another, and another, tiU I ha4 examined all.
ine's library was select, and its* state of dilap
proved it to have been well used, though not alt
for a legitimate purpose. Scarcely one chapt
escaped a pen-and^nk commentary — at least,
peardnce of one — covering every morsel of blai
the printer had left. Some were detached sen
other parts .took the form of a regular diary, s <
in an unformed, childish hand. At the top of a
page < quite a treasure, probably, when first ligh
I was'grieatiy amused to behold an exceUent cai
of my friend Jbseph, rudely yet powerfully sk
An immediate interest kindled within me for 1
known'Cathjjrine, and I b^an forthwith to dedp
faded hieroglyphics.
** An awful Sunday ! " commenced the paragri
neath. " I wish my father were back again. ]
is a detestable substitute — ^his conduct to Heat]
atrocious — H. and I ore going to rebel — ^we tc
initiatory Step this evening,
" All day had been flooding with rain. W <
not go to church, so Joseph must needs get up
gregation in the garret ; and while Hindley 2
wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire-
anything but reading their Bibles, V\\ answer i
Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy plough-bo
commanded to take our prayer-books and moun
were ranged in a row on a sack of com, groani
shivering, and hoping that Joseph would shiver.
tAat he irij^hi give us a short hotmly for Ms ow
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Ii,
I vain idea ! The service lasted precisely three hours ;
yet my brother had the face to exclaim, when he
'us descending,'What ! done already ?'On Sunday
lings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not
ke much noise ; now a mere titter is sufficient to
nd us into comers !
1 "'You'forget you have a master here/ says the
J frant. * I'll demolish the first who puts me out of
mper !'I insist on perfect sobriety and silence. O
2 jyl was that you? — Frances darling, pull his hair
c I you go by. I heard him snap his fingers.'Frances
3 oiled his hair heartily, and then went and seated her-
1 a on her husband's knee ; and there they were, like
i m > babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour-—
1 Bolish palaver that we should be ashamed of. We
2 lade ourselves as snug as our means allowed in the
J ich of the dresser. I had just fastened our pinafores
: Dgether, and hung them up for a curtain, when in
M Dmes Joseph on an errand from the stables. He tears
D Dwn my handiwork, boxes my ears, and croaks, —
H " * T'maister nobbut just buried, and Sabbath no
u ered, und t'sound o't'gospel still i'yer lugs, and ye
\i irr be laiking ! Shame on ye ! Sit ye down, ill childer ;
here's good books eneugh if ye'll read'em. Sit ye
i Bwn, and think o'yer sowls !'
i " Saying this, he compelled us so to square our posi-
ons that we might receive from the far-off fiire a dull
t ly to show us the text of the lumber he thrust upon
8. I could not bear the employment. I took my
J ingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-
i ennel, vowing I hated a good book. Heathcliff kicked
j s to the same place. Then there was a hubbub !
Di " * Maister Hindley !'shouted our chaplain. * Maister,
om hitker ! Miss Cathy's riven th'back off " Th'
net o'Salvation, " vm. Heathcliff's pawsed his fit into
'first part o'*'T Brooad Way to Destruction ! " It's
'■ flaysome that ye let'em go on this gait. Ech ! th'
J man wad ha'laced'em properly ; b\i\.\v'&'^ ^ci?ixs.\'
'HiuOey hurried up from his para^se ou Wi^\\fiaxSi
20 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and seizing one of us by the collar, and the: other b
arm, hurled both into the back kitchen, where, J(
asseverated, * owd Nick'would fetch us as sure ;
were living ; and, so gomforted, we each sought a sep
nook to await his advent. I reached this book, i
pot of ink from a shelf, and pushed the house doq:
to give me Hght, and I have got the time on with w
for twenty minutes ; but my companion is impa
and proposes that we should appropriate the <
woman's cloak, and have a scamper oi^ the . n
under its shelter: . A pleasant suggestion ; and
if the surly old man come in, he may believe his pro]
verified. We cannot be damper or colder in thie
than we are here. "
* * * * ♦
I suppose Catherine fulfilled her piroject, for the
sentence took up another subject. She waxed la
paose.
** How little did I dream that, Hindley would
make me cry so ! " she wrote. " My head aches,
cannot keep it on the pillow ; ; and still I can't give
Poor-Heathcliff 1 Hindley calk him a vagabond
won't let him sit with us, nor eat with us any r
-and he says he and I must not play together,
threatens to turn him out of the house if we brea
orders. He has been blaming our father (how i
he ?) for treating H. too liberallyj and swears h <
reduce him to his right place-. "
» * * ♦ *
I began to nod drowsily over the dim page. M
wandered from manuscript to print. I saw a red
mented title— " Seventy Times Seyen, and the Ft
the Seventy-First. A Pious Discourse delivered b
Reverend Jabes Branderham, in .the Chapel p < ,Gin
den Sough. " And while I was half consciously w;oi
my brain to guess what Jabes Branderham would
'his subject, I sank back in bed and fell asleep,
the effects of bad tea and bad temper ! Wha
iJd it he that made me pass such a .teirible |u^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
't remember another that I can at all compare \v > .
since I was capable of suffering.
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensibl
my locality, I thought it was morning, and I ha
out on my way home, with Joseph for a guide. Th
lay yards deep in oiir road ; and as we floundered
" iti*, my companion wearied me with constant reproachc
tia at I had not brought a pilgrim's staff, telling me tha
Lair ould never get into the house without one, and boasi
loa ly flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which I undei
th^ood to be so denominated. For a moment I considere
absurd that I should need such a weapon to gai
4lmittance into my own residence. Then a new ide
ashed across me, I was not going there. We wei
mmeying to hear the famous Jabes Branderham preac
ne Dm the text, " Seventy Times Seven, " and eithe
Keph the preacher or I had committed the *'Fin
: the Seventy-First, " and were to ue pubhcly expose
6^vd excommunicated.
We came to the chapel. I have passed it really i
o^'Ay walks twice or thrice. It hes in a hoUcw betwee
ai 10 hills — an elevated hollow, near a swamp, whos
'^ aty moisture is said to answer all the purposes (
ai iibalming on the few corpses deposited there. Th
k i of has been kept whole hitherto ; but as the clergj
Ian an's stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, an
^^ house with two rooms, threatening speedily to dete:
line into one, no clergyman will undertake the duti(
( pastor, especially as it is currently reported that h
'ej Bdc would rather let him starve than increase tt
3nii ring by one penny from their own pockets. Howeve
my dream, Jabes had a full and attentive congregj
, tod hf preached — good God ! what a sermoi
ided into four hundred and ninety parts, each full
to an ordinary address from the pulpit, and eac
_ a separate sin ! Where he searched for then
l^camiot tell. He had his private manner of interpretin
pfarase, and it seemed necessary the Yjio^Jaex ^w:
aifforen^ ^ns on every occasion. TYvev'^^'^^ ^^
)he
n
ne
chi
ev
till
o\
10]
•St I
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
arious character — odd transgressions that ]
'Zlined previously.
'Oh, how weary I grew ! How I writhed, and y*
and liodded, and revived ! . ; How I pinched, and j
myself, and rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sa
again, and nudged Joseph to inform me if he won
have done ! I was condemned to hear all out. I
he reached the " First of the Seventy^ First. " /.
crisis,- a sudden inspiration descended on me.
mo^''ed to rise and denounce Jabes Branderham
sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon.
" Sir, " I exclaimed, " sitting here within thes
walls, at one stretch, I have endured and forgiv
four hundred and ninety heads of your discourse. S
times seven times have I plucked up my hat an <
about to depart; seventy times seven times hal
Erepiosterously forced me to i*esume my seat. Tl
undred and ninety-first is too much.— Fellow-m
have at him ! Drag him down, and crush him to
that the place which knows him may know h
morel "
" Thou art the man ! " cried Jabes, after a ?
pause, leaning over his cushion. ** Seventy times
times didst thou gapingly contort thy visage ; s <
times seven did I take counsel with my soid. L
is human weakness; this also may be absolved ;
'First of the Seventy-First'is come. Brethren, e
upon him the judgment written. Such honour h;
His saints I "
With that concluding word, the whole assemb
alting their pilgrim's staves, rushed round me in a
and I, having no weapon to: raise in self-defence
menced grappling with Joseph, my nearest and
ferocious assailant, for his. In the confluence
multitude several clubs crossed ; blows aimed
fell on other sconces. Presently - the whole cha]
sounded with rappings and counter-rappings. * *
I man's hand was against his neighbour; and Bi
f A^tm, unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his ;
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 23
f shower of loud taps on the boards of the pulpit, which
onded so smartly that at last, to my unspeakable
ef, they woke me. And what was it that had sug-
Bted the tremendous tumult ? What had played
s's part in the row ? Merely the branch of a fir-
that touched my lattice, as the blast wailed by,
]^ rattled its dry cones against the panes ! I listened
ttbtingly an instant, detected the disturber, then
SI med and dozed, and dreamt again — if possible, still
tl wre disagreeably than before.
This time 1 remembered I was lying in the oak ck > set,
id I heard distinctly the gusty wind and the driving
t the snow. I heard also the fir-bough repeat its
n asing soimd, and ascribed it to the right cause. But
e aimoyed me so much that I resolved to silence it, if
\^ Bssible ; and I thought I rose and endeavoured to
ihasp the casement. The hook was soldered into the
■y] aple — a circumstance observed by me when awake, but
DC igotten. " I must stop it, nevertheless 1 " I muttered,
1 locking iny knuckles through the glass, and stretching
I arm out to seize the importunate branch ; instead of
n rich, my fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-
n Id hand 1 The intense horror of nightmare came over
Qj It I tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung
± ) it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed, " Let me in
n Jet me in ! "'* Who are you ? " I asked, struggling,
u teanwhile, to disengage myself. " Catherine Linton, "
a ijreplied shiveringly. (Why did I think of Linton ? I
|id read Eamshaw twenty times for Linton.) " I'm
eiBme home. I'd lost my way on the moor. " As it
dv oke, I discerned, obscurely, a child's face looking
oi rough the window. Terror made me cruel ; and
no! lufing it useless to attempt shaking the creature off,
til pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and rubbed
m t to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the
rt ridothes. Still it wailed, *'Let me in ! " and main-
/cf ^ffled its tenacious gripe, almost maddening me with
dd »r.'^How can I ? " I said at length. " \je\. vvie %^
.1 jfi-jwi want'me to let you in ! " Tlie fing^exs T^'a. " 5t^\
li#jw
24 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly pile
books up in a p5n:amid against it, and stopped m;
to exclude the lamentable prayer. I seemed to!
them closed above a quarter of an hour ; yet the ii
I listened again, there was the doleful cry moanin
" Begone 1 " I shouted ; " I'll never let you in — ;
you beg for twenty years. "'* It is twenty y
mourned the Voice — " twenty years. I've been s
for twenty years 1 " Thereat began a feeble scra;i
outside, and the pile of books moved as if thrust for
I tried to jump up, but could not stir a limb, a
yelled aloud in a frenzy of fright. To my confus
discovered the yell was not ideal. Hasty foo
approached my chamber door ; somebody pus!
open : with a vigorous hand, and a light glim:
through the squares at the top of the bed. I sat shi
ing yet, and wiping the perspiration from my fon
The intruder appeared to hesitate, and mutter
himself. At last he said in a half -whisper, plain]
expecting an answer, " Is any one here ? " I
sidered it best to confess my presence, for I knew t
cliff's accents, and feared he might search furth?
kept quiet. With this intention I turned and c
the panels. I shall not soon forget the effect my
produced:
Heathcliff stood near the. entrance, in his sh'
trousers, with a candle dripping over his finge
his face as white as the wall behind him. T
creak of the oak startled him like an electric
The light leaped from his hold to a distance
feet, and his agitation was so extreme that
hardly pick it up.
" It is only your guest, sir, " I called out, d*
spare him the humiliation of exposing his
furthers " I had the misfortune to scream in
owing to a frightful nightmare. I'm sorry I
you. "
" Oh, God confound you, Mr. Lockwood I
/Vi^re at the " commenced my host, settin/
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2?
chair, because he found it impossible to hold it
y. " And who showed you up into this room ? "
Dntinued, crushing his nails into his palms and
ing his teeth to subdue the maxillary convulsions,
lo was it? Tve a good niind to turn them oiit
e house this mornent. "
t was your servant Zillah, " I replied, flinging
If on to the floor, and rapidly resuming triy gar-
s. ** I should not care if you did, Mr. Heathdiff 5
ichly deserves it. I suppose that she wanted to
Luother proof that the place was haunted, at my
ise. Well, it is — swarming with ghosts and gdb-
You have reason in shutting it up, I assure you.
ne will thank you for a doze in such a den ! "
Vhat do you mean ? " asked Heathcliff, " land what
/ou doing ? Lie down and finish out the night,
you are here ; but, for Heaven's sake, don't repeal
horrid noise. Nothing could excuse it, unless yp4
having your throat cut ! " - -
i the little fiend had got in at the window, shfe
ibly would have strangled me I " I return^.'** I'm
roing to endure the persecutions of your hospitable
> tors again. Was not the Reverend Jabes Brahder-
akin to you on the mother's side ? And that .minx,
erine Linton, or Eamshaw, or however she was
i, she must have been a changeling — ^wicked little
I She told me she had been walking the €arth
J twenty years — a just punishment for. hef mortal
jgressions, I've no doubt. "
arcely were these words uttered, when I recollected
issociation of HeathcUff's with Catherine's name in
> ook, which had completely sKpped from my memory,
hus awakened. I blushed at my inconsideration ;
without showing further consciousness of the offence,
stened to add, " The triith is, sir, I passed the first
of the night in " Here I stopped afresh. I was
it to say " perusing those old volumes " — IVnksv S^-
d have revealed my knowledge oi \ > cvKvt ^^rc^^Xfc'^ -^
as their printed contents; so, cotTecMvc\% xk > 3*s»« &
26 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
I Went on, " In spelling over the name scratched
that window-ledge — a monotonous occupation, cal <
lated to set me asleep, like counting, or "
.'* What can you mean by talking in this way to me
thundered HeathclifE, with savage vehemence. " H
— how dare you, under my roof ?---God, he's inad
speak so ! " And he struck his forehead with rage;
I did not know whether to resent this langus
or pursue my explanation ; but he seemed so pow
fully affected that I took pity and proceeded with ]
dreams,, affirming I had never, heard the appellation
" Catherine Linton " before, but reading it often o]
produced an impr^sion which personified itself whei
had no longer my imagination under control. Hea
difE gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed
I spoke, finally sitting down almost concealed behi
it. I guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepi
breathing, that he struggled to vanquish an excess
violent emotion. Not Hking to show him that I h
heard the conflict, I continued my toilet rather noi?'
looked at my watch, and soliloquized on the lengtl
the night. Not three o'clock yet ! I could have ta
oath it had been six. Time stagnates here. We n
surely have retired to rest at eight ! "
" Alwaj^ at nine in winter^ and rise at four, " said
host, suppressing a groan, and, as I fancied, by
motion of his arm's shadow, dashing a tear from
eyes. " Mr. Lockwood/'he added, " you may go i
my room. You'll only be in the way, coming do
stairs so early ; and your childish outcry has sent si
to the devH f or me. " ! i-
" And for me too, " I replied. " I'll walk in the y
till dayhght, and then I'll be off ; and you need
dread a repetition of my intrusion. I'm now qi
cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country
town. A sensible man ought to find sufficient compj
in himself. " > ,.
" DeJi^rhtful company ! " muttered Heathclifi. " Tj
; r^e candle, and go where you pleiasfe. I shall join 5
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2?
1 a chair, because he found it impossible to hold it
eady. " And who showed you up into this room ? "
; continued, crushing his nails into his palms and
inding his teeth to subdue the maxillary convulsions.
Who was it ? I've a good mind to turn them oiit
ithe house this moment. "
" It was your servant Zillah/'I replied, flinging
bself on to the floor, and rapidly resuming niy gar-
Ints. " I should riot care if you did, Mr, Heathdiff ;
e richly deserves it. I suppose that she wanted to
rt another proof that the place was haunted, at my
rinse. Well, it is — swarming with ghosts and gdb-
I You have reason in shutting it up, I assure you.
Id one will thank you for a doze in such a den 1 "
: " What do you mean ? " asked Heathcliff, ** and what
k you doing ? Lie down and finish out the night,
hce you are here ; but, for Heaven's sake, don't repeal
lat horrid noise. Nothing could excuse it, unless yo4
lire having your throat cut ! "
'■'If the little fiend had got in at the window, she
robably would have strangled me ! " I returned. ** I'm
It going to endure the persecutions of your hospitable
Itestors again. Was not the Reverend Jabes Branded-
Urn akin to you on the mother's side ? And that minx,
atherine Linton, or Eamshaw, or however she was
IDed, she must have been a changeling — ^wicked little
fall She told me she had been walking the earth
lose twenty years — a just punishment for hef mortal
ansgressions, I've no doubt.'*
Scarcely were these words uttered, when I recollected
le association of HeathcHff's with Catherine's name in
le book, which had completely slipped from my memory,
Q thus awakened. I blushed at my inconsideration ;
at without showing further consciousness of the offence,
hastened to add, " The truth is, sir, I passed the first
•rt of the night in " Here I stopped afresh. I was
bout to say " perusing those old volumes " — then it
iould have revealed my knowledge oi t\wevx'wc\X.\ & ts. 7is >
W as'their printed contents ; so, cotxee\!vc\% xwvj'Si^
28 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
three-inch pipe with tobacco. My presence ii
turn was evidently esteemed a piece of impi;
shameful for remark. He silently applied ti
his lips, folded his arms, and puffed away,
enjoy the luxury unannoyed ; and after sucki
last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, 1:
and departed as solenmly as he came.
A more elastic footstep entered next ; a:
opened- my mouth for a " good-morning, " bu
again, the salutation unachieved, for Hareton
was performing his orisons, sotto voce^ in a serie
directed against every object he touched,
rummaged a corner for a spade or shovel to di
the driitSv; He glanced over the back of t
dilating his nostrils, and thought as Uttle of e
civilities with me as with my companion tl
guessed by his preparations that egress wai
and leaving! my hard couch, made a movemen
him; He noticed this^ and thrust at an inner
the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticu!
that there was the place where I must go if
my locality.
It opened into the house, where the fem
already astir'— Zillah urging flakes of flam
chimney with a colossal bellows; and Mrs. ]
kneehng on the hearth, reading a book by the
blaze. She held her hand interposed betweei
nace*heat and her eyes, and seemed absorb
occupation, desisting from it only to chide tJ
for covering her with sparks, or to push aw;
now and then, that snoozled its nose over-forw
her face. I was surprised to see Heathcliff t
He stood by the fire, his back towards me, jus
a stormy scene to poor Zillah, who ever and a
rupted her labour to pluck up the comer of .
and heave an indignant groan.
*'And you, you worthless — " he broke out as
*»^niing to his daughter-in-law, and employing ;
inless as duck or sheep, but generally re
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29
a dash ; " There you are at your idle tricks
in ! The rest of them do earn their bread : you live
my charity ! Put your trash away, and find some-
ig to do; You shall pay me for the plague of having
eternally in my sight. Do you hear^ damnable
3? "
I'll put my trash away, because you can make me
refuse, " answered the young lady, closing her book
throwing it on a chair: " But I'll not do anything,
agh you should swear your tongue out, except what
ease » "
[eathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to
ifer distance; obviously acquainted with its weight,
zing no desire to be -entertained by a eat-arid-dog
ibat, I stepped forward briskly, as if eager to par-
B the warmth of the hearth, and iimdcerit- of any
wledge of the interrupted dispute; = Each had enough
arum to suspend further hostilities. HeathcliflE placed
fists, out of temptation, in his pockets ; Mrs. Heath-
: curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off, where
kept her word by playing the part of a statue during
remainder of my stay* That was not long. I de-
ed joining their breakfast, and at the first gleam of
m took an opportunity of escaping into the free air,
1 clear, and still, and cold as impalpable ice,
ly landlord hallooed for me to stop ere I reached the
tom of the garden, and offered to accompany me
!)S8 the moor. It was well he did, for the whole
-back was one billowy, white ocean, the swells and
5 not indicating corresponding ri^s'and depressions
the ground. Many pits, at least,'Were filled to a
si, and entire ranges of mounds, the refuse of the
irries, blotted from the chart which my yesterday's
Ik left pictured in my mind. I had remarked on one
5 of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, a
J of upright stones, continued through the whole
gth of the barren. These were erected and daubed
h lime on purpose to serve as guides* \tv \.\ifc ^^axly
1 also when a /aiJj like the preseivt, cotAoxoAr^ N
30 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
deep swam])S on either hand with the firmer p & ,th ; but
excepting a dirty dot pointing up here and there, a]
traces of their existence had vanished, and my com
panion found it necessary to warn me frequently t
steer to the right or left, wheil I imagined I was follow
ing correctly the windings of the road.
We exchanged Uttle conversation^ and he halted a
the entrance of Thrushcross Park, saying I could mak
no error there. Our adieus were limited to a hast;
boWj and then I pushed forward, trusting to my owi
resources, for the porter's lodge is imtenanted as yet
The distance frojn the gate to the Grange is two miles
I believe I managed to make it four, what with losinj
myself among the trees, and sinking up to the neck ii
«now — SL predicament which only those who have ex
perienced it can appreciate. At any rate, whateve
were my wauderingSj the clock chimed twelve as
entered the- house, and that gave exactly an hour fo
every mile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.
My himian fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome
me, Exclaiming tumultuously they had completely givei
me up; Everybody conjectured that I perished las
night, and they were wondering how they must se
about the search for my remains. I bid them be quiet
now that they saw me returned, and, benumbed to m;
very heart, I dragged upstairs ; whence, after puttinj
on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or fort;
minutes, to restore the animal heat, I. am adjourned h
my study, feeble as a kitten — almost too much so t
enjoy the cheerful fire and .smoking coffee which thi
servant has prepared for my refreshment.
CHAPTER IV.
What vain weather-cocks we are ! I, who had deter
mined to hold myself independent of all social inter
course, and thanked my stars that at length I ha <
lighted on a spot where it was next to vnv^t^fi.tka.bl < a — 1
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3 1
wretch, after maintaining till dusk a struggle with
spirits and solitude, was finally compelled to strike
ly colours ; and under pretence of gaining information
oncerning the necessities of my establishment, I desired
Crs. Dean, when she brought in supper, to sit down
rhile I ate it, hoping sincerely she would prove a regular
pssip, and either rouse me to animation or lull me to
eep by her talk.
*'You have lived here a considerable time, " I com-
aenced— ** did you not say sixteen years ? "
** Eighteen, sir. I came, when the mistress was
Harried, to wait on her ; after she died, the master
etained me for his housekeeper/'
" Indeed. "
There ensued a pause. She was not a gossip, I feared
-unless about her own affairs, and those could hardly
iiterest me. However, having studied for an interval,
tnih a fist on either knee, and a cloud of meditation
over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculated, —
" Ah, times are greatly chatrged since then ! "
" Yes, " I remarked ; ** you've seen a good many
alterations, I suppose ? "
** I have ; and troubles too, " she said,
'* Oh, I'll turn the talk on my landlord's family I "
I thought to myself. ** A good subject to start ! And
that pretty girl-widow^ I should like to know her history
—whether she be a native of the country, or, as is more
probable, an exotic that the surly indigena will not
recognize for kin* " With this intention I asked Mrs,
Dean why Heathcliff let Thrushcross Grange, and pre-
ferred living in a situation and residence so much in-
ferior. ** Is he not rich enough to keep the estate in
good order ? " I inquired.
I " Rich, sir ! " she returned. ** He has nobody knows
what money, and every year it increases. Yes, yes ; he's
rich enough to live in a finer house than tlais*.'e > > aX.\s!^'5
very near — close-handed ; and il \ie \vad t^xa'^isvv \r > *^
to Thrushcross Grange, as soon, as " he \ve^.^d. o\: ^ %'
^enaoi he could not have bome to is:ass \3aft OclWis:
J2 WUTHERJNG HEIGHTS.
ffettiDg a fewj hundr-eds iqaore. It is strange pec
pe so greedy when they, are alone in the world
" He bad a son^ it seemsj ?/'
** Yes, he had one. He is dead. "
" And. that young lady, Mrs, Heathcliff, i§ his
-.: .''Yes/'.,.
.;'V Where did. she conie from originally? "
" Why, sir, she is my late master's daughter,
JJnton waSi h^ maiden name. I nursed her, p
I did wish Mr, IJeathcliff . would remove here,
we ,might have been together again, "
'^'lA^at! Catherine Linton ? . " I exclaim <
ished. But a minute's ueflectipn .convinced .:
not my ghostly Catherine. *'Then, " I cojitin
IHjed^essor's name was tinton ? "
" Itw^/- :
. -'And who is. that Earnshaw— Hareton ]Ej
who: lives with Mr. HeatheUff ? Are they rela
** No ; he i$ the .late Mv^, Linton's nephew/'
'* The young lady's cousin, the^n ? "
..*:*:Ye$;.. ,and her hushand'was her cousi|i
on the mother's side, the other on the fat)
Heathcliff married Mr. Linton's sister. "
" I'^Ii'See the^'house at Wuthmng Heights h
skaw': carved ;oyer the front door. Are tb <
faradly?/'. ..'...
> • " Very old,^ ^ir ;.;iand',Haretou is. the last oi
our Miss Cathy id of .us — I mean of the Lintoj
you been . to Wutberiiig Heights ? I beg p
asking ; but Ishould like to hear how she is. "
: " Mrs. Heathchff ? She looked very well,
hiandsome ; . yet, I. think, not very happy. "
*'Oh dear, I don't wonder ! And how di(
the master?'!
*! A rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean. Is nc
character ? " ;
/* Rough as a saw-edge > and hard as whinst
less you meddle with him the better. "
'*iJe must have had some ups and downs
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 33
lim such a churl: Do you know anything of his
s a cuckoo's, sir; I know all about it — except
he was bom, and who were his parents, and how
his money at first. And Hareton has been cast
:e an unfledged dunnock ! The unfortunate lad
3nly one in all this parish that does not guess how
been cheated/'
ell, Mrs: Dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell
nething of my neighbours: I feel I shall not rest
> to bedj so be good enough to sit and chat an
ij certainlyj sir ! I'll just fetch a little sewing,
len ril sit as long as you please: But you've
cold — I saw you shivering; and you must have
:ruel to drive it out/'
worthy woman bustled off, and I crouched nearer
e. My head felt hot, and the rest of me chill ;
/erj I was excited, almost to a pitch of foolish-
:hrough my nerves and brain: This caused me
, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as'I am
f serious effects from the incidents of'to-day and
lay. She returned presently, bringing a smoking
and a basket of work ; and having placed the
on the hob, drew in her seat; evidently pleased
me so companionable:
^ « « # «
re I came to live here, she commenced— waiting
ther invitation to her story — I was almost always
thering Heights, because my mother had nursed
ndley Eamshaw (that was Hareton's father), and
ised to plajdng with the children. I ran errands,
:d helped to make hay, and hung about the farm,
for anything that anybody would set me to. One
mmer morning — it was die beginning of harvest,
mber — Mr. Eamshaw, the old master, came down*-
dressed for a journey; and after he had told
what was to be done during ttv^ da^j , \^fc ^saxift.^
\d]ey, and Cathy, and me — ^lot \ saJe essJ6?c^^ ^
34 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
porridge with them — and he said^ speaking to his soc
" Now, my bonny man, Tm going to Liverpool today
what shall I bring you? You may choose what yo
like. Only let it be little, for I shall walk there aife^
back. Sixty miles each way — that is a long spell !*^
Hindley named a fiddle, and then he asked Miss Cathji^
She was hardly six years old, but she could ride an^
horse in the stable, and she chose a whip. He did ni*^
forget me, for he had a kind heart, though he was rath
severe sometimes. He promised to bring me a pocket
of apples and pears ; and then he kissed his childre
said good-bye, and set off.
It seemed a long while to us all — the three days of'.
absence — and often did little Cathy ask when he wot
be home. Mrs. Eamshaw expected him by supper-tin
on the third evening, and she put the meal off hour aft
hour. There were no signs: of his coming, however, anc
at. last the children got tired of running down to
gate to look. Then it grew dark. She would have
them to bed, but they begged sadly to be allowed
stay up; and just about eleven o'clock the door-late
was raised quietly, and in stepped the master. He threurf
himself into a chair, . laughing and groaning, and bi < ^
them all stand off, for he was nearly killed. He woulffl
not have such another walk for the three kingdoms. > i
'* And at the end of it, to be flighted to death ! *'bet
said, opening his greatcoat, which he held bimdled up^
in his arms. " See here, wife ! I was never io beateir
with anything in my hfe ; but you must e'en take it ail
a gift of God, though it's as dark almost as if it earner
from the devil. "
We crowded round, and over Miss Cathy's head I ha < t
a peep at a dirty, ragged, black-haired chUd, big enough
both to walk and talk. Indeed, its face looked older,
than Catherine's; yet when it was set on its feet it
only stared round, and repeated oyer and over again
some gibberish that: nobody could understand. I was
frightened, and Mrs. Eamshaw was ready to fling it out
o/ doors. She did Qy up, asking how he could fashion
IWUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3S
to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had
heir own bairns to feed and fend for ; what he meant
do with it, and whether he were mad. The master
lied to explain the matter ; but he w£ls really half dead
ith fatigue, and all that I could make out, amongst
tr scolding, was a tale of his seeing it starving, and
Duseless, and as good as dumb, in the streets of Liver-
ool, where he picked it up and inquired for its owner,
lot a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said ; and his
oney and time being both limited, he thought it better
) take it home with him at once, than run into vain
Kpenses there, because he was determined he would
lot leave it as he found it. Well, the conclusion was
hat my mistress grumbled herself calm ; and Mr. Eam-
haw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and
Bt it sleep with the children.
Hindley and Cathy contented themselves with look-
ng and listening tiU peace was restored ; then both
)egan searching their father's pockets for the presents
he had promised them. The former was a boy of four-
teen, but when he drew out what had been a fiddle,
cnished to morsels in the greatcoat, he blubbered aloud ;
ind Cathy, when she learned the master had lost her
whip in attending on the stranjger, showed her humour
by grinning and spitting at the stupid little things eam-
ii^ for her pains a sound blow from her father to teach
her cleaner manners. They entirely refused to have it
m bed with them, or even in their room ; and I had no
more sense, so I put it on the landing of the stairs,
hoping it might be gone on the morrow. By chance, or
else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to Mr. Eam-
shaw's door, and there he foimd it on quitting his chamber.
Inquiries were made as to how it got there. I was
obliged to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice
and inhumanity was sent out of the house.
This was Heathcliff's first introduction to the family.
On coming back a few days afterwards (for I did not
consider my banishment perpetual) I iowxvd 1\nk^''taSs.
christened . liiiM " Heathcliii.*- It was tYifc xi^xcNfc ^S^'
36 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
son who died in childhood, and it has served him eve
since, both for Christian and surname. Miss Cathy an <
he were now very thick ; but Hindley hated him, and
to say the truth, I did the same ; and we plagued aiw
went on with him : shamefully, for I wasn't reasonabl
enough to feel my- injustice, and the mistress never pu
in a word on his behalf when she saw him wronged. .
He seemed a sulleni, patiept child, hardened, perhape
to ill-treatment. He would stand Hindley's blows with
out winking or shedding a tear, and my pinches movet
him only to draw in a. breath .and open his eyes, as j
he had hurt himself by accident and nobody was h
blame. This endurance made old Eamshaw furion
when he discovered his $on persecuting the poor, father
less child, as he called him. He , took to Heathclii
strangely, believing all he said (for that matter, he sail
precious little, and^ generally the truth), and petting hin
up far above Cathy, who was too mischievous and way
ward for a favourite.
So from the very beginning he bred bad feeling ii
the house.; and at Mrs. Eamshaw's death, which hap
pened in > less than two years after, the yoimg maste
had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rathes
than a friend, and Heathcliff as a usurper of his parent*!
affections and his privileges, and he grew bitter witl
brooding over these injuries. I sympathized a while
but when the children fell ill of the measles, and I ha(
•to tend them, and take on me the cares of a woman a
once, I changed my ideas, Heathcliff was dangeroush
sick ; and while he lay at the worst he would have m'
•constantly by his pillow. I suppose he felt I did a goo <
deal for him, and he hadn't wit to guess that I wa
compelled to- do it. However, I will say this — he wa
the quietest child that ever nurse watched over, Tb
difference between him and the others forced me to b
less partial. Cathy and her brother harassed me terribly
/fe was as uncomplaining as a lamb, though hardness
not gentleness, made him give little trouble.
He g^ot through, and the doctor affirmed, it was in j
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 37
jreat measure owing to me, and praised me for my care.
[ was vain of his commendations, and softened towards
he being by whose means I earned them; and thus
Endley lost his last ally. Still I couldn't dote on
Jeathcliff, and I wondered often what my master saw
» admire so much in the sullen boy, who never, to my
TBcollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of grati-
nde. He was not insolent to his benefactor, he was
imply insensible, though knowing perfectly the hold he
ad on his heart, and conscious he had only to speak
nd all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes.
\s an instance, I remember Mr^ Eamshaw once bought
.couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads
ach one; Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon
ell lame, and when he discovered it, he said to Hindley, —
" You must exchange horses with me — I don't like
nine ; and if you won't, I shall tell your father of the
hree thrashings you've given me this week, and show
im my arm, which is black to the shoulder. " Hindley
ut out his tongue and cuffed him over the ears* " You'd
etter do it at once, " he persisted, escaping to the porch
Jiey were in the stable). " You will have to ; and if I
)eak of these blows, you'll get them again with interest. "
Off, dog ! " cried Hindley, threatening him with an
on weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. ** Throw
, " he replied, standing still, " and then I'll tell how you
> asted that you would turn me out of doors as soon
i he died, and see whether he will not turn you out
rectly* " Hiiidley threw it, hitting him on the breast,
id down he fell, but staggered up immediately, breath-
5S and white ; and had I not prevented it, he would
ive gone just so to the master, and'got full revenge
/ letting his condition plead for him, intimating who
id caused it*'* Take tny cblt, gipsy, then ! " said
> ung Earnshaw. " And I pray that he may break
)ur neck. Take him, and be damned, you beggarly
terloper ; and wheedle my father put of all he has*
nly afterwards show him what you are, imp of Satatv.
nd take that ! I hope he'll kick a\it -^oxrc \^x?I\t«.\'^
38 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Heathcliff had gone to loose the beast and shift it tfi
his own stall.! He was passing behind it, when Hindlej
finished his speech by knocking him under its feet, anS
without stopping to examine, whether his hopes wer|
fulfilled, ran away as fast as he could. I was surprised
to witness how coolly thechijd gathered himself up, and
went on with his intention — exchanging saddles and aH
and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to overcome
the iqualm which the violent blow occasioned, before hj
Entered the house. I persuaded him easily to let mi
lay the blame of his bruises on the horse* He minde|
little what tale was tpld, since he had what he wanted.
He complained so seldom, indeed, of such stirs as thesey
that I really. thought him not vindictive. I was deceived
completely, as you will hear* .
Cfl[APTER V.
In the course of time Mr. Eatnshaw began to fail. H€
had been active and healthy, yet his strength left him
suddenly ; and when he was confiined to the chimney-
comer he grew grievously irritable* A nothing vexed
him, and suspected slights of his authority nearly thre^i
him into fits* This was. especially to be remarked ii
any one attempted to impose upon or domineer ovei
his favourite. He was painfully jealous lest a word
should be spoken amiss to him, . seeming to have got
into his head the notion that, because he. liked Heath-
cliff, all hated and longed to do him an ill turn* It
was a disadvantage to the lad, for the kinder among
us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured
his partiality ; and that'hutnouring was rich nourish-
ment to the child's pride and black tempers. Still it
became in a manner'necessary: Twice oi; thrice Hindley's
manifestation of scorn, while his father was near, roused
the old man to a fury. He seized his stick to strike
bim, and shook with rage that he could not do it.
At last our .curate (we had a curate then, wbo. made
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 39
tbe Kving answer by teaching the little Lintons and
Eamshaws and farming his bit of land himself) advised
that the yoimg man should be sent to college ; and Mr.
Eamshaw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for he
ittid, " Hindley was nought, and would never thrive as
[riiere he wandered. "
I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt
me to think the master should be made uncomfortable
I by his own good deed. I fancied the discontent of age
md disease arose from his family disagreements, as he
Vould have it that it did. Really, you know, sir, it was
k his sinking frame. We might have got on tolerably,
notwithsfcinding, but for two people — Miss Cathy and
Joseph the servant. You saw him, I dare say, up
yonder. He was, and is yet most Hkely, the wearisomest
self-righteous Plmrisee that ever ransacked a Bible to
rake the promises to himself and fling the curses to his
neighbours. By his knack of sermonizing and pious
discoursing he contrived to make a great impression on
Mr. Eamshaw ; and the more feeble the master became,
the more influence he gained. He was relentless in
worrying him about his soul's concerns, and about ruling
his children rigidly. He encouraged him to regard
Hindley as a reprobate; and night after night he
regularly grumbled out a long string of talShs against
HeathcUf! and Catherine, alway minding to flatter Barn-
Shaw's weakness by heaping the heaviest blame on the
latter.
Certainly she had ways with her such as I never saw
a child take up before ; and she put all of us past our
patience fifty times and oftener in a day. From the
hour she came downstairs till the hour she went to bed
we had not a minute's security that she wouldn't be in
mischief. ,Her spirits were always at high- water mark,
her tongue always going — singing, laughing, and plaguing
everybody who would not do the same. A wild, wicked
slip she was ; but she had the bonniest eye, the sweetest
smile, and hghtest foot in the parish. And, after all, I
believe she meant no harm ; for when once ^ < ^ xra^ ^^^
40 WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
cry in good earnest, it seldom happened that she woul
not keep you company, and obhge you to be quiet, tha
you mi^ht comfort her. She was much too fondc
Heathchff , The greatest punishment we could inver
for her was to. keep'her separate from him ; yet she gic
chided more than any of us on his. account. In pla
she liked exceedingly to act the little mistress, using he
hands freely, and commanding her companions. Sh
did so to me, but I would not bear shopping and ordq
ing, and so I let her know.
Now, Mr. Eamshaw did not understand jokes froi
his children. He had always been strict and grave wit
them ; and Catherine, on hier part, had no idea wh
her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailin
condition than he was in his prime. His peevish n
proofs wakened in her a naughty delight to provoh
him. She was never so happy as when we were a
scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bole
saucy look and her ready words, turning Joseph's n
lieious curses into ridicule, baiting me, and doing jus
wiat her father hated most— showing how her pretende
insolence, which he thought real, had more power ovc
Heathchff than his kindness; how the boy would d
her bidding in anything, and his only when it suited hi
own inclination. After behaving as badly as possib]
all day, she sometimes came fondling to make it up s
night.'* Nay, ■ Gathy, " the old man would say, **
cannot love thee ; thou'rt worse than thy brother. G
say thy prayers, child, and ask God's pardon. I doul
thy mother and I must rue that we ever reared thee I
That made her cry at first ; and then being repulse
continually hardened her, and she laughed if I to)
her to say she was sorry for her faults, and beg to
forgiven.
But the hour came at la & t that ended Mr. Eamshav
troubles on earth. He died quietly in his chair o
October evening, seated by the fireside. A high wii
blustered round the house and roared in the chimne
It sounded wild and stomiy; yet it was not cold, ai
•0'
a]
It;
•hi
)E
tl
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 4I
we were all together — I, a little removed from the hearth,
busy at my knitting, and Joseph reading his Bible neai
the table (for the servants generally sat in the house
then, after their work was done). Miss Cathy had been
Bck, and that made her still. She leant against hei
father's knee, and Heathcliff was lying on the floor with
Ks head in her lap. I remember the master, before he
icU into a doze, stroking her bonily hair — ^it pleased him
rarely to see her gentle — and sayings " Why canst thou
Bot alwa}^ be a good lass, Cathy ? " - . And she : turned
ier face up to his, and laughed, and answered, " Why
cannot you always be a good man, father ? " But as
soon as she saw him vexed agaiif, she kissed his hand,
and said she would sing him to sleep. She began singing
very low, till :his fingers dropped from hers, and his
head sank on his breast. Then I told her to hush, and
not stir, for fear she should wake him. We all kept as
mute as mice a full half -hour, and should have done so
longer, only Joseph, having finished his chapter, got up
j and said that he must rouse the master for prayers and
] bed. He stepped forward, and called him by name, and
'touched his shoulder ; but he would not move, so he
took the candle and looked at him. I thought there
was something wrong as he set down. the light, and
Seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to
" frame upstairs, and make little din ; they might pray
alone that evening — ^he had sunMnut to .do.!'
" I shall bid father good-night -first, " said Catherine,
putting her arms round his neck before we could hinder
her. The poor thing discov^ered her loss directly. She
screamed out, " Oh, he's dead, HeathclifE-rrhe's dead 1 *'
And they both set up a heartbreaking cry...
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter ; but
Joseph asked what we coidd be thinking of to roar
m that way over a saint in heaven. He told me to
put on my cloak and nm to Gimmerton for the doctor
and the parson. I could not guess the use that either
would be of then. However, I went throui^lv hww^ •^b.^
rain, and brought one, the doctoT, Wc\l -wJOa. TCifc\ *^
42 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
other said be would come in the morning. Leavini
Joseph to explain matters, I ran to the children's room
Their door was ajar. I saw they had never laid down
though it was past midnight ; but they were calmer
and did not need me to Console them. The little soul
were comforting each other with better thoughts thai
I could have hit on. No parson in the world ever pic
tured heaven so beautifully as they did in their inno
cent talk ; and, while I sobbed and Ustened, I couk
not help wishing we were all there safe together.
.'CHAPTER VI.
Mr. Hindley came home to the funeral ; and — a thinj
that sdnazed us, and set the neighbours gossiping righ
and left— he brought a wife with him. What she wai
and where she was bom, he never informed us. Prob
ably she had neither money nor name to recoramen <
her, or be would scarcely have kept the union from hi
father*
She was not one that woiild have disturbed the hous
much on her own account. Every object she saw, th
moment she crossed the threshold, appeared to deUgh
her, and every circumistance that took place about hei
except the preparing for'the'l)urial, and the presenc
of the mourners. I thought she was half silly, f roE
her behaviour while that went on. She rail into he
chamber, and made me come with her, though I should
have been dressing the children ; and there she sa
shivering and clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly
" Are they gone yet ? " Then she began describiui
with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on he
to see black, and started, and trembled, and at las
fell a-weeping; and when I asked what was the mattei
answered she didn't know, but she felt so afraid c
djdng. I imagined her as little likely to die as mysell
She was rath & T thin, but young and fresh-complexionec
^nd her eyes sparkled as bright as ^^cnvox^'^ \ ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 43
remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made her
breathe very quick ; that the least sudden noise set her
all in a quiver, and that she coughed troublesomely
sometimes ; but I knew nothing of what these symptoms
Krtended, and had no impulse to sympathize with her.
e don't in general take to foreigners here, Mr. Lock-
wod, unless they take to us first.
Young Eamshaw was altered considerably in the three
fears of his absence. He had grown sparer, and lost his
tolour, and spoke and dressed quite differently ; and
the very day of his return he told Joseph and me
we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back
kitchen, and leave the house for him. Indeed, he would
have carpeted and papered a small spare room for a
parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at the
riiite floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter
dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space
there was to move about in where they usually sat,
that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort, and so
dropped the intention.
I She expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among
her new acquaintance ; and she prattled io Catherine,
and kissed her, and ran about with her, and gave her
quantities of presents, at the beginning. Her affection
tired very soon, however; and when she grew peevish
Hindley became tyrannical. A^ few words from her,
evincing a dislike to HeathclifE, were enough to rouse
m him all his old hatred of the boy. He drove him
from their company to the servants, deprived him of
the instructions of the curate, and insisted that he
should labour out of doors instead, compelling him to
do so as hard as any other lad on the farm.
Heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first,
because Cathy taught him what she learned, and worked
w: played with him in the fields. They both promised
lair to grow up as rude as savages', the y^^^*^ xsNas^uet
being entirely negligent how they behscve^ ^tA > «tiai
key did, so they kept cleax of him. lie wo^^X^ tlo\- e^i^
ive seen after their going to church, on ?svH\^'a-^^'» ^
44 WUTH^RING liEIGHTS.
Joseph ?md I3ae curate reprimanded his carelessness
they; absented: themselves ; and that reminded h
order Jffeathdiff a flogging, and Catherine a fast
dinner or,: supper; But it was one of their chief a:
raents to run away, to the moOrs in the morning
remain there all day, and the after punishment g;
mere thing to laugh at,. The ( curate might set as
chapters; asi hje pleasied for Catherine to get by'.
and Joseph might thrash Heathcliff till his arm a(
they forgot everything the. minute thejy were to^
again — at least, the niinute they had cbntrived
naughty plan of revenge.v.And many a time Fve
to myself to watch them grpwing more reckless
and I not daring to speak a syllable, for fear of'.
the small power I still retained oyer; the unfri <
creatures. . One Sunday evjening it chanced that
were banished from the sitting-room for making a :
QT a light offence of the kind j: and when I went t«
them to supper I could ^scover them nowJbere,
searched the house, above and below, and the: yar <
{^tables. They were invisible; and at last Hindi
a passion.) told: u6 to bolt the doors, and swore n(
should I let them in that night. The household we
bed ^. and I,. too anxious. to lie down, opened my 1
and put my head out to hearken, though it n
determined to admit them. in spite of the prohit
should) they. return. In. a while I distinguished
coming up the road,: and the light of a lantern glimi
through the gate. I threw a shawl over my head
ran to prevent them from waking Mr. Eamsha
knocking.'There -was Heathcliff, by himself. It
me a start to see him alone.
** Where is Miss Catherine ? ^'I cried huMedly.
accident, I hope ? " " At Thrushcross Grange, " h
swered; " and I would have been there; too, but
had not the manners to ask me to stay. " " Well
will catch it ! " I said ; " youll never be conter
you're sent about your btismesa.'Waa.V m > i > a &
led you wandering ta Thrushcrosa Gx^3a%fe'^*'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
5s wV: ffle get off my wet clothes, and I'll tell you all at
him : it, Nelly/'he repHed. I bid him beware of rousing
It fro: master ; and whHe he undressed, and I waited to put
amua tte candle, he continued, " Cathy'and I escaped f:
ng an itfae wash-house to have a ramble at Hberty, and get
grew % glimpse of the Grange Hghts, we thought we wc
3 mar jnst go and see whether the Lintons passed their Sun
hear evenings standing shivering in comers, while their fai
ached ind mother sat eating and drinking, and singing
DgetlJkaghing, and burning their eyes out before the fire,
i soAou think they do ? Or reading sermons, and being c
e en HiLzed by thar man-servant, and set to learn a coli
daii U Scripture names, if they don't answer properlj
losii V Probably not, " I responded. *'They are good c
iendi dren, no doubt, and don't deserve the treatment
t th( receive for your bad conduct. " *'Don't cant, Nel
nois he said ; ** nonsense ! We ran from the top of
to a Heights to the park without stopping, Catherine o
'. V detely beaten in the race, because she was baref
rd an You'll have to seek for her shoes in the bog to-mon
^ley i Wc crept through a broken hedge, groped our way
obod the path, and planted ourselves on a flower-plot ui
ent t the drawing-room window. The light came from the:
lattic They had not put up the shutters, and the curtains \
ainec only half closed. Both of us were able to look in
> itioE standing on the basement and clinging to the le(
step and we saw — ah ! it was beautiful — a splendid p
tier© carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs
ani tables, and a pure white ceiling bordered by golc
''h shower of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from
avj centre, and shimmering with little soft tapers. Old
and Mrs. Linton were not there ; Edgar and his si
> rJ had it entirely to themselves. Shouldn't they have I
ar..| happy ? We should have thought ourselves in heav
hevj And now, guess what your good children were do
►'ojj Isabella — I believe she is eleven, a yeat ^jcs\m\%^x ^
till Cathy— Jaj^ screaming at the farthei exidi o\ > Ct\fc ^
" /cy sbrieking as if witches were running ted-Yvot xvee^
y Aen Edgar stood on the hearth weeping, «^^^*^
46 WUTHERING HEIGHTS;
in the middle of the table sat a httle dog, shaking its.
paw and yelping ; which, from their mtitual accusations;'
we understood they had nearly pulled in two between,
them. The idiots ! That was their pleasure — to quarrel
who should hold a heap of warm hair, and each begin to
tvy because'both, after strugghng to get it, refused tO'
take it. We laughed outright at the petted things. We
did despise them. When would you catch me wishing
to have what Catherine wanted, or find us by oiu^elves;
seeking entertainment in yelling, and sobbing, and rolling
on the ground, divided by the whole room? I'd not
exchange for a thousand lives my condition here iov
Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grange— not if I might
have the privilege of flinging Joseph oS the highest gable,
and painting the house-front with Hindley's blood ! "
'* Hush, hush ! " I interrupted. ** StiU j^u have not
told me, Heathcliff, how Catherine is left behind/'
■ • I told you we laughed, " he answered, ** The Lintons
heard us, and with one accord they shot like arrow3
to the door. There was silence, and then a cry, -Q
mamma, mamma ! papa ! mamma, come here,
papa, oh !'They really did howl out something in
that way. We made frightful noises to terrify them still
more, and then we dropped off the ledge because some-
body was drawing the bars, and we felt we had better
flee, I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging her on,
when all at once she fell down, * Run, Heathcliff, run !'
she whispered, * They have let the bulL-dog loose, and
he holds me !'The devil had seized her ankle, Nelly ;
1 heard his abominable snorting. She did not yell out —
no ! she would have scorned to do it if she had been
spitted on the horns of a mad cow, I did, though, I
vociferated curses enough to annihilate any fiend in
Christendom ; and I got a stone and thrust it between
his jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down his
throat. A beast of a servant came up with a lantern
at last, shouting,.'Keep fast, Skulker, keep fast 1'He
changed his note, however, when lie saw Sto3[)!kef ?i %^xj\^.
^e dog was throttled off, his Too^'b pxitp\^ Voxv^
WUTHERING HEIGHT & 47
hanging half a foot out of his mouth, and his pendent
lips streaming with bloody slaver. The man took Cathy
q). She was sick — not from fear, I*m certain, but from
jain. He carried her in. I followed, grumbling execra-
tions and vengeance. * What prey, Robert ?'hallooed
Linton from the entrance.'Skulker has caught a Httle
girl, sir,'he repHed ; * and there's a lad here,'he added,
making a clutch at me,'who looks an out-and-outer.
Very fike, the robbers were for putting them through
flie window to open the doors to the gang after all were
asleep, that they might murder us at their ease. — Hold
your tongue, you foul-mouthed thief, you ! You shall go
to the ^JIows for this. — Mr. Linton, sir, don't lay by
your gun.*'No, no, Robert,* said the c^d fooL'The
rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day* They
thought to have me cleverly. Come in j I'll furnish
them a reception.— There, John, fasten the chain. — Give
Skulker some water, Jenny* To beard a magistrate in
his stronghold, and on the Sabbath, too! Where will
their insolence stop ?— Oh, my dear Mary, look here!
Don't be afraid ; it is J}ut'a boy, yet the villain scowli
so plainly in his face 5 would it not be a kindness to the
country to hang him at once, before he shows his nature
in acts as well as features ? * He pulled me under the
chandeher, and Mrs. Linton placed her spectacles on her
nose and raised her hands in horror* The cowardly
children crept nearer also, Isabella lining,'Frightfial
thing ! Put him in the cellar, papa* He's exactly like
the son of the fortune-teller that stole my taroe pheasant
—Isn*t he, Edgar ?'
'* While they examined me Cathy came round* She
heard the last speech, and laughed* Edgar Linton, after,
an inquisitive stare, collected sufficient wit to recognize
her. They see us at church, you know, though we seldom
meet them elsewhere. * That's Miss Eamshaw 1'he
whispered to his mother;'and look hoYC SkssK & sx. ^2as
hitten her — how her foot bleeds I * " ^
'''Miss Eamshaw I Nonsense \'ccvefi. " " ^^ ^^^
Miss Eamshaw scouring the cownti^ W-^iicv ^ ^'
48 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
And yet, my dear, the child is in mourning* Sure]
is. And she may be lamed for life.'
" * What culpable carelessness in her brother !'
claimed Mr. Linton, turning from me to Cathej
'I've understood from Shielders'" (that was the cur
sir) *''that he lets her grow up in absolute heathen
But who is this ? Where did she pick up this c
panion ? Oho ! I declare he is that strange acquisi
my late neighbour made in his journey to Liver
— a Uttle Lascar, or an American or Spanish castawa
"'A wicked boy, at all events,'remarked the
lady,'and quite unfit for a decent house ! Did
notice his language, Linton ? I'm shocked that
children should have heard if
" I recommenced cursing — don't be angry, Nel
and so Robert was ordered to take me off. I refi
to go without Cathy* He dragged me into the gar <
pushed the lantern into my haiid, assured me that
Eamshaw should be informed of my behaviour,
bidding me march directly, secured the door ag
Hie curtains were still looped up at one comer, ar
resumed my station as spy * because, if Catherine
wished to return, I intended shattering their great §
panes to a million of fragments, unless they let her
She sat on the sofa quietly. Mrs^ Linton took off
gray cloak of the dairymaid which we had borrowed
our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating ^
her, I suppose. She was a young lady, and they ir
a distinctictti between her treatment and nline. 1
the woman-servant brought a basin of warm water,
washed her feet j and Mr. Linton mixed a tumble
negus, and Isabella emptied a plateful of cakes into
lap, and Edgar stood gaping at a distance* Afterwj
they dried and combed her beautiful hair, and gave
a pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled her to
fire ; and I left her, as merry as she could be, divi <
/ler food between the little dog and Skulker, whose i
sAe pinched as be ate, and toidfiivg z. s^tV cA ^
U2 the vacant blue eyes of the Tumtota — ^ ^axcv x^^ <
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 40
from her own enchanting face, I saw thev were full of
stupid admiration ; she is so immeasurably superior to
them — to everybody on earth, is she not, Nelly ? "
" There will more come of this business than you
reckon on, " I answered, covering him up and extingmsh-
ing the light, " You are incurable, Heathcliff ; and Mr.
Hindley will have to proceed to extremities — see if he
won't. " My words came truer than I desired. The
luckless adventure made Eamshaw furious. And then
lir. Linton, to mend manners, paid us a visit himself
m the morrow, and read the young master such a
ecture on the road he guided his family that he was
jtirred to look about him in earnest Heathcliff received
lo flogging, but he was told that the first word he spoke
to Miss Catherine should ensure a dismissal ; and Mrs.
Eamshaw imdertook to keep her sister-in-law in due
restraint when she returned home, emplo3nng art, not
force. With force she would have found it impossible.
CHAPTER VII.
Zathy stayed at Thrushcross Grange five weeks — ^till
Christmas. By that time her ankle was thoroughly
:ured, and her manners much improved. The mistress
mited her often in the interval, and commenced her
plan of reform by trying to raise her self-respect with
Sne clothes and flattery, which she took readily; so.
that, instead of a wild, hatless little savage jumping
nto the house, and rushing to squeeze us all breathless,
there lighted from a handsome black pony a very digni-
ied person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover
)f a feathered beaver, and a long cloth habit, which she
^as obliged to hold up with both hands, that she might
> ail in. Hindley lifted her from her horse, exclaiming
ielightedly, *'Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty ! 1
> hould scarcely have known you. You look like a lady
aow. — Isabella Linton is not to be compared with her,
s sbe, Frances ? "
so WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
*'Isabella has not her natxiral advantages, " replied im
wife; ** but she must mind and not grow wild a^gaii
here, — Ellen, help Miss Catherine off with her things.t4i
Stay, dear; you will disarrange your curls. Let m^
untie your hat/'
I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneatl
a grand plaid silk frock, white trousers, and burnished
shoes ; and while her eyes sparkled joyfully when the
dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dare hardlj
touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid
garments, She kissed me gently, I was all flour makin(
the Christmas cake, and it woiild not have done to- give
me a hug ; and then she looked round for Heathcliff
Mr, and Mrs, Eamshaw watched anxiously their meet
ing, thinking it would enable them to judge, in som <
measure, what grounds they had for hoping to succeed
in separating the two friends,
Heathcliff was hard to discover at first. If he wen
careless and uncared for before Catherine's absence, h <
had been ten times more so since. Nobody but I evei
did him the kindness to call .him a dirty boy, and bic
him wash himself, once a week ; and children of his ag <
seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water
Therefore, not to mention his clothes, which had seei
three months'^rvice in mire and dust, and his thicl
uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands wai
dismally beclouded. He might well skulk behind th <
settle, on beholding such a bright, graceful damsel entei
the house, instead of a rough-headed counterpart o
himself, as he expected. ** Is Heathcliff not here ?'
she demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying
fingers wonderfidly whitened with doing nothing anc
staying indoors, . .'.
** Heathcliff, you may come forward,''cried Mr. Hind
ley, enjoying his disconifiture, and gratified to'see what i
forbidding young blackguard he would be compelled t <
present himself, " You may come and wish Miss Catherine
welcome, Uke the other servants. "
Cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his conceal
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 5 1
ment, flew to embrace him. She bestowed seven or eight
kisses on his cheek within the second, and then stopped,
and drawing back, burst into a laugh, exclaiming, " Why,
how very black and cross you look ! and how — ^how
funny and grim I But that's because Fm used to Edgar
and Isabella Linton: Well^ Heathcliff, have you for-
gotten me ? **
She had some reason to put the question, for shame
and pride threw double gloom over his coimtenance,
; and kept him immovable:
I " Shake hands, Heathcliff/* said Mr. Eamshaw,. con-
descendingly ;''once in a way that is permitted/'
" I shall not, " replied the boy^ finding his tongue at
last ; " I shall not stand to be laughed at. I shall not
bear it. "
And he would have broken from the circle, but Miss
Cathy seized him again:
" I did not mean to laugh at you, " she said ; ^'I
could not hinder myself: HeathclifiEi shake hands at
least. What are you sulky for ? It was only that you
looked odd. If you wash your face and brush your hair
it will be all right ; but you are so dirty ! "
She gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held
in her owUj and also at her dress, which she feared had
gained no embellishment from its contact with his.
'* You needn't have touched me, " he answered,
following her eye and snatching away his hand. ** I
shall be as dirty as I please; and I like to be dirty,
and I will be dirty. "
With that he dashed head foremost out of the room,
amid the merriment of the master and mistress^ and to
the serious disturbance of Catherine j Ayho could not. com-
prehend how her remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.
After playing lady's-maid to the newcomer^ and putting
my cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen
cheerful with great fires, befitting Christmas Eve, I pre-
pared to sit down and amuse myselt h^ ^vss^s^ cax. < ^
aU. alone, regardless oi Joseph's affiriiiaAAOxv^ \JaaX.'^
52 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
considered the merry tunes I chose as next door td
songs. He had retired to private prayer in his chamber
and Mr. and Mrs. Eamshaw were engaging Missy's atten-
tion by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present ti
the Uttle Lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kind'
ness: They had invited them to spend the morrow at^
Wuthering Heights, and the invitation had been accepteci
on one condition: Mrs: Linton begged that her darlings
might be kept carefully apart from that " naughty^ swesS^
ing boy. " -^
Under these circumstances I remained solitary^ ]
smelt the rich scent of the heating spices, and admireij
the shining kitchen utensils, the polished clock, decked
in holly, the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready to hi
filled with mulled ale for supper^ and, above all, thi
speckless purity of my particular care — the scoured and
well-s^yept floor. I gave due inward applause to everj
object, and then I reiiiembered how old Eamshaw used
to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lasst
and slip a shilling into my hand as a Christmas-box ; anq
from that I went on to think of his fondness for Heath-
cliff, and his dread lest he should suffer neglect aftei
death had removed him ; and that naturally led mc
to consider the poor lad's situation now^ and from sing*
ing I changed my mind to crying: It struck me soon
however^ there would be more sense in endeavouring
to repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears ovei
them: I got up and walked into the court to seek him
He was not far. I found him smoothing the glosej
coat of the new pony in the stable, and feeding the othei
beasts, according to custom:
" Make haste* Heathclifi ! ** I said; ** the kitchen is M
comfortable,'and Joseph is upstairs: Make haste, anc
let me dress you smart before Miss Cathy comes out
and then you can sit together, with the whole heart!
to yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime: "
He proceeded with his task, and never turned his heac
towards me:
''Come; are you coming?** 1 cotvtm\\fed.'* TV^\
WUTHERING HEIGHXa 53
I little cake for each of you, nearly enough; and you'll
deed half an hour's donning. "
I waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.
3atherine supped with her brother and sister-in-law,
[oseph and I joined at an unsociable meal, seasoned
irith reproofs on one side and sauciness on. the other.
His cake and cheese remained on the table all night for
the fairies. He managed to continue work till nine
Wock, and then marched dumb and dour to his cham*:
^er, Cathy sat up late, having a world of things . to
irder for the reception of her new friends. She came
htQ the kitchen once to speak to her old one ; but he
ims gone, and she only stayed to ask what was the
Batter with him, and then went back. In the morning
> e rose early ; and as it was a hoUday carried his ill-
mmour on to the moors, not reappearing till the family
Ifere departed for church. Fasting and reflection seemed
have brought him to a better spirit. He hung about
oe for a while, and having screwed up his courage, ex-
laimed abruptly, —
** Nelly, make me decent ; I'm going to be good. "
" High time, Heathcliff,''I said ; ** you have grieved
iatherine. She's sorry she ever came home, I dare sayl
t looks as if you envied her because she is more thought
f than you. " ^
The notion of envying Catherine was incomprehensible
) him, but the notion of grieving her he imderstood
learly enough,
** Did she say she was grieved ? " he inquired, looking
ery serious.
** She cried when I told her you were off again this
lorning. "
" Well, / cried last night, " he returned, ** and I had
lore reason to cry than she. "
*'Yes. You had the reason of going to bed with a
roud heart and an empty stomach, " sa\d !• " " ^x^sk^
eople breed sad sorrows for themselves*. " RmX., *^ ^^^^^
? ashamed of your touchiness, you roast ^s^sl ^^^^
t?4 wJien she comes in. You must go up ^2C^^ ^^
54 WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
to kiss her, and say^— :you know best what to say ; onlj
do it heartily, and not as if you thought her convertec
into a stranger by her grand dress. And now, though ]
have dinner to get ready, Til steal time to arrange yoi
so that Edgar Linton shall look quite a doll beside you.
and that he does. You are younger, and yeft, I'll U
bound, you are taller and twice as broad across th^
shoulders. You could knock him down in a twinkling
Don't you feel that you could ? "
HeathcHff's face brightened a moment; then it wai
overcast afresh, and he sighed,
** But, Nelly, if I knocked him down twenty tima^
that wouldn't make him less handsome or me more so
I wish I had light hair and a fair skin, and was dressec
and behaved as well, and had a chance of being as rict
as he will be, "
•* And cried for mamma at every turn, " I added
" and trembled if a country lad heaved his fist againsi
you, and sat at home all day for a shower of rain. Oh
Heathcliff , you are showing a poor spirit ! Come to th <
glass, and I'll let you see what you should wish, Dc
you mark those two lines between your eyes ; and thos <
thick brows that, instead of rising arched, sink in th <
middle ; and that couple of black fiends, so deeplj
buried, who never open their windows boldly, but iurl
glinting under them, like devil's spies ? Wish and lean
to smooth away the surly wrinkles, to raise your lidj
frankly, and change the fiends to confident, innoceni
angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always
seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. Don'1
get the expression of a vicious cur that appears to kno\^
the kicks it gets are its desert, and yet hates all th^
world as well as the kicker for what it suffers. "
** In other words, I must wish for Edgar Linton's
great blue eyes and even forehead, " he replied, " 1
do, and that won't help me to them. "
'''A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my
lad/'I continued, *'if yon were a le^^t \ > \5Lci\L% ■asvS
'- bad one will turil the bonmest mto som < ei^ > Mavg, ^w?
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 55
than ugly. And now that we've done washing, and
combing, and sulking, tell me whether you don't think
yourself rather handsome ? Fll tell you I do. You're
fit for a prince in disguise: Who knows but your father
was Emperor of China, and your mother an Indian
queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week's
Hicome, Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange to-
gether ? And you were kidnapped by wicked sailors
and brought to England. Were I in your place, I would
tame high notions of my birth ; and the thoughts of
what I was should give me courage and dignity to support
the oppressions of a little farmer. "
So I chattered on ; and Heathcliff gradually lost his
ftown and began to look quite pleasant, when all at
once our conversation was interrupted by a rumbhng
sound moving up the road and entering the court. He
ran to the window and I to the door, just in time to
behold the two Lintons descend from the family carriage,
anothered in cloaks and furs, and the Earnshaws dis-
mount from their horses: They often rode to church
ia winter: Catherine took a hand of each of the chil-
dren, and brought them into the house and set them
before the fire^ which quickly put colour into their white
faces:
I urged my companion to hasten now and show his
amiable humour, and he willingly obeyed ; but ill luck
would have it that, as he opened the door leading from
the .kitchen on one side, Hindley opened it on the other.
They met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean
and cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to
Mrs. Linton, shoved him back with a sudden thrust, and
angrily bade Joseph'■ keep the fellow out of the room ;
send him into the garret till dinner is over. He'll be
cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit,
if left alone with them a minute. "
" Nay, sir, " I could not avoid answering^ " \v < fe'Vs. V^n^
nothing — not he ; and I suppose " he irvxv & V \\saN^ ^^^s»'^^
o/the dainties as yreU as we.'*
''He sbaJI have bis share oi my liatvd \i 1 c^-tOcv
56 WUTHERlNG HEIGHTS.
downstairs till dark,'* cried Hindley.— " Begone, yet
vagabond ! What ! you are attempting the coxcomb
are you ? Wait till I get hold of those elegant locks
see if I won't pull them a bit longer. "
''They are long enough already/* observed Mastei
Linton, peeping from the doorway ; " I wonder thej
don't make his head ache; It's like a colt's mane ovei
his eyes. "
He ventured this remark without any intention t(
insult ; but Heathcliff's violent nature was not prepared
to endure the appearance of impertinence from oni
whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival. Ht
seized a tureen of hot apple sauce — the first thing tha'
came under his gripe — and dashed it full against th\
speaker's face and neck, who instantly commenced i
lament that brought Isabella and Catherine hurrying t <
the place* Mr. Eamshaw snatched up the culprii
directly, and conveyed him to his chamber, where
doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool th <
fit of passion, for he appeared red and breathless. ]
got the dish-cloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed Edgar*i
nose and mouth, affirming it served him right for med
dling. His sister began weeping to go home, and Cath]
stood by confounded, blushing for all.
" You should not have spoken to him ! " she expos
tulated with Master Linton. ** He was in a bad temper
and now you've spoilt your visit, and he'll be flogged
I hate him to be flogged. I can't eat my dinner. Whj
did you speak to him, Edgar ? "
" I didn't, " sobbed the youth, escaping from mj
hands and finishing the remainder of the purification witl
his cambric pocket-handkerchief. " I promised mammj
that I woulchi't say one word to him, and I didn't. "
*'Well, don't cry, " replied Catherine contemptuously
" you're not killed. Don't make more mischief; M]
brother is coming ; be quiet I — Hush, Isabella 1 Hai
anybody hurt you ? "
'There, there, children; to yoMt Sfc^\s»r ct\B^^\sv^
^y, bustling in. " That brute ot a I^lOl \vas» vi^sme^ ^
WUTHEI?lING HEIQHTa $7
picely. Next time, Master Edgar, take the law into your
own fists; it will give you an appetite/'
The httle party recovered its equanimity at sight of
[the fragrant feast. They were hungry after their ride,
fuad easily consoled, since no real harm had befallen
them. Mr. Eamshaw carved bountiful platefuls, and
the mistress made them merry with lively talk. I
waited behind her chair, and was pained to behold
Catherine, with dry eyeg and an indifferent air, commence
ptting up the wing of a goose before her. " An unfeeling
diild, " I thought to myself ; ** how lightly she dismisses
her old playmate's troubles I I could not have imagined
her to be so selfish. " She lifted a mouthful to her lips,
then she set it down again ; her cheeks flushed, and the
tejgrs gushed over them. She slipped her forjc to the
floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her
emotion. I did not call her unfeeling long, for . I per-
ceived ^e was in purgatory throughout the day, find
wearjdng to find an opportunity of getting by herself,
or pa)dng a visit to Heathclifi, who had been locked
up by the master, ^ I discovered, on endeavouring to
introduce to him a private mess of victuals.
In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged tha.t
he might be liberated then, as Isabella Linton had no
partner. Her entreaties were vain, and I was appointed
to supply the deficiency. We got rid of all gloom in
the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was
increased by the arrival of the Gimmerton band, muster-
ing fifteen strong — a trumpet, a trombone, clarionets,
bassoons, French horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
They go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and
receive contributions every Christmas, and we esteemed
it a first-rate treat to hear them. After the usual carols
had been sung, we set them to songs and glees. Mrs,
Elamshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.
Catherine loved it too, but she said it sounded sweetest
at the top of the steps, and she went up in the dark ; I
followed. They shut the house door belovi, iveN^t y^oN^sns?
our absezKe, it was so f uU of people. S\ie la^d^^ xvo sV?
58 WUTHERING HEIGHXa
at the stairs* head, but mounted farther to the gam
where HeathcHff was confined, and called him. H
stubbornly declined answering for a while; she pe:
severed, and finally persuaded him to hold communio
with her through the boards. I let the poor thin§
converse immolested, till I supposed the songs Wei
going to cease, and the singers to get some refreshment
then I clambered up the ladder to warn her. Instea
of finding her outside, I heard her voice within, Tl
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one ^arre
along the roof, into the skylight of the other, and it ws
with the utmost difficulty I could coax her out agaij
When she did come, Heathcliff came with her, and si
insisted that I should take him into the kitchen, as m
fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour's to be remove
from the sound of our *'devil's psalmody, " as it please
him to call it, I told them I intended by no means 1
encourage their tricks, but as the prisoner had nev <
broken his fast since yesterday's dinner, I would win
at his cheating Mr, Hindley that once. He= went dowi
I set him a stool by the fire, and offered him a quantit
of good things ; but he was sick, and could eat littl <
and my attempts to entertain him were thrown awa;
He leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin c
his hands, and remained wrapt in dumb meditation.
my inquiring the subject of his thoughts he answere
gravely,—
" I'm trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley bad
I don't care how long I wait, if I can only do it at las
I hope he will not die before I do ! "
*'For shame, Heathcliff ! " said I. " It is for God 1
pimish wicked people ; we should learn to forgive. "
** No ; God won't have the satisfaction that I shall,
he returned. ** I only wish I knew the best way. L <
me alone, and I'll plan it out ; while I'm thinking i
that I don't feel pain. "
But, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tales cannot dive:
you. I'm annoyed how I should dream of chattering c
at such a rate, and your gme\ co\d, ^nd ^qkjl uoddir
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 59
for bed ! I could have told Heathcliff's history — all that
you need hear — ^in half a dozen words.
Thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose and
proceeded to lay aside her sewing ; but I felt incapable
|(rf nnioving from the hearth, and I was very far from
ftodding.''Sit still, Mrs* Dean,''I cried,'* do sit still
another half-hour ! You've done just right to tell the
■ Itory leisurdly— that is the method I like ; and you must
i finish it in the same stylei I am interested in every
Itfiaracter you. have mentioned, more or less.'*
f- " The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sin "
" No matter: I'm not accustomed to go to bed in the
long hours* One or two is nearly enough for a person
who lies till ten. ■'
" You shouldn't .lie till ^ten* There's- the very prime
of the momihg gone long before that time* A person
who has not done one .half his day's work by ten o'clock
runs a chance =of leaving the other half undone*'* : »
" Nevertheless^ Mrs. Dean, resume your chair, because
to-morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon.
I prognosticate for myself ^ obstinate cold, at leai5t. " j
" I hope not, sir. Well, you must allow me to leap
c/tet some three years. During that space Mrs. Earn-
diaw— ** .
" No, no ; I'll allow nothing of- the sort. Are you
acquainted with the mood of mind in which, if you were
seated alone, fiind the cat licking its kitten on the rug
before you, you would watch the operation so intently
that puiss's neglect of one ear would put you seriously
out of temper ? " :':
** A terribly la^y mood, I diould say*'* )'
" On the contrary, a tiresomely active one* It is mine
at present; and, .therefore, continue minutely. I per-
ceive that people in these regions acquire over people in
towns the value that a spider in. a. dungeon does over a
spider in a cottage, to their various, occupants ; jand
yet the deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the
situation of the looker-on^ They do live laoie m e^rcsKs.^
more in themselves, and less in suriace» Oaaxii^^^ «
60 W.UTHERING HEIGHTS.
frivolous external things. I could fancy a love for 1:
here almost possible ; and I was a fixed unbeliever
any love of a year's standing. One state resemb]
setting a hungry man down to a single dish, on whi
he may concentrate his entire appetite and do it justic
the other, introducing him to a table laid out by Fren
cooks. . He can perhaps extract as milch enjoyment frc
the whole, but each part is a mere atom in his rejgfa
and remembrance.'*
" Oh, here we are the same as anywhere else, wheny
get to know us, " observed Mrs. Dean, somewhat puzzl
at my speech.
" Excuse me,'* I responded* " ^ You, m)^ good fri^r
are a striking evidence against that assertion. Exce]
ing a few provincialismis of slight consequence, you ha
no marks of the manners which I am habituated
£onisiider as peculiar to your class. I am sure you ha
thought a ^eat deal more than the generality of servai
ifaink.'You have been compelled to ciiltivate .yo
reflective faculties, for want of occasions for fritteri
your life away in silly trifles.*'
. Mrs. Dean laughed. . .
" I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable ki
of body, " she said — " not exactly from living aniong i
hills and seeing one set of faces and one series of actic
from year's end to Year's end, but I have undergo
sharp discipline, which has taught me wisdom ; and th <
I have read more than you would fancyV Mr. Lockwoc
You could not opeil a book in this library that I have t
looked into, and got something out of sJso— unless it
that range of Greek and Latin, and that of French ; a
those I faiow one from another^ It is as much as you c
expect of a poor man's daughter. However, if I am
follow my story in true gossip's fashion, I had better
on ; and instead, of leaping three years, I will be contc
ito pass to the next summer — the summer of 1778 ; tt
js hearly twenty-three years ago. "
lii^
ce
nc
or
an
^0
:le
i\
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER VIII.
On the morning of a fine June day my first bonny litt.
nursling, and the last of the ancient Eamshaw stoc]
was bom. We were busy with the hay in a far-awa
field when the girl that usually brought our breakfas^
came nmning an hour too soon, across the meadow an
up the lane, calUng me as she ran.
" Oh, such a grand bairn ! *'she panted out. " Tl:
finest lad that ever breathed ! But the doctor saj
missis must go. He says she's been in a consumptio
nd these many months. I heard him tell Mr. Hindley
pi and now she has nothing to keep her, and she'll be dea
before winter. You must come home directly. You'i
to nurse it, Nelly — to feed it with sugar and milk, an
take care of it day and night. I wish I were you, becaus
it will be all yours when there is no missis ! "
" But is she very ill ? " I asked, flinging down niy rals
jjj and tying my bonnet.
" I guess she is ; yet she looks bravely, " replied th
girl, " and she talks as if she thought of living to see :
grow a man. She's out of her head for joy, it's sue
a beauty ! If I were her, I'm certain I should not die
I should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite c
Kenneth. I was fairly mad at him. Dame Arche
brought the cherub down to master, in the house, an
his face just began to light up, when the old croake
steps forward, and says he,'Eamshaw, it's a blessin
your wife has been spared to leave you this son. Whe
she came, I felt convinced we shouldn't keep her long
and now, I must tell you, the winter will proba;bl
finish her* Don't take on and fret about it too mucl
It can't be helped. And besides, you should ha\
known better than to choose such a rush of a lass 1'"
" And what did the master answer ? " I mo^VL^^.
" I think he swore ; but I didrft itivcvi. Ycckx— ^ " =
straining to see the bairn.** And sYie \i^gaxv -aJijo:
descnbe it rapturously: I, as zealous as Vexs^i,^^
3
02 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
eagerly home to admire, on my part, though I was very,
sad for Hindley's sake. He had room in his heart only,
for two idols — his wife and himself. He doted on both,
and adored one, and I couldn't conceive how he would;
bear the loss.
When we got to Wuthering Heights, there he stoodj
at the front door ; and, as I passed in, I asked, " Ho\«j
was the baby ? *'j
" Nearly ready to run about, Nell!*'he replied^ ^
putting on a cheerful smile. j
'* And the mistress ? " I ventured to inquire ; " th^
doctor says she's'* i
" Danm the doctor! " he interrupted, reddening^
** Frances is quite right ; she'll be perfectly well b^;
this time next week. Are you going upstairs ? Wiifi
you tell her that I'll come, if she'll promise not to talk^j
I left her because she would not hold her tongue ; aqd,
she must. Tell her Mr. Kenneth says she must be quiet.* V
I deUvered this message to Mrs. Eamshaw. She
seemed in flighty spirits, and replied merrily, —
'*'I hardly spoke a word, Ellen, and there he has gone
out twice, crying. Well, say I promise I won't speak ;
but that does not bind me not to laugh at him. "
Poor soul I Till within a week of her death that gay
heart never failed her, and her husband persisted doggedly
— nay, furiously — in affirming her health improved every
day. When Kenneth warned him that his medicines
were useless at that stage of the malady, and he needn't
put him to further expense by attending her, he re-
torted, —
" I know you need not ; she's well — ^she does noi
want any more attendance from you ! She never was
in a consumption. It was a fever, and it is gone.; her
pulse is as slow as mine now, and her cheek as cool. "
He told his wife the same story, and she seamed to
believe him ; but one night, while leaning on his shoulder
in the act of saying she thought she should be able to
get up to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her — a very
slight one. He raised her in his arms; she put her two
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 63
hands about his neck, her face changed, and she was
dead.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell
wholly into my hands. Mr. Eamshaw, provided he saw
'him healthy, and never heard him cry, was contented, as
far as regarded him. For himself, he grew desperate ;
his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament. He
neither wept nor prayed ; he cursed and defied — exe-
I crated God and man, and gave himself up to reckless
[dissipation. The servants could not bear Ms t3^annical
and evil conduct long. Joseph and I were the only two
that would stay. I had not the heart to leave my chaise ;
and besides, you know I had been his foster-sister, and
excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger
would. Joseph remained to hector over tenants and
labourers, and because it was his vocation to be where
he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.'
The master's bad ways and bad companions formed
a pretty example for Catherine and Heathcliff. His
treatment of the latter was enough to make a fiend of
a saint. And, truly, it appeared as if the lad were pos-
sessed of something diaboUcal at that period. He
dehghted to witness Hindley degrading lumself past
redemption, and became daily more notable for savage
sullenness and ferocity. I could not half tell what an
infernal house we had. The curate dropped calling,
and nobody decent came near us at last, unless Edgar
Linton's visits to Miss Cathy might be an exception.
At fifteen she was the queen of the countryside ; she
had no peer, and she did tiun out a haughty, headstrong
creature ! I own I did not like her after her infancy
svas past, and I vexed her frequently by trying to bring
down her arrogance ; she never took an aversion to me,
though. She had a wondrous constancy to old attach-
ments — even Heathcliff kept his hold on her ^fffcC^c > poa
xmalterahly; and young Linton, wittv aXV \xss» sa^-^
> nty, found It difficult to make an eqaaVW Aee^ vck^^
on, Jle was my late master ; tbat \s \v\s» ^^
er the ffreplace. It used to bang an oxve s\^^.
64 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
his wife's on the other ; but hers has been removed, or
else you might see something of what she was. Can
you make that out ?
Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a soft-
featured face, exceedingly resembling the yoimg lady at
the Heights, but more pensive and amiable in expression.
It formed a sweet picture. The long light hair curled
slightly on the temples ; the eyes were large and serious,
the j & gure almost too graceful. I did not marvel how
Catherine Earnshaw could forget her first friend for such
an individual. I marvelled much how he, with a mind
to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea of
Catherine Earnshaw.
*'A very agreeable portrait, " I observed to the house-
keeper,''Is it like ? "
. " Yes, " she answered ; ** but he looked better when
he was animated. That is his everyday countenance.
He wanted spirit in general. "
Catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the
Lintons since her five weeks'residence among them;
and as she had no temptation to show her rough side
in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy,
she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman
by her ingenious corcfiality, gained the admiration of
Isabella, and the heart and soul of her brother — acquisi-
tions that flattered her from the first, for she was full of
ambition, and led her to adopt a double character without
exactly intending to deceive any one. In the place
where she heard Heathcliff termed a " vulgar young
ruffian, " and *'worse than a brute, " she took care not
to act Hke him ; but at home she had small inclination
to practise politeness that would only be laughed at,
and restrain an unruly nature when it would bring her
neither credit nor praise.
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering
Heights openly. He had a terror of Earnshaw's reputa-
'Jon, and shrank from encountering YiVm. \ ^xs.t. ^^V "
»s always received with our best attempts at cc^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 65
master himself avoided offending him, knowing why
a,me ; and if he could not be gracious, kept out of
A^ay. I rather think his appearance there was dis-
ful to Catherine. She was not artful, never played
:oquette, and had evidently an objection to her two
ds meeting at all ; for when Heathcliff expressed
3mpt of Linton in his presence, she could not half
dde as she did in his absence ; and when Linton
:ed disgust and antipathy to Heathcliff, she dared
treat his sentiments with mdifference, as if deprecia-
of her playmate were of scarcely any consequence
2r. Tve had many a laugh at her perplexities and
Id troubles, which she vainly strove to hide from
mockery. That sounds ill-natured, but she was so
d it became really imix)ssible to pity her distresses,
he should be chastened into more humility. She did
1^ herself, finally, to confess, and to conjide in me.
e was not a soul else that she might fashion into
iviser.
*. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon,
Heathcliff presumed to give himself a holiday on
strength of it. He had reached the age of sixteen
, I think, and without having bad features or
I deficient in intellect, he contrived to convey an
ession of inward and outward repulsiveness that
Dresent aspect retains no traces of. In the first
5, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early
ation. Continual hard work, begun soon and con-
id late, had extinguished any curiosity he once
jssed in pursuit of knowledge, and any love for
s or learning. His childhood's sense of superiority
led into him by the favours of old Mr. Eamshaw
faded away. He struggled long to keep up an
lity with Catherine in her studies, and yielded with
lant though silent regret ; but he yielded com-
ly, and there was no prevailing on bmv \!^ \ak & -^
in the way of moving upward, viYveiv V < b \csvixA^c > a
necessarily sink beneath " his iotraeT \^n^. " ^^
ioJ appearance S3anpathized NvitYi mexiXai essX^^^ "
66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
tion. He acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look;
his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into,
an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness, and
he took a grim pleasure, apparently, in exciting the
aversion rather than the esteem of his few acquaintance.
Catherine and he were constant companions still at
his seasons of respite from labour, but he had ceased
to express his fondness for her in words, and recoiled
with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses, as if
conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such
marks of affection on him. On the before-named occa-
sion he came into the house to annoimce his intention
of doing nothing, while I was assisting Miss Cathy to
arrange her dress. She had not reckoned on his taking
it into his head to be idle, and imagining she would have
the whole place to herself, she managed, by some means,
to inform Mr. Edgar of her brother's absence, and waa
then preparing to receive him.
" Cathy, are you busy this afternoon ? ** asked Heath-
cliff. " Are you going anywhere ? **
*'No ; it is raining,** she answered.
** Why have you that silk frock on, then ? *'he said.
** Nobody coming here, I hope ?'*
" Not that I know of,** stammered miss ;'* but you
should be in the field now, Heathcliff. It is an hour past
dinner-time. I thought you were gone.**
" Hindley does not often free us from his accursed
presence, " observed the boy.'* I'll not work any more
to-day ; 1*11 stay with you.**
''Oh, but Joseph will tell,'* she suggested. " You*d
better go.**
" Joseph is loading lime on the further side of Pen-
iston Crag; it will take him till dark, and he*ll never
know.**
So sajdng, he lounged to the fire and sat down. Cath-
erine reflected an instant with knitted brows ; she found
J t needful to smooth the way for an intrusion. ** Isabella
^d Edgar Linton talked ol casing t^ii^ ^iXenvwya.;'^
a«4 at the conclusion of a minute's saeacfc^'* K &
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 67
rains, I hardly expect them ; but they may come, and
if they do you run the risk of being scolded for no
good. "
" Order Ellen to say you are engaged, Cathy, " he
persisted ** Don't turn me out for those pitiful, silly
friends of yours ! Tm on the point, sometimes, of com-
plaining that they — but I'll not. "
" That they what ? " cried Catherine, gazing at him
with a troubled countenance. — " Oh, Nelly ! " she added
petulantly, jerking her head away from my hands,
" you've combed my hair quite out of curl. That's
enough ; let me alone. — ^What are you on the point of
complaining about, Heathcliff ? "
" Nothing — only look at the almanac on that wall, "
I He pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window,
and continued, " The crosses are for the evenings you
have spent with the Lintons, the dots for those spent
with me. Do you see ? I've marked every day. "
" Yes ; very foolish — as if I took notice I'■ replied
Catherine, in a peevish tone. ** And where is the sense
of that ? "
" To show that I do take notice, " said Heathcliff.
" And should I always be sitting with you ? " she
demanded, growing more irritated. ** What good do I
get ? What do you talk about ? You might be dumb,
or a baby, for anything; you say to amuse me, or for
anything you do either.'
" You never told me before that I talked too little,
or that you disliked my company, Cathy, " exclaimed
Heathcliff in much agitation.
" It's no company at all, when people know nothing,
and say nothing, " she muttered.
Her companion rose up; but he hadn't time to ex-
press his feelings further, for a horse's feet were heard
on the flags ; and, having knocked gently, young Linton
entered, his face brilHant with delight at t > ^ < ^ Mwerx^^^cXfc.^
srnnmons he had received. Doubtless C.a^i^^axv£^fe xwaxNf^
tbe difference between her friends, as oxv^ c-axae Vsv'
the other went out. The contrast resfem\ > \e^ > «\v^^
68 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
see in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal country for
beautiful fertile valley ; and his voice and greeting wei
as opposite as his aspect. He had a sweet, low manm
of speaking, and pronounced his words as you do-
that's less gruff than we talk here, and softer.
" Tm not come too soon, am I ? " he said, casting
look at me. I had begun to wipe the plate and tid
some drawers at the far end in the dresser.
** No/'answered Catherine. —'* What are you doit
there, Nelly? "
'* My work, miss, " I repUed. (Mr. Hindley had give
me directions to make a third party in any private visi
Linton chose to pay.)
She stepped behind me and whispered crossly, ** Tal
yourself and your dusters off. When company are i
the house, servants don't commence scouring and cleaj
ing in the room where they are. "
** It's a good opportimity, now that master is away,
I answered aloud. ** He hates me to be fidgeting ov <
these things in his presence. I'm sure Mr. Edgar wi
excuse me. "
** I hatq you to be fidgeting in my presence, " exclaime
the young lady imperiously, not allowing her guest tin:
to speak. She had failed to recover her equanimit
since the little dispute with HeathcHff.
*'I'm sorry for it, Miss Catherine, " was my response
and I proceeded assiduously with my occupation.
She, supposing Edgar could not see her, snatched tl:
cloth from my hand, and pinched me, with a prolonge
wrench, very spitefully on the arm. I've said I did nc
love her, and rather relished mortifying her vanity no-
and then — besides, she hurt me extremely ; so I starte
up from my knees, and screamed out, " O miss, that
a nasty trick ! You have no right to nip me, and I'l
not going to bear it. "
** I didn't touch you, you lying creature ! " cried sh <
her fingers tingling to repeat the act, and her ears re
with rage. She never had power to conceal her passion
Jt always set her whofe complexion in. a blaze.
ve
me:
Lo-
tidy
\'er
isiti
^ i
iarx-
ver
.viU
led
mc
ity
he
?d
ot
w
d
n
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" What's that, then ?'* I retorted, showing a deci
purple witness to refute her.
She stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and tl
irresistibly impelled by the naughty spirit within
slapped me on the cheek — a stinging blow that ^
both eyes with water.
" Catherine, love ! Catherine ! " interposed Lin
greatly shocked at the double fault of falsehood
violence which his idol had committed.
" Leave the room, Ellen ! " she repeated, trembling
over.
Little Hareton, who followed me everywhere, and
sitting near me on the floor, at seeing my tears commer
crying himself, and sobbed out complaints aga
" wicked Aunt Cathy, " which drew her fury on to
unlucky head. She seized his shoulders, and shook
• till the poor child waxed livid, and Edgar thoughtle
laid hold of her hands to deliver him. In an insi
one was wrung free, and the astonished young man
it applied over his own ear in a way that could nol
mistaken for jest. He drew back in consternation
lifted Hareton in my arms, and walked off to the kite
ivith him, leaving the door of commimication open,
I was curious to watch how they would settle their
agreement. The insulted visitor moved to the i
where he had laid his hat, pale and with a quive
lip.
" That's right ! " I said to myself. " Take wan
and begone ! It's a kindness to let you have a glin
of her genuine disposition. "
" Where are you going ? " demanded Catherine,
vancing to the door.
He swerved aside, and attempted fo pass.
" You must not go ! " she exclaimed energetically.
" I must and shsdl ! " he replied in a subdued voic
" No,'* she persisted, grasping the handle ; " not
Edgar Linton. Sit down. You shall not leave m <
that temper. I should be miserable all night, an
won't be miserable for you I'*
yo WUTIIERING HEIGHTS.
*'Can I stay, after you have struck me ? " asked Linton
Catherine was mute.
*'YouVe made me afraid and ashamed of you/* h
continued. " I'll not come here again. "
Her eyes began to glisten, and her Uds to twinkle.
" And you told a deliberate untruth/* he said.
" I didn't/* she cried, recovering her speech. /'I di(
nothing deliberately. Well, go, if you please — ge
away. And now rU cry— 1*11 cry myself sick.**
She dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set t <
weeping in serious earnest. Edgar persevered in hi
resolution as far as the court ; there he. lingered. .
resolved to encourage him.
" Miss is dreadfully wa5^ward, sir,'* I called out. " A
bad as any marred child. You*d better be riding home
or else she will be sick only to grieve us.**
The soft thing looked askance through the window
He possessed the power to depart as much as a ca
possesses the power to leave a mouse half killed or i
bird half eaten. Ah, I thought, there will be no savin|
him ; he*s doomed, and flies to bis . fate ! And so i
was. He turned abruptly, hastened into the houa
again, shut the door behind him; and when I went h
a while after to inform them that Earnshaw had conn
home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place abou
our ears (his ordinary frame of mind in that condition)
I saw the quarrel had merely effected a closer intimacy
—had broken the. outworks of youthful timidity, an(
enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, anc
confess themselves lovers.
Intelligence of Mr» Hindley*s arrival drove Lintoi
speedily to his horse, and Catherine to her chamber,
went to hide little Hareton, and to take the shot out o
the master*s fowling-piece, which he was fond of playing
with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the livei
of any who provoked or even attracted his notice to(
much; and I had hit upon the plan of removing it
that he might do less mischiei ii " h.e ^d ^o \ > cvfc Ve.xv'iJ.^
ofjaring the gun.
\ WUTHERING HEIGHTS. J
n. ;
le CHAPTER IX.
He entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear, an
caught me in the act of stowing his son away in tl
kitchen cupboard. Hareton was impressed with
wholesome terror of encountering either his wild beast
fondness or his madman's rage ; for in one he ran
diance of being squeezed and kissed to death, and :
the other of being flung into the fire or dashed again
the wall ; and the poor thing remained perfectly qui(
wherever I chose to put him.
" There, I've foimd it out at last, " cried Hindle;
pulling me back by the skin of my neck, like a doj
" By heaven and hell, you've sworn between you 1
murder that child! I know how it is, now, that he
always out of my way. But, with the help of Sata:
I sImU make you swallow the carving-knife, Nellj
You needn't laugh, for I've just crammed Kennet!
head-downmost, in the Blackhorse marsh ; and two
the same as one — and I want to kiU some of you. I sha
have no rest till I do. "
*'But I don't Uke the carving-knife, Mr. Hindley, "
answered ;'* it has been cutting red herrings. I'
rather be shot, if you please. "
" You'd rather be damned ! " he said ; *'and so yc
shall. No law in England can hinder a man from keepir
his house decent, and mine's abominable. Open yoi
mouth. "
He held the knife in his hand, and pushed its poii
between my teeth ; but, for my part, I was never muc
afraid of his vagaries. I spat out, and afl & rmed it taste
detestably ; I would not take it on any accoimt.
•* Oh ! " said he, releasing me, " I see that hideoi
little villain is not Hareton. I beg your pardon, Nel
If it be, he deserves flaying alive for ivot yvxmk^^
welcome me, and for screaming as Vi 1 ^et^ ^ ^^
'Unnatural cub, come hither, m tearia. > ^^'& ^-^ " ^
on a good -hearted, deluded lather* ^ovj > ^ox^^
J.% WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
think the lad would be handsomer cropped ? It make
a dog fiercer, and I love something fierce — get me
scissors — something fierce and trim ! Besides, it's ir
femal affectation — devilish conceit it is to cherish on
ears — ^we're asses enough without them. Hush, chile
hush ! Well, then, it is my darling ! Wisht, dry thy eye
—there's a joy ; kiss me. What ! it won't ? Kiss m(
Hareton ! Damn thee, kiss me I By God, as if
would rear such a monster ! As sure as I'm living, V
break the brat's neck. "
Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father^
arms with all his might, and redoubled his yells when h
carried him upstairs and lifted him over the baniste:
i cried out that he would frighten the child into fitj
and ran to rescue him. As I reached them, Hindle
leant forward on the rails to listen to a noise belov
almost forgetting what he had in his hands. ** Who :
that ? " he asked, hearing some one approaching tt
stair's foot. I leant forward also, for the purpose c
signing to Heathcliff, whose step I recognized, not t
come farther ; and at the instant when my eye quitte
Hareton, he gave a sudden spring, delivered himse
from the careless grasp that held him, and fell.
There was scarcely time to experience a thrill <
horror before we saw that the little wretch was saf <
Heathcliff arrived underneath just at the critical m <
ment ; by a natural impulse he arrested his descen
and setting him on his feet, looked up to discover tl:
author of the accident. A miser who has parted wit
a lucky lottery ticket for five shillings, and finds ne?
day he has lost in the bargain five thousand pound
could not show a blanker countenance than he did c
beholding the figure of Mr. Eamshaw above. It e:
pressed, plainer than words could do, the intensest anguis
at having made himself the instrument of thwarting h
own revenge. Had it been dark, I dare say he woul
have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton
skull on the steps ; but we witnessed his salvatioi
and I was presently below with my precious char§
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 7J
pressed to my heart. Hindley descended more leisurely,
sobered and abashed.
" It is your fault, Ellen, " he said ; " you should have
sept him out of sight. You should have taken him
irom me. Is he injured anywhere ?'*
" Injured ! " I cried angrHy ; " if he's not killed, he'll
K an idiot ! Oh, I wonder his mother does not rise
dom her grave to see how you use him ! You're worse
than a heathen — treating your own flesh and blood in
ihat manner ! "
He attempted to touch the child, who, on finding
mnself with me, sobbed off his terror directly. At tte
irst finger his father laid on hkn, however, he shrieked
igain louder than before, and struggled as if he would
JO into convulsions.
" You shall not meddle with him, " I continued^
'He hates you ; they all hate you — that's the truth !
i happy family you have, and a pretty state you're
ome to ! "
" I shall come to a prettier yet, Nelly, " laughed the
lisguided man, recovering his hardness. " At present,
Mivey yourself and him away. — And hark you, Heath-
liff ; clear you too quite from my reach and hearing.
wouldn't murder you to-night, unless, perhaps, I set
lie house on fire ; but that's as my fancy goes. "
While saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy
" om the dresser and poured some into a tumbler.
" Nay, don't ! " I entreated. " Mr. Hindley, do take
'aming. Have mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you
ire nothing for yourself ! "
" Any one will do better for him than I shall/'he
nswered.
" Have mercy on your own soul ! " I said, endeavour-
ig to snatch the glass from his hand.
" Not 1 1 On the contrary I shall have great pleasure
1 sending it to perdition to punish its Maker, " ex-'
laimed the blasphemer. " Here's to its hearty danma-
ionl "
He drank the spirits and impa^ietvA^ Xi^jS.^ x^s* ^^
74 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
terminating his command with a sequel of horrid
precations too bad to repeat or remember.
'* It's a pity he cannot kill himself with drink, "
served Heathcliff, muttering an echo of curses 1
when the door was shut. " He's doing his very utn
but his constitution defies him. Mr. Kenneth sayj
would wager his mare that he'll outlive any man on
side Gimmerton, and go to the grave a hoary sin
unless some happy chance out of the common co
befall him. "
I went into the kitchen and sat down to lull my 1
lamb to deep. Heathcliff, as I thought, walked thrc
to the bam. It turned out afterwards that he only
as far as the other side the settle, when he flimg hin
on a bench by the wall, removed from the fire, and
mained silent.
I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and hunMnir
song that began—
** It was for in the night, and the baimies grat,
The mither beneath the miools heard that " —
when Miss Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub f
her room, put her head in and whispered, —
*'Are you alone, Nelly ? "
" Yes, miss, " I replied.
She entered and approached the hearth. I, suppo
she was going to say something, looked up. The
pression of her face seemed disturbed and anxious,
lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and
drew a breath ; but it escaped in a . sigh instead i
sentence. I resumed my song, not haying forgo
her recent behaviour.
" Where's Heathcliff ? " she said, interrupting me.
" About his work in the stable/'was my answer.
He did not contradict me ; perhaps he had fallen
a doze. There followed another long pau$e, du
w/u'cli I perceived a drop or two trickle from Qitheri
cheek to the Sags. Is she sorry lot " tec ^•axcv^^wJi
^uct ? I asked myself. That vriBL \ > e ^ tiwtSLl^.
im
ob
aci
ost,
h€
this
:ier,
irse
ttle
2g\
got
seli
re
> ni
^8
X-
er
:ie
a
■n
/
WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
she may come to the point as she will; I shan't h
her. No; she felt small trouble regarding any subj <
save her own concerns.
" Oh dear ! " she cried at last, " I'm very unhappy !
" A pity, " observed I. *'You're hard to please,
many friends, and so few cares, and can't make yours
content ! "
" Nelly, will you keep a secret for me ? " she pursu
kneeling down by me and lifting her winsome eyes to i
face with that sort of look which turns off bad temper e\
when one has all the right in the world to indulge it.
" Is it worth keeping ? " I inquired less sulkily.
** Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out,
want to know what I should do. To-day Edgar Lini
5 asked me to marry him, and I've given him
answer. Now, before I tell you whether it was a cons(
or denial, you tell me which it ought to have been. "
" Really, Miss Catherine, how can I know ? " I repHi
" To be sure, considering the exhibition you perfom:
b his presence this afternoon, I might say it would
wise to refuse him; since he asked you after that,
must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool
" If you talk so, I won't tell you any more, " s
returned peevishly, rising to her feet. " I accepted hi
Nelly. Be quick, and say whether I was wrong. "
** You accepted him ! Then what good is it discussi
the matter ? You have pledged your word, and cam
retract. "
" But say whether I should have done so— do ! " s
exclaimed in an irritated tone, chafing her hands
gather and frowning,
" There are many things to be considered before tl
question can be answered properly, " I said sententious
" First and foremost, do you love Mr. Edgar ? "
" Who can help it ? Of course I do, " she answered
Then I put her through the lollovTmg, c^XfecJa^sssx " ,
a^ of twenty- two it was not in^udadoxxs.
''Why do you love him, Miss CatYiy'^ " "
" Nonsense; I do— that's sufficient;'
76 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" By no means; you must say why. "
** Well, because he is handsome and pleasant to
with/'
" Bad ! " was my commentary.
" And because he is young and cheerful. "
" Bad stiU. "
" And because he loves me. "
" Indifferent, coming there. "
** And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the grea
woman of the neighbourhood, and I shall be prouc
hayinc^ such a husband. "
** Worst of all. And now, say how you love him, "
" As everybody loves. You're silly, Nelly, "
*'Not at all — answer. "
" I love the ground under his feet, and the air c
his head, and everything he touches, and. every vi
he says. I love all his looks, and all his actions,
him entirely and altogether. There now ! "
" And why? "
" Nay, you are making a jest of it. It is exceedii
ill-natured. It's no jest to me ! " said the young Is
scowling and turning her face to the fire.
" I'm very far from jesting. Miss Catherine, " I repl
" You love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and yoi
and cheerful, and rich, and loves you. The last, h
ever, goes for nothing — you would love him without 1
probably ; and with it you wouldn't, imless he possej
the four former attractions. "
" No ; to be sure not. I should only pity him — 1
him, perhaps, if he were ugly and a clown. "
" But there are several other handsome, rich yo
men in the world— handsomer, possibly, and richer t
he is. What should hinder you from loving them ? "
" If there be any, they are out of my way. I've s
none like Edgar. "
** You may see some. And he won't always be ha
some and young, and may not always be rich. "
" He is now ; and I have only to do with the pres
J msh you would speak rationally "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. jy
Well, that settles it. If you have only to do with
present, marry Mr. Linton. "
I don't want your permission for that — I ^uM
Ty him; and yet you have not told me whether
right-
Perfectly right, if people be right to marry only
the present. And now, let us hear what you are
appy about. Your brother will be pleased ; the old
J and gentleman will not object, I think; you will
ipe from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy,
)ec table one ; and you love Edgar, and Edgar loves
. All seems smooth and easy. Where is the ob-
:le ? " . . •
Here^, and here I ^'replied Catherine, striking one hand
her forehead and the other on her breast; " in
chever place the soul lives. In my soul and in my
rt Fm convinced Tm wrong. "
That's very strange. I cannot makie it out. "
It's my secret. But if you will not mock, at me, I'll
lain it. I can't do it distinctly, but I'll give you a
ing of how I feel. "
he seated herself by me again ; her countenance gfew
ler and graver, and her clasped hands trembled.
Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams ? " she
I suddenly, after some minutes'reflection.
Yes ; now and then, " I answered.
And so do I. I've dreamt in my life dreams that
e stayed with me ever after, and changed my ideas ;
^•ve gone through and through me, like wine through
er, and altered the colour of my mind. And this is
I'm going to tell it ; but take care not to smile at
part of it. "
Oh ! don't, Miss Catherine ! " I cried. *'We're
cial enough without conjuring up ghosts and visions
> erplex us. Come, come, be merry and like yourself 1
k at little Hareton ! He^s dreaming nothing dreary,
^ sweetly he smiles in his sleep ! "
Yes ; ai3d how sweetly his iathet cvrcses* \s\ \sis >
vde ! You remember him, I dare say, vjVieTi^x^ ^a^
7^ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
just such another as that chubby thing — nearly a
young and innocent. However, Nelly, I shall obhg
you to listen ; it's not long, and Tve no power to b
merry to-night. "
** I won't hear it, I won't hear it ! " I repeated hastilj
I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still
and Catherine had an unusual gloom in her aspect tha
made me dread something from which I might shape
prophecy and foresee a fearful catastrophe. She wa
vexed, but she did not proceed. Apparently taking u
another subject, she recommenced in a short time.'
■'If I were in heaven, Nelly, I should be extreme!
miserable. "
" Because you are not fit to . go there, " I answerec
** All sinners would be miserable in heaven/'
*'But it is not for that. I dreamt once that I wa
there. "
** I tell you I won't hearken to your dreams, Mis
Catherine ! I'll go to bed, " I interrupted again.
She laughed and held me down^ for I made a motio
to leave my chair.
*'This is nothing, " cried she. " I was only going t
say that heaven did not seem to be my home, and I hrdk
my heart with weeping to come back to earth ; and th
angels were so angry that they fiimg me out into th
middle of the heafii on the top of Wuthering Height
where I woke sobbing for joy. That will do to explai
my secret as well as the other. I've no more busines
to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in heaven ; an
if the wicked man in there had not brought Heathcli
so low, I shouldn't have thought of it. It would degrad
me to marry Heathcliff now, so he shall never know hoi
I love him ; and that not because he's handsome, Nell]
but because he's more mjrself than I am. Whatever ou
souls are made of, his and mine are the same ; and Lir
ton*s is as different as a moonbeam from lightning, c
frost from fire, "
Ere this speech ended I becanve sens^\ < ^ oi'^^•^^
^'^^'s presence. Having noticed a ^^V mo^esGeo?
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 7%
turned my head and saw him rise from the bench and
steal out noiselessly. He had hsteried till he hearc
Catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, anc
then he stayed to hear no further. My companion,
sitting on the ground, was prevented by the back ol
the settle from remarking his presence or departure ; bui
I started and bade her hush.
" Why ? " she asked, gazing nervously round.
3 < " Joseph is here, " I answered, catching opportunel)
,j the roll of his cart-wheels up the road, " and Heathclif
will come in with him. I'm not sure whether he wen
Ij not at the door this moment. "
" Oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door, " said she
" Give me Hareton while you get the supper, and whei
it is ready ask me to sup with you. I want to cheat mj
uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that Heath
difE has no notion of these things. He has not, has he i
He does not know what being in love is ? "
" I see no reason that he should not know, as well ai
you, " I returned ; " and if you are his choice, he'll b(
the most unfortunate creature that ever was bom. As
soon as you become Mrs. Linton, he loses friend, anc
love, and all: Have you considered how you'll bea:
the separation, and how he'll bear to.be quite desertec
b the world ? Because, Miss Catherine "
" He quite deserted I we separated I " she exclaimec
with an accent of indignation. " Who is to separate us
ray ? They'll meet the fate of Milo. Not as long ai
Uve, Ellen — for no mortal creature. Every Linton oi
the face of the earth might melt into nothing before ]
could consent to forsake HeathcUff. Oh, that's no
what I intend — that's not what I mean ! I shouldn''
be Mrs. Linton were such a price demanded ! He'll b(
as much to me as he has been all his hfetime. Edga:
must shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least
He will, when he learns my true leelm^ \.o^N•^^^^^^
Nellys J seenow—yoM think me a seViv^ vn^vOcL\ ^
did It never strike you that if Heat\vc\\ft ^xvdL\ tw2CC
we should be beggars ? Whereas, \i \ roax^:^ ^^
8o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
I can aid Heathcliff to rise, and. place him out of m]
brother's power. " *
" With your husband's money, Miss Catherine ? " 1
asked. " You'll find him not so pliable as you calculate
upon ; and, though Fm hardly a judge, I think that'i
the worst motive you've given yet for being the wife o
young Linton. "
" It is not 1 " retorted she j " it is the best ! Th <
others were the satisfaction of my whims ; and fo;
Edgar's sake, too — to satisfy him. This is for the sab
of one who comprehends in his person my feelings U
Edgar and myself. I cannot express it, but surely yot
and everybody have a notion that there is or should b <
an existence of yours beyond you. What were the " us <
of my creation if I were entirely contained here ? M3
great miseries in this world have been HeathclifFs
miseries, and I watched and felt each from the beginning
My great thought in living is himself. If all else perished
and he remained, / should still continue to be. And i:
all else remained, and he were annihilated, the uniyers(
would turn to a mighty stranger — I should not seem i
part of it. My love for Linton is like the fohage in th
woods: time will change it, I'm well aware, as wintei
changes the trees. My love for Heathdiff resemble!
the eternal rocks beneath — a source of Uttle visihli
delight, but necessary. Nelly, I am Heathcliff ! He'i
alwaj^, alwajrs in my mind — not as a pleasure, any moK
than I am always a pleasure to myself, but as my owl
being. So don't talk of our separation again. It i
impracticable, and "
She paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown
but I jerked it forcibly away. I was out of patieno
with her folly.
" If I. can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,-
I said, " it only goes to convince me that you are igno
rant of the duties you imdertake in marr5ang, or eb
that you are a wicked, unprincipled ]^tL B\it trouble m <
witlrno more secrets ; TU not piomisfe to Vftfc^ ^iwsKi:'
" You'll keep that ? " she asked eagpiV^*
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, 8 1
" No, I'll not promise, " I repeated.
She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph
finished our conversation ; and Catherine removed her
seat to a comer and nursed Hareton, while I made the
sapper. After it was cooked, my fellow-servant and I
b^ian to quarrel who should carry some to Mr, Hindley ;
and we didn't settle it till all was nearly cold. Then we
came to the agreement that we would let him ask if he
wanted any, for we feared particularly to go into his
presence when he had been some time alone.
" And how isn't that nowt comed in fro'th'field
he this time ? What is he about ? girt idle seeght I "
demanded the old man, looking round for Heathcliff.
" I'll caU him, " I repUed. *'He's in the bam, I've no
doubt. "
I went and called, but got no answer. On returning,
[ whispered to Catherine that he had heard a good part
)f what she said, I was sure, and told how I saw him
|uit the kitchen just as she complained of her brother's
onduct regarding him. She jumped up in a fine fright,
ung Hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her
iend herself, not taking leisure'to consider why she
fas so flurried, or how her talk would have affected him,
he was absent such a while that Joseph proposed we
loxild wait no longer. He cimningly conjectured they
'ere staying away in order to avoid hearing his pro-
racted blessing. They were " ill eneugh for ony fahl
lanners, " he affirmed. And on their behalf he added
lat night a special prayer to the usual quarter of an
oar's supplication before meat, and would have tacked
lother to the end of the grace, had not his young mis-
■ess broken in upon him with a hurried command that
e must run down the road, and wherever Heathcliff
ad rambled, find and make him re-enter directly.
" I want to speak to him, and I must before I go up-
tairs, " she said. " And the gate is opeiv. ^ < & Ss» ^Rrccsfc-
rhere out of hearing, for he would not x^^Vg, > 0w3v^^
touted at the top of the fold as loud as \ cotsX.^^
Joseph objected at first. She was too Tcmc?tv vcv ^^a^
8a WUTHBRING HEIGHTS.
however, to suffer contradiction ; and at last he placed hij
hat on his head and walked grumbling forth. Meantime
Catherine paced up and down the floor, exclaiming, —
*'I wonder where he is — I wonder where he can be
What did I say, Nelly ? IVe forgotten. Was he vexec
at my bad humour this afternoon ? Dear ! tell me wha
I've said to grieve him. I do wish he'd come. I dc
wish he would. "
*'What a noise for nothing ! " I cried, though rathe:
uneasy myself. " What a trifle scares you ! It's sureh
no great cause of alarm that Heathcliff should take j
moonlight saunter on the moors, or even He too sulk]
to speak to us in the hay-loft. Til engage he's lurking
there. See if I don't ferret him out ! "
I departed to renew my search. Its result was dis
appointment, and Joseph's quest ended in the same.
** Yon lad gets war un war ! " observed he on re-enter
ing. ** He's left th'yate at t'full swing, and miss'i
pony has trodden dahn two rigs o'com, and plotterec
through, raight o'er into t'meadow ! Hahsomdiver, t
maister'uU play t'devil to-mom, and he'll do weel. He'i
patience itsseln wi'sich careless, oflald craters — ^patiena
itsseln he is ! Bud he'll not be soa alius — yah's see, al
on ye ! Yah munn't drive him out of his heead foi
nowt ! "
** Have you found Heathcliff, you ass ? " intemiptec
Catherine. " Have you been looking for him, as ]
ordered ? "
** I sud more likker look for th'horse, " he replied
" It'ud be to more sense. Bud I can look for northej
horse nur man of a neeght loike this — as black as t
chimbley ; und Heathcliff's noan t'chap to coom at tn^
whistle. Happen he'll be less hard o'hearing wi'ye / *'
It was a very dark evening for suminer. The clouds
appeared inclined to thimder, and I said we had bettei
all sit down ; the approaching rain would be certain tc
Ivyhg- him home without f\M:ther trouble. However
Catherine would not be persuaded mto tWiX«\v3C!^\.^
26e Jcept wandering to and fro, irom tb.e gaAfe \.o \)afc ^^
wuth?:ring heights. 83
in a state of agitation which permitted no repose, and
at length took up a permanent situation on one side
of the wall, near the road, where, heedless of my ex-
postulations and the growling thunder, and the great
drops that began to plash around her, she remained;
calling at intervals, and then hsteiiing, and then crying
outright. She beat Hareton, or any child, at a good
passionate fit of crying.
About midnight, while we still sat up, the storiii came
.rattling over the Heights in full fury. There was a
violent wind, as well as thunder, and either one or the
other spHt a tree off at the comer of the building; a
huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a
portion of the east chimney stack, sending a clatter of
stones and soot into the kitchen fire. We thought a
bolt had fallen in the middle of us, and Joseph swung on
to his knees, beseeching the Lor4 to remember the
patriarchs Noah and Lot, and, as in former times, spare
the righteous, though He smote the ungodly. I felt
some . sentiment that it must be a judgment on us also.
The Jonah, in my mind, was Mr. Eamshaw ; and I shook
the handle of his den, that I might ascertain if he were
yet Uving. He replied audibly enough in a fashion which
made my companion vociferate, more clamorously than
before, Ihat a wide distinction might be drawn between
saints like himself and sinners Hke his master. But the
uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all
unharmed, excepting Cathy, who got thoroiighly drenched
for her obstinacy in refusing to take shelter, and standing
bonnetless and shawl-less to catch as much water as she
could with her hair and clothes. She came in and lay
down on the settle, all soaked as she was, tmning her
face to the back and putting her hands before it*
" Well, miss! " I exclaimed, touching her shoulder;
" you are not bent on getting your death, are you ?
Do you know whait o'clock it is ? Hali-^^s.! ^^n*^^.
Come, come to bed I There's no wse -w^i^xxv^ V > tv^^^ ^
that foolish boy. He'll be gone to GimmexVovx, ^^^
•tay there now. He guesses we sho\Ato! > L > N^«^ ^^^
84 WOTHER'ING HEIGHTS.
till this late hour— at least he guesses that only Mr*
Hindley would be up ; and he'd rather avoid having
the door opened by the master.'*
" Nay, nay ; he's noan. at Gimmerton, " said Joseph.
" I's niver wonder but he's at t'bothom of a bog-hoile.
This visitation wom't for nowt, and I wod hev ye to
look out, miss ; yah muh be t'next. Thank Hivin for
all ! All warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen,
and piked out fro'th'rubbidge. Yah knaw whet t'
Scripture ses. " And he began quoting several texts»
referring us to chapters and verses where we might find
them.
I, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and re-
move her wet things, left him preaching and her shiver-
ing, and betook myself to bed with little Hareton, who
slept as fast as if every one had been sleeping round him*
I heard Joseph read on a while afterwards ; then I dis-
tinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then I dropped
asleep.
Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by
the sunbeams piercing the chinks of the shutters. Miss
Catherine still seated near the fireplace. The house
door was ajar too ; light entered from its unclosed
windows. Hindley had come out, and stood on the
kitchen hearth, haggard and drowsy.
" What ails you, Cathy ? " he was saying when I
entered ; " you look as dismal as a drowned whelp. Why
are you so damp and pale, child ? "
" I've been wet ! " she answered reluctantly, " and
I'm cold; that's all. "
" Oh, she is naughty ! " I cried, perceiving the master
to be tolerably sober. " She got steeped in the shower
of yesterday evening, and there she has sat the night
through, and I couldn't prevail on her to stir. "
Mr. Eamshaw stared at us in surprise. *'The night
through 1 " he repeated. " What kept her up ? Not feai
of the thunder, surely ? That was over hours since. "
Neither of us wished to mention lie^AiltvcX^^ ^i^i(s«ttfy
^ ^0/7^ as we could conceal it, so 1 tep\\e^\ d^^3DL\. > Kafi
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 8$
bow she took it into her head to sit up, and she said
lothing. The morning was fresh and codl. I threw
)ack the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet
icents from the garden ; but Catherine called peevishly
:o me, *'Ellen, shut the window. I'm starving 1 " And
ler teeth chattered as she shrank closer to the almost
xtinguished embers.
** She's ill, " said Hindley, taking her wrist ; ** I
appose that's the reason she would not go to bed.
)amn it ! I don't want to be troubled with more sick-
ess here. What took you into the rain ? "
** Running after t'lads as usuald ! " croaked Joseph,
atching an opportunity, from our hesitation, to thrust
1 his evil tongue. **If I war yah, maister, I'd just
lam t'boards i'their faces all on'em, gentle and simple,
[ever a day ut yah're off, but yon cat o'Linton comes
leaking hither; and Miss Nelly — shoo's a fine lass —
loo sits watching for ye i't'kitchen ; and as yah're
I at one door, he's out at t'other, and then wer grand
idy goes a-coorting of her side ! It's bonny behaviour,
irking amang f fields after twelve o* t'night wi'that
ihl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, Heathcliff ! They think
'm blind, but I'm noan — nowt ut t'soart ! I seed
oung Linton boath coming and going, and I seed yah "
iirecting his discourse to me), " yah gooid fur nowt,
attenly witch, nip up and bolt into th'house, t'
linute yah heard t'maister's horse fit clatter up t'
> ad. "
" Silence, eavesdropper ! " cried Catherine; ** none of
our insolence before me ! — Edgar Linton came yester-
ay by chance, Hindley, and it was / who told him to
e off, because I kn^w you would not like to have met
im as you were. " ^
*'You He, Cathy, no doubt, " answered her brother,
and you are a confounded simpleton ! But \\fcN^\.
lind Linton at present; tell me — wete'^om tvd^ ^^n > J^
ieathcliff last night ? Speak the tratYv, Tvo^ . Xcjv5.t^^
yt be afraid of harming him. TYiovLg\v A \\aXe ^sjccsv
ich as ever, he did me a good turn a. s\ioxV \h:sa^ ^
86 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
that will make my conscience tender of breaking h
neck. To prevent it, I shall send him about his busine
this very morning ; and after he's gone, Fd advise yc
all to look sharp. I shall only have the more humoi
for you: "
" I never saw Heathcliff last night,*'answered Catherin
beginning to sob bitterly, " and if you do turn him oi
of doors, I'll go with him. But perhaps you'll never ha^
an opportunity ; perhaps he's gone. " Here she bur
into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her wor <
were inarticulate.
Hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, at
bade her get to her room immediately, or she shouldn
cry for nothing. I obliged her to obey; and I shs
never forget what a scene she acted when we reache
her chamber — it terrified me. I thought she was goii
mad, and I begged Joseph to nm for the doctor,
proved the commencement of delirium. Mr. Kenneth, ;
3oon as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill. SI
had a fever. He bled her, and he told me to let b
live on whey and water-gruel, and take care she d
not throw herself downstairs or out of the window ; ar
then he left, for he had enough to do in the paris!
where two or three miles was the ordinary distant
between cottage and cottage.
Though I cannot say I made a gentle nurse, and Josej
and the master were no better, and though our patiei
was as wearisome and headstrong as a patient could b
she weathered it through. Old Mrs. Linton paid i
several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, ar
scolded and ordered us all; and when Catherine w;
convalescent she insisted on conveying her to Thrusl
cross Grange, for which deliverance we were very grat
ful ; but the poor dame had reason to repent of h
kindness. She and her husband both took the feve
and died within a few days of each other.
Our young lady returned to \is, sauciet and mo
Passionate and haughtier than evei, T^e^.'CaOcv^ \i
f^ver been heard of since the eveuVng oi ^afc > Oa»aJ
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 8/
x)rm ; and one day I had the misfortune, when she
id provoked me exceedingly, to lay the blame of his
isappearance on her — where indeed it belonged, as
le well knew. From that period, for several months,
le ceased to hold any communication with me, save
the relation of a mere servant. Joseph fell under a
in also. He would speak his mind, and lecture her all
le same as if she were a little girl ; and she esteemed
jrself a woman, and our mistress, and thought that her
cent illness gave her a claim to be treated with con-
ieration. Then the doctor had said that she would not
lar crossing much — ^she ought to have her own way ; and
was nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one
presume to stand up and contradict her. From Mr.
imshaw and his companions she kept aloof ; and
tored by Kenneth, and serious threats of a fit that
ten attended her rages, her brother allowed her what-
er she pleased to demand, and generally avoided
gravating her fiery temper. He was rather too in-
Jgent in humouring her caprices — ^not from affection,
Lt from pride. He wished earnestly to see her bring
•nour to the family by an alliance with the Lintons ;
.d as long as she let him alone she might trample on
like slaves, for aught he cared. Ec^ar Linton, as
altitudes have been before, and will be after him,
IS infatuated, and believed himself the happiest man
ve on the day he led her to Gimmerton Chapel, three
ars subsequent to his father's death.
Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to
ive Wurthering Heights and accompany her here,
ttle Hareton was nearly five years old, and I had just
gun to teach him his letters; We made a sad parting,
it Catherine's tears were more powerful than ours,
hen I refused to go, and when she found her entreaties
d not move me, she went lamenting to her husband
id brother; The former offered me mumfi.c«cA.^ " ^2^^\
e latter ordered me to pack up. He'w«LSx\.e^^ < ^ ^orrefis?^
the house, he said, now that there w^'s* xio t«v%\x^
r as to Hareton, the curate should t^^e > DMSL'vEw\i»:
88 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
by-and-by. And so I had but one choice left-^
as I was ordered. I told the master he got rid
decent people only to ride to ruin a little faster. I
Hareton, said good-bye, and since then he has 1
stranger; and it's very queer to think it, but I
doubt he has completely forgotten all about Ellen
and that he was ever more than all the world i
and she to him.
* * * *
At this point of the housekeeper's story she cl
to glance towards the timepiece over the chimne
was in amazement on seeing the minute-hand m
half -past one: She would not hear of sta5dng a :
longer — ^in truth, I felt rather disposed to def
isequel of her narrative myself. And now that
vanished to her rest, and I have, meditated for a
hour or two, I shall summon courage to go also, ii
of aching laziness of head and limbs:
CHAPTER X.
A CHARMING introduction to a hermit's life !
weeks* torture, tossing, and sickness ! Oh, these
winds, and bitter northern skies, and impassable
and dilatory country surgeons ! And, oh, this
of the human physiognomy ! and, worse than s
terrible intimation of Kenneth that I need not ex]
be 6ut of doors till spring !
Mr. HeathcHff has just honoured me with a call.
seven days ago he sent me a brace of grouse — the
the season. Scoundrel ! He is not altogether g
in this illness of mine, and that I had a great m
tell him ; but, alas 1 how could I offend a ma^ w]
charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good hoi
talk on some other subject than pills and dr^
blisters, and leeches ? . This is quite «ii easy in
lam too weak to read, yet 1 leeL as iil coxM eav^
'^^sr interesting.. Why not have up Ut^;I > easi.
ei
nc
ire
nc
he
is
le'
ite
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 8
her tale ? I can recollect its chief incidents as far a
she had gone. Yes ; I remember her hero had ru:
off, and never been heard of for three years ; and th
heroine was married. 1*11 ring. She'll be delighted t
find me capable of talking cheerfully, Mrs, Dea
^\ came,
- " I ** It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medi
cine, " she commenced,
** Away, away with it ! " I replied, ** I desire t
kve—''
** The doctor says you must drop the powders. "
" With all my heart ! Don't interrupt me. Com
and take your seat here. Keep your fingers from:tha
bitter phalanx of vials. Draw your knitting out c
your pocket — that will do ; now continue the history c
Hr, HeathcHff , from where you left off to the presen
fay. Did he finish his education on the Continent, an
come back a gentleman ? or did he get a sizar's place a
college, or escape to America, and earn honours b
drawing blood from his foster-country, or make a foi
tune more promptly on the English highways ? "
'* He may have done a Httle in all these vocation:
lir. Lockwood, but I couldn't give my word for anj
I stated before that I didn't know how he gained hi
money, neither am I aware of the means he took to rais
mind from the savage ignorance into which it wa
sunk ; but, with your oleave, I'll proceed in my ow
fashion, if you think it will amuse and not weary yoi
Are you feeling better this morning ? "
" Much. "
" That's good news. 1 got Miss Catherine and myse
to Thrushcross Grange, and, to my agreeable disappoini
ment, she behaved infinitely better than I dared t
expect. She seemed almost over-fond of Mr. Lintoi
and even to his sister she showed plenty of affectioi
They were both very attentive to hex coiaioT^,, Qfcx\»5K^
It was not the thorn bending to the \iOTVe^js\3LO^^'5 > ,
/the honeysuckles embracing the thorn, Tl^ifex^ ^qe^i
mutual concessions — one stood erect ^xx^ ^^
90 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
yielded ; and who can be ill-natured and bad-temperec
when they encounter neither opposition nor indifference
I observed that Mr. Edgar had a deep-rooted fear o
ruffling her humour. He concealed it from her ; bu
if ever he heard me answer sharply, or saw any othe
servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of hers
he would show his trouble by a frown of displeasure
that never darkened on his own account. He many ;
time spoke sternly to me about my pertness, and averrec
that the stab of a knife could not inflict a worse pan^
than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed. Not h
grieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy ; anc
for the space of half a year the gunpowder lay as harm
less as sand, because no fire came near to explode it
Catherine had seasons of gloom and silence now anc
then ; they were respected with sympathizing silenc <
by her husband, who ascribed them to an alteration ii
her constitution, produced by her perilous illness, as sh <
was never subject to depression of spirits before. Th <
return of sunshine was welcomed by answering sunshin <
from him. I believe I may assert that they were reall]
in possession of deep and growing happiness.
It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the lon|
run ; the mild and generous are only more justly selfis]
than the domineering, and it ended when circumstance
caused each to feel that the one's interest was not th
chief consideration in the other's thoughts. On i
mellow evening in September I was coming from th
garden with a heavy basket of apples which I had beei
gathering. It had got dusk, and the moon looked ove
the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows t <
lurk in the comers of the numerous projecting portion
of the building. I set my burden on the house steps b;
the kitchen door, and lingered to rest, and drew in ;
few more breaths of the soft, sweet air. My eyes wer
on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when
Aeard a voice behind me say, —
^'Nelly, is that you?**
It was a deep voice, and foreign va toTka, ^^ ^
WUTHERING HEIGHT & 9 1
vas something in the manner of pronouncing my name
vhich made it sound familiar. I turned about to dis-
cover who spoke, fearfully ; for the doors were shut, and
I had seen nobody on approaching the steps. Something
stirred in the porch ; and moving nearer, I distinguished
a tall man dressed in dark clothes, with dark face and
bair. He leant against the side, and held his fingers on
flie latch, as if intending to open for himself. " Who
can it be ?'* I thought. " Mr. Eamshaw ? Oh no !
The voice has no resemblance to his.*'
I have waited here an hour/* he resumed, while 1
continued staring ; " and the whole of that time all
RHmd has been as still as death. I dared not enter.
You do not know me ? Look, I'm not a stranger ! "
A ray fell on his features ; the cheeks were sallow
jnd half covered with black whiskers, the brows lower-.
JDg, the eyes deep-set and singular. I remembered the
" What ! *'I cried, uncertain whether to regard him
as a worldly visitor, and I raised my hands in amaze-
f Dent: " What ! you come back ? Is it really you ?
^Jpsit? "
" Yes, Heathcliff,** he replied, glancing from me up
1 b the windows, which reflected a score of glittering
'* Boons, but showed no lights from within. " Are they
^ It home ? Where is she ? Nelly, you are not glad.
^JW needn't be so disturbed. Is she here? Speak!
I want to have one word with her — your mistress. Go,
ad say some person from Gimmerton desires to see
kr. " -^ ^
" How will she take it ? " I exclaimed. " What will
'we do ? The surprise bewilders me. It will put her
'fcut of''" ••- - ■ -
T
her head. And you are Heathcliff, but altered !
Kay, there's no comprehending it; Have you been for a
loldier ? "
Go and carry my message, " he Vrvlextxx^X.^^ Sssv-
patiently. " Fm in bell till you do \ "
He lifted the latch, and I entered ; bwt vA[ieTv\ %^'<'
'be parlour where Mr. and Mrs. Lintou Nvex^A wvi^o^
92 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
persuade myself to proceed: At length I resolved on
making an excuse to ask if they would have the candles
lighted, and I opened the door.
They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back
against the wall, and displayed, beyond the garden trees
and the wild green park, the valley of Gimmerton, with
a long line of mist winding nearly to its top (for vety
soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticea,
the sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which
follows the bend of the glen). Wuthering Heights rosei
above this silvery vapour, but our old house was in-i
visible ; it rather dips down on the other side. Both
the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed I
on, looked wondroiisly peaceful. I shrank reluctantly
from performing my errand^ and was actually gping
away leaving it unsaid, after having put my questibit
about the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled
me to return and mutter,'* A person from Gimmerton
wishes to see you, ma'am.**
" What does he want ? ** asked Mrs. Linton.
" I did not question him, " I answered:
'* Well, close the curtains, Nelly, " she said, " and
bring up tea; 1*11 be back again directly.'*
She quitted the apartment. Mr: Edgar inquired care*
lessly who it was.
" Some one mistress does not expect,** I replied;
" That Heathcliff — you recollect him, sir — who used to
live at Mr. Earnshaw*s.**
" What ! The gipsy — the ploughboy ? " he cried;
** Why did you not say so to Catherine ? **
" Hush! you must not call him by those names,
master, " I said. " She*d be sadly grieved to hear you:
She was nearly heartbroken when he ran off. I guess
his return will make a jubilee to her.**
Mr. Linton walked to a window on the other side of
the room that overlooked the court. He unfastened it
^nd leant out I suppose they were below, for he
'^claimed quickly, " Don't staad \!tifire, \on^\ " ^tvsv^
io person in, ii it be any one paT\\c\3X^.t:'ILx^Acst
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 93
eard the click of the latch, and Catherine flew up-
rs, breathless and wild, too excited to show gladness ;
jed, by her face, you would rather have surmised
iwf ul calamity.
Edgar, Edgar ! " she panted, flinging her arhis
ad his neck. ** O Edgar darling ! HeathcUff's come
k — ^he is !'* And she tightened her embrace to a
eeze.
Well, well, " cried her husband crossly, " don't
.ngle me for that. He never struck me as such a
-vellous treasure. There is no need to be frantic.'-
1 know you didn't like him, " she answered, repressing
ttle the intensity of her delight. " Yet, for my sike,
must be friends now. Shall I tell him to come up ? "
Here ? " he said — " into the parlour ? "
Where else ? " she asked.
[e looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a
•e suitable place for him. Mrs. Linton eyed him
1 a droll expression — half angry, half laughing, at
fastidiousness.
No, " she added, after a while ; " I cannot sit in
kitchen.— Set two tables here, Ellen— one for your
»ter and Miss Isabella, being gentry ; the other for
Lthcliff and myself, being of the lower orders. — Will
t please you, dear ? Or must I have a fire lighted
where ? If so, give directions. I'U run down and
ire my guest. I'm afraid the joy is too great to be
! "
he was about to dart off again, but Edgar arrested her.
You bid him step up, " he said, addressing me ;
id, Catherine, try to be glad without being absurd.
5 whole household need not witness the sight : of
r ^Icoming a runaway servant as a brother. "
descended and found Heathcliff . waiting under the
ch, evidently anticipating an invitation to enter-
followed my guidance without waste ol ^^^x^^ «xn.^
shered him into the presence ot t\\e Tc\.'as\feT ^s\.^ xk > s.-
> , whose flushed cheeks betrayed i\s^ ^''^ ^ " ^^^
n^. ^uf the iady's glowed with mol\\et\e^^^%^^
94'WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
her friend appeared at the door. She sprang fonv
took both his hands, and led him to Linton ; and i
she seized Linton's reluctant fingers and crushed't
into his. Now fully revealed by the fire and car
light, I was amazed more than ever to behold the tr
formation of Heathcliff. He had grown a tall, athl
well-formed man, beside whom my master seemed q
slender and youth-like. His upright carriage sugge
the idea of his having been in the army. His d
tenance was much older in expression and decisioi
feature thian Mr. Linton's; it looked intelligent,
retained no marks of former degraJdation. A I
civilized ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows
6yes full of black fire, but it was subdued, and his maj
was even dignified — quite divested of roughness, the
too stern for grace. My master's surprise eqnallec
exceeded mine. He remained for a minute at a
how to address the ploughboy, as he had called ]
Heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and stood lookin
him coolly till he chose to speak.
" Sit down, sir, " he said at length. " Mrs. Lin
recalling old times, would have me give you a cbi
reception ; andi of course, I am gratified \riieh anyt!
occurs to please her. "
" And I also, " answered Heathcliff, " especially if i
anything in which I have a pail. I shall stay an hov
two willingly. "
He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her \
fixed on him as if she feared he would vaniish were
to remove it. He < Kd not raise his to her often — a q
glance now and then sufficed ; but it flashed back, <
time more confidently, the undisguised delight he di
from hers. They were too much absorbed in 1
mutual joy to suffer embarrassment. Not so Mr. Ed
He grew pale with pure annoyance— -a feeling that reac
its cUmax when his lady rose, and stepping across
nis; seized Hea,thcUfPs hands agaiiv, and laughed
one beside herself.
''I shall think it a dream to-xnoitowX " ^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 95
> hall not be able to believe that I have seen, and
lied, and spoken to you once more. And yet, cruel
liclifi ! you don't deserve this welcome. To be absent
silent for three years, and never to think of me ! " -
A little more than you have thought of me, " he
nured. " I heard of your marriage, Cathy, not long
t ; and while waiting in the yard below I meditated
plan — ^just to have one glimpse of your face, a stare
irprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure ; afterwards
B my score with Hindley ; and then prevent the
by doing execution on myself. Your welcome has
these ideas out of my mind ; but beware of meeting
with another aspect next time ! Nay, you'll not
3 me off again. You were really sorry for me, were
? Well, there was cause. I've fought through a
T life since I last heard your voice ; and you must
ve me, for I struggled only for you ! "
Catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to
5 to the table, " interrupted Linton, striving to pre-
3 his ordinary tone, and a due measure of polite-
** Mr. Heathcliff will have a long walk, wherever
lay lodge to-night, and I'm thirsty. "
le took her post before the urn ; and Miss Isabella
2, summoned by the bell ; then having handed their
rs forward, I left the room. The meal hardly eh-
d ten minutes. Catherine's cup was never filled,
could neither eat nor drink. Edgar had made a
in his saucer, and scarcely swallowed a mouthful,
r guest did not protract his stay that evening above
lour longer. I asked, as he departed, if he went to
merton ?
No ; to Wuthering Heights, " he answered. " Mr.
ishaw invited me when I called this morning. "
r. Earnshaw invited him! and he called on Mr.
ishaw ! I pondered this sentence painfully after he
gone. Is he turning out a bit of a hY^^v^-, ^«^^^
ing mto the countiy to work inisdmLei \rcA < «: -a. O^oRjji?^'^
ised. I had a presentiment m ^lYift \ > o\toxa oV tc^
that he had better have remadiied aw« > J»
96 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
About the middle of the night I was wakened fr <
my first nap by Mrs. Linton gliding into my chamb
taking a seat on my bedside, and pulling me by the h
to rouse me.
" I cannot rest, Ellen, " she said, by way of. apolo^
" And I want some living creature to keep me compa
in my happiness. Edgar is sulky because I'm ^ad
a thing that does not interest him. He refuses to op
his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches ; a
he affirmed I was cruel and selfish for wishing to U
when he was so sick and sleepy. He always contrives
be sick at the least cross! I gave a few sentences,
conunendation to Heathcliff, and he, either for a hea
ache or a pang of envy, began to cry ; so I got up a
left him. "
" What use is it praising Heathcliff to him ? " la
swered. " As lads they had an aversion to each otb
and Heathcliff would hate just as much to hear h
praised ; it's humaii nature. Let Mr. Linton alo
about him, unless you would like an open quarrel I
tween them. "
" But does it not show great weakness? " pursu
she. " I'm not envious. I never feel hurt at the brig!
ness of Isabella's yellow hair and the whiteness of 1:
skin, at her dainty elegance and the fondness all t
family exhibit for her. Even you, Nelly, if we have
dispute sometimes, you back Isabella at once ; and
yield like a foolish mother. I call her a darling, a
flatter her into a good temper. It pleases her brotl
to see us icordial, and that pleases me. But they i
very much alike. They are spoiled children, and fan
the world was made for their accommodation ; a
though I humour both, I think a smart chastisemc
might improve them, all the same. "
" You're mistaken, Mrs. Linton, " said :L " Th
humour you. I know what there would be to do
they did not. You. can well afford to. indulgei..th
passing whims as long as their business is to anticip^
all your desires. You may, however, fall. out at h
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 97
^ over something of equal consequence to both sides ; and
^ then those you term weak are very capable of being as
^ obstinate as you. "
" And then we shall fight to the death, shan't we,
^^Nelly ? " she returned, laughing. " No ; I tell you I
^hve such faith in Linton's love that I believe I might
^1 kOl him, and he wouldn't wish to retaliate. "
-^^ [ I advised her to value him the more for his affection.
^ . " I do,''she answered ; " but he needn't resort to
^^ ihining for trifles. It is childish ; and instead of
^^ [felting into tears because I said that Heathcliff was
'^'low worthy of any one's regard, and it would honour
^'B»e first gentleman in the country to be his friend, he
^imght to have said it for me, and been delighted from
sympathy. He must get accustomed to him, and he
^ nay as well Uke him. Considering how Heathcliff has
h^ leason to object to him, I'm sure he behaved excellently. "
hii " What do you think of his going to Wuthering
1^ Heights ? " I inquired. " He is reformed in every re-
" ^)ect, apparently — quite a Christian — offering the right
ffimd of fellowship to his enemies all around ! " <
^^ " He explained it, " she repUed. " I wonder as much
5/^^ as you. He said he called to gather information con-
^ ceraing me from you,, supposing you resided there still ;
^ ind Joseph told Hindley, who came out and fell to
^ fluestioning him of what he had been doing, and how
^ fe had been Hving, and finally desired him to walk in.
^ There were some persons sitting at cards. Heathcliff
^^ joined them. My brother lost some money to him ;
^ and finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that
^! ie would come again in the evening, to which he con-
'l'sented, Hindley is too reckless to select his acquaint-
'lance prudently. He doesn't trouble himself to reflect
on the causes he might have for mistrusting one whom
he has basely injured. But Heathcliff affirms his prin-
dpal reason for resuming a connection with his ancient
persecutor is a wish to install himself in quarters at
walking distance from the Grange, and an att^.Q3MaNfex^
to the house where we lived togettieT, axA \^^^«v
98 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
a hope that I shall have more opportunities of se
him there than I could have if he settled in Gimmei
He means to offer liberal payment for permissioi
lodge at the Heights; and doubtless my brotl
covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms,
was always greedy, though what he grasps with
hand he flings away with the other. "
" It's a nice place for a young man to i & x his dwe
in ! *'said I. ** Have you no fear of the consequeir
Mrs. Linton? "
" None for my friend, " she replied. " His st
head will keep him from danger. A little for Hinc
But he can't be made morally worse than he is ;
I stand between him and bodily harm. The even
this evening has reconciled me to God and humai
I had risen in angry rebellion against Providence.;
Tve endured very, very bitter misery, Nelly ! If
creature knew how bitter, he'd be ashanied to clouc
removal with idle petulance. It was kindness for
which induced me to bear it alone. Had I exprei
the agony I frequently felt, he would have been tai
to long for its alleviation as ardently as I. Howe
it's over, arid I'll take no revenge on his folly. I
afford to suffer anything hereafter. Should the mea
thing alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn
other, but I'd ask pardon for provoking it ; and j
proof I'll go make my peace with Edgar instar
Good-night ! I'm an angel ! "
In this self-complacent conviction she departed ;
the success of her fulfilled resolution was obvious on
morrow. Mr. Linton had not only abjured his pee\
ness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by Cathieri
exuberance of vivacity), but he ventured no objectio
her taking Isabella with her to Wuthering Heights in
afternoon ; and she rewarded him with such a sum
of sweetness and affection in return as made the h <
a paradise for several days, both master and servj
profiting from the perpettMil sunsYime.
Heathcliff—Mr. Heathclifi, 1 sYioxAd sa.'^j Vjv iwX
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 99
used the liberty of visiting at Thrushcross Grange
cautiously, at first He seemed estimating how far its
owner woxildbear his intrusion. Catherine, also, deemed
k judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in
J HBceiving him ; and he ^adually established his right
3, to be expected. He retained a great deal of the reserve
k which his boyhood was remarkable ; and that served
ji to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling. My
3j tester's tmeasiness experienced a lull, and further cir-
tamstances diverted it into another channel for a space.
3j ;.His new source of trouble sprang from the not-antici-
;g, fated misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden
y nd irresistible attraction towards the tolerated guest.
( She was at that time a charming young lady of eighteen,
I, infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen
jhdings, and a keen temper, too, if irritated. Her
brother, who loved her tenderly, was appalled at this
intastic preference. Leaving aside the degradation of
an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact
p, that his property, in default of heirs male, might pass
I iito such a one's power, he had sense to comprehend
[ Heathcliff's disposition — to know that, though his ex-
terior was altered, his mind was unchangeable and un-
changed. And he dreaded that mind. It revolted him.
le shrank forebodingly from the idea of committing
sabella to its keeping. He would have recoiled still more
had he been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited,
and was bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation
of sentiment^ for the minute he discovered its existence
he laid the blame on Heathcliff's deUberate designing.
We had all remarked, during some time, that Miss
Linton fretted and pined over something. She grew
cross and wearisome, snapping at and teasing Catherine
continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her
limited patience. We excused her, to a certain extent,
on the plea of ill-health. She was dwindling and tadm.^
before, our eyes. But one day, vrtieiv ^ < ^ \sa.^ \i'^^\ >
peculiarly wayward, rejecting her btea\d^s > V, coxa^-axM^
hat the servants did not do what she lo\d \}cvexsi\ \s
II
I
lOO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the mistress would allow her to be nothing iii the hoiu
and Edgar neglected her; that she had caught a. cc
with the doors being left open, and we let the pado
fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a. hundred j
more frivolous accusations, Mrs. Linton pieremptori
insisted that she should get to bed, and having scold
her heartily, threatened to send for the doctor. Menti
of Kenneth caused her to exclaim instantly that t
health Was perfect, and it was only Catherine's hara
ness which made her unhappy.
" How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fori
ling? " cried the mistress, amazed at the unreasonal
assertion. " You are surely losing your reason. Wh
have I been harsh, tell me ? "
** Yesterday,*'sobbed Isabella, " and now ! "
" Yesterday ! " said her sister-in-law. " On what ode
sion? " .'
" In our walk along the moor. You told me to rami
where I pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heat
cliff! "
" And that's your notion of harshness ? " said Catherii
laughing. " It was no hint that your company w
superfluous. We didn't care whether you kept with
or not. I merely thought Heathcliff's talk would ha
nothing entertaining for your ears. "
" Oh no, " wept the young lady ; " you wished i
away because you knew I liked to be there ! " i
*'Is she sane ? " asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to n
** I'll repeat Our conversation, word for word, Isabell:
and you point out any charm it could have had for 5^u
'" I don't mind the conversation, " she answered. ^
wanted to be with "''
" Well ? " said Catherine, perceiving her hesitate
complete the sentence.
" With him ; and I won't be always sent off ! " s
continued, kindling up. " You are a dog in the mang«
Cathy, and desire no one to be loved but yourself ! "
"'You are an impertinent little morL\Le > j\ " ^':k.cSaMr
Mrs. Linton, in surprise. " But TYL tiot \)^\«^^'
I WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOI
jj idiocy. It is impossible that you can covet the admira-
K tion of Heathcliff — that you consider him an agreeable
{, person ! I hope I have misunderstood you, Isabella ? "
\ " No, you have not, " said the infatuated girl. " I
j£ bve him more than ever you loved Edgar ; and he
i( might love me, if you would let him ! "
1j " I wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then ! " Gather-
j m declared emphatically ; and she seemed to speak
fccerdy.— " Nelly, help me to convince her of her
jfcadness* Tell her what HeathcUfE is — an unreclaimed
Sreature, without refinement, without cultivation, an arid
Mdemess of furze and whinstone. I'd as soon put that
jUttle canary into the park on a winter's day, as recom^
mend you to bestow your heart on him. It is deplorable
ignorance of his character, child, and nothing else, which
makes that dream enter your heiad. Pray don't imagine
J that he conceals depths of benevolence and affection
beneath a stern exterior. He's not a rough diamond,
a pearl-containing oyster of a rustic. He's a fierce,
pitiless, wolfish man. I never say to him, * Let this or
that enemy'alone, because it would be ungenerous or
crael to harm them.'I say,'Let them alone, because
/ should hate them to be wronged.'And he'd crush
you like a sparrow's egg, Isabella, if he found you a
troublesome charge. I know he couldn't love a Linton ;
and yet he'd be quite capable of marrying your fortune
and expectations. Avarice is growing with him a be-
setting sin. There*s my picture; and I'm his friend-
so much so, that had he thought seriously to catch
you, I should perhaps have held my tongue, and let
you fall into his trap. "
Miss Linton regarded her sister-in4aw with indignation.
" For shame ! for shame ! " she repeated angrily ;
'you are worse than twenty foes, you poisonous friend I "
" Ah ! you won't believe me, then ? " said Catherine.
* You think I speak from wicked seVfeYvm^^a " ^'"
*'J'i22 certain you do, " retorted l?abeXVau\ ^^ -axv^ ^
hndder at you !''
''Good!''cried the other. " Try ioi ^JoaTs€! & ^ ^^^ *^
I02 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
be your spirit. I have done, and jdeld the argi
your saucy insolence.*'
" And 1 must suffer for her egotism ! " she
as Mrs. Linton left the room. *'All, all is ag£
She has blighted my single consolation. But sh
falsehoods, didn't she ? Mr. HeathclifE is not
He has an honourable soul, and a true one,
could he remember her ? "
'* Banish him from your thoughts, miss, "
" He's a bird of bad omen — no mate for yoi
Linton spoke strongly, and yet I can't contra
She is better acquainted with his heart than I
one besides; and she never would represent
worse than he is. Honest people don't hide the
How has he been Uving ? How has he got rich
is he staying at Wuthering Heights, the house (
whom he abhors ? They say Mr. Eamshaw
and worse since he came. They sit up all night
continually, and Hindley has been borrowing n
his land, and does nothing but play and drink,
only a week ago — it was Joseph who told mc
him at Gimmerton. * Nelly,'he said,'we'i
crowner's'quest enow, at ahr folks. One (
a'most getten his finger cut ofi wi'handing t'o
stickin hisseln loike a cawlf . That's maister, yi
'at's soa up o'going tuh t'grand'sizes. H
feared o't'bench o'judges, norther Paul, ni
nur John, nur Matthew, nor noan on'em, not
fair Hkes — he langs to set his brazened face ag
And yon bonny lad Heathcliff, yah mind, he'
un ! He can girn a laugh as well's onybody at
divil's jest. Does he niver say nowt of his fii
amang us, when he goes to t'Grange ? This i
on't. Up at sundown ; dice, brandy, cloised
un can'le-light till next day at noon ; then,
gangs banning un raving to his cham'er, makkin
fowks dig thur fingers i'thur lugs fur varry
un the knave, why he can caint his brass, un
sleep, uh off to his neighbour's to gossip wi'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOJ
rse, he tells Dame Catherine how her fathur's goold
nto his pocket, and her fathur's son gallops down
ad road, while he flees afore to oppen t'pikes !'
Miss Linton, Joseph is an old rascal, but no liar ;
his account of HeathcHff's conduct be true, you
never think of desiring such a husband, would
ou are leagued with the rest, Ellen I " she replied,
not listen to your slanders. What malevolence
lust have to wish to convince me that there is no
less in the world ! "
gther she would have got over this fancy if left
rself, or persevered in ninrsing it perpetually, I
t say. She had little time to reflect. The day
there was a justice meeting at the next town. My
r was obUged to attend ; and Mr. HeathclifE, aware
absence, called rather earher than usual. Catherine
iabella were sitting in the library, on hostile terms,
lent — the latter alarmed at her recent indiscretion,
iie disclosure she had made of her secret feelings
transient fit of passion ; the former, on mature
eration, really offended with her companion, and
laughed again at her pertness, inclined to make it
ighing matter to her. She did laugh as she saw
diff pass the window. I was sweeping the hearth,
noticed a mischievous smile on her lips. Isabella,
)ed in her meditations, or a book, remained till
X)r opened ; and it was too late to attempt an
i, which she would gladly have done had it been
:able.
> me in ; that's right ! " exclaimed the mistress gaily,
I a chair to the fire. ** Here are two people sadly
d of a third to thaw the ice between them ; and
e the very one we should both of us choose. Heath-
;'m proud to show you, at last, somebody that
on you more than myself. I expect you to feel
3d. Nay, it's not Nelly ; don't look at her !
)or little sister-in-law is breaking her heart b^
:ontemplation of your physical ^iiA. TEiox^\ > «as!i5e5-
I04 WUTHERING HEIGHTS:
It lies in your own power to be Edgar's brother.r^I
no, Isabella ; you shan't run off, " she continued, arrestii
with feigned playfulness, the confounded girl, who.h
risen incfignantly.-T- " : We were quarrelling likfe cats abc
you, Heathcliff, and I was fairly beaten in protestatic
of devotion and admiration ; and, moreover, I wias
formed that if I would but have the manners to sta
aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, woi
shoot a shaft into, your soul that would fix you for ev
and send my image into eternal oblivion ! "
" Catherine ! " said Isabella, calling up her digni
and disdaining to struggle from the tight grasp that hi
her, " I*d thank you to adhere to the truths and i
slander me, even in joke.— Mr. Heathcliff, be ki
enough to bid this friend of yours release me. S
forgets that you and I are not intimate acquaintance
and what amuses her is painful to me beyond expressioi
As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, a
looked thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she ch
ished concerning him, she turned and whispered
earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.
" By no means ! " cried^ Mrs. Linton in answer,
won't be named a dog in the manger again. You sJ
stay. — Now, then, Heathcliff, why don't you evil
satisfaction at my pleasant news ? Isabella swears t]
the love Edgar has for me is nothing to that she enl
tains for you. I'm sure she made some speech of
kind — did she not, Ellen ? And she has fasted ever si:
the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and r;
that I dispatched her out of your society under
idea of its being unacceptable. "
" I think you belie her, " said Heathcliff, twisting
chair to face them.'* She wishes to be out of my soci
now, at any rate. "
And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as <
might do at a strange, repulsive animal — a centip <
from the Indies, for instance, which curiosity leads <
to examine in spite of the aversion it raises. The p
'ifl^ couldn't bear that. She gfew white and red
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOS
rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes,
bent the strength of her small fingers to loosen the firm
dutch of Catherine ; and perceiving that as fast as she
raised one finger off her arm another closed down, and
die could not remove the whole together, she began to
make use of her nails; and their sharpness presently
jcmamented the detainer's with crescents of red.
** There's a tigress ! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting
ler free, and shaking her hand with pain. " Begone,
kr God's sake, and lude your vixen face ! How foolish
1^, fa reveal those talons to him / Can't you fancy the con-
dosions he'll draw ? — Look, Heathcliff ! they are instru-
, ^'laents that will do execution ; you must beware of your
St
c &
3n
au
her
10*
er-
" I'd wrench them ofi her fingers if they ever menaced
me, " he answered brutally, when the door had closed
after her. " But what did you mean by teasing the
creature in that manner, Cathy ? You were not speak-
ing the truth, were you ? "
" I assure you I was, " she returned. *'She has been
dymg for your sake several weeks, and raving about
Sou this morning, and pouring forth a deluge of abuse,
because I represented your failings in a plain light, for
the purpose of mitigating her adoration. But. don't
ilotice it further. I wished to punish her sauciness —
, I that's all. I like her too well, my dear Heathcliff, to
flfet you absolutely seize and devour her up. "
^'" And I like her too ill to attempt it, " said he, " ex-
cept in a very ghoulish fashion. You'd h^ar of odd
tmngs if I lived alone with that mawkish, waxen face.
The most ordinary would be painting on its white the
colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black,
every day or two. They detestably resemble Linton's. "
" Delectably ! " observed Catherine. " They are dove's
eyes — angel's ! "
" She's her brother's heir, is she not ? " he asked, after
a brief silence.
" I should be sorry to think so, " telMtivfe^ \a% wco
panion. " Half a dozen nephews sYvaW. et^sfc \NKt ^oiC
106 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
please Heaven ! Abstract your mind from the subjec
at present. You are too prone to covet your neigh
hour's goods. Remember this neighbour's goods ar^
mine. "
" If they were mine, they would be none the less that,'
said Heathcliff ; " but though Isabella Linton may b
silly, she is scarcely mad ; and, in short, we'll dismiss tb
matter, as you advise. "
From their tongues they did dismiss it ; and Catherine
probably, from her thoughts. The other, I felt certain
recalled it often in the course of the evening. I sai
him smile to himself — grin rather — and lapse into omi
nous musing whenever Mrs. Linton had occasion to b
absent from the apartment.
I determined to watch his movements. My hear
invariably cleaved to the master's, in preference t
Catherine's side — ^with reason, I imagined, for he wa
kind, and trustful, and honourable ; and she — she coul(
not be called the opposite, yet she seemed to allow ha
self such wide latitude that I had little faith in he
principles, and still less sympathy for her feelings,
wanted something to happen which might have th
effect of freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grang
of Mr. Heathcliff quietly, leaving us as we had beei
prior to his advent. His visits were a continual night
mare to me, and, I suspected, to my master also. Hi
abode at the Heights was an oppression past explaining
I felt that God had forsaken the stray sheep there t
its own wicked wanderings, and an evil beast prowler
between it and the fold, waiting his time to spnng am
destroy.
CHAPTER XL
Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude
I've got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonne
to go see how all was at the iaim. \Ne -^T^^oaAfe^ xs <
conscience that it was a duty to waxn \v\m Vcw ^o^
^Iced regarding his ways ; and ttven \Ne^ x^co^i^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I07
bis confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting
him, have flinched from re-entering the dismal house,
doubting if I could bear to be taken at my word.
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way,
on a journey to Gimmerton. It was about the period
that my narrative has reached — a bright, frosty after-
lioon, the ground bare, and the road hard and dry.
1 came to a stone where the highway branches off on
jto the moor at your left hand — a rough sand-pillar, with
je letters W. H. cut on its north side, on the east, G.,
ftd on the south-west, T. G. It serves as a guide-post
» the Grange, the Heights, and village. The sun shone
dlow on its gray head, reminding me of summer;
nd I cannot say why, but all at once a gush of child's
ensations flowed into my heart. Hindley and I held
t a favourite spot twenty years before. I gazed long
^ the weather-worn block, and stooping down, perceived
Ihole near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles,
wiich we were fond of storing there with more perishable
s ; and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I be*
Id my early playmate seated on the withered turf,
dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand
[icooping out the earth with a piece of slate. " Poor
Imdley ! " I exclaimed involuntarily. I started. My
.bodily eye was cheated into a momentary beUef that
the child lifted its face and stared straight into mine !
It vanished in a twinkling ; but immediately I felt an
irresistible yearning to be at the Heights. Superstition
Jirged me to comply with this impulse. Supposing he
should be dead, I thought, or should die soon !^—
supposing it were a sign of death! The nearer I got
to the house the more agitated I grew ; and on catching
sight of it I trembled every limb. The apparition had
outstripped me. It stood looking through the gate.
That was my first idea on observing an elf -locked, brown-
eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars.
Further reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my
Hareton, Dot altered greatly since I left him, ten motvtbs*
once.
I08 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" God bless thee, darling!*'I cried, forgetting in
stantaneousiy my foolish fears. " Hareton, = it^s NeDjM
Nelly, thy nurse/'::...'!
He retreated out of arm's length, and'picked up \
large flint. ■■'-■.■'■
" I^am come to see thy father, Hareton, " I added
guessing from the action that Nelly, if she lived in hi
ttiemory at all, was not recognized as one with me.
He raised his missile to hurl it. I commenced a sooti
ing speech, but could not stay his hand. The stcd
struck my bonnet ; and then ensued, from the stamm€(
ing lips of the httle fellow, a string of curses, whicJ
whether he comprehended them or pot, were delivers
with practised emphasis, and distorted his baby feature
iiito a shocking expression of malignity. You may i
certain this grieved nlore than angered nie. Fit to cry,
took an orange from my pocket, and offered it to propitiai
him. He hesitated, and then snatched it from my hol <
as if he fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoii
him. I showed another, keeping it out of his reach.
" Who has taught you those fine wordSj. my bairn ?•
I inquired — " the curate ?'•
" Damn the curate, and thee! Gie me that, " t
replied. . :
" Tell us where you got -your lessons, and you sha
have it, " said I.'* Who's your master ? "
" Devil daddy, " Was his answer.
/■ And what do you learn from daddy ? " I continued
He jumped at the fruit. I raised it higher. " Whs
does he teach you ? " I asked.
" Naught, " said he,'* but to keep out of his gai'
Daddy cannot bide me, because I swear at him. "
*'Ah ! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy ?
I observed.
" Ay — nay, " he drawled.
" Who, then ? "
I asked if he liked Mr. HeatticM.
^Ay I " he answered again.
WU1CHERING heights: lOp
Desiring'to- have ms reasons ior liking him, I could
only gather Ihe.sifehtences, ** I known't. . He pays dad
back what he^^es to^me; hfe'curses daddy for cursing
me. Hef say!^ i niuri do as I will/'
" And th.2 curate does not teach you to read and write
then ? " I-'pursiied.'''.
** No, I was told the curate should have his — ^ — teeth
dashed down his •- throat if he stepped ovier the
threshold. HeathcUff had promised that ! "
I I put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his
father that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting tp
speak with him by the garden gate. He went up the
walk, and entered the house ; but instead of Hindley,
Heathcliff appeared on the door stohes ; and I turned
directly atid ran doMm the road as hard as ever I could
race, making no halt till I gained the guide-post, and
feeling as scared as if I had raised a goblin. This is
not much connected with Miss Isabella's affair, except
that it urged me to resolve further on mounting vigilant
i guard, and doing my utmost to check the spread of such
bad infliience at the Grange, even though I should wake
fa domestic storm by th\yarting Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
The next time Heathcliff came, my young lady chanced
to be feeding some pigeons in the court. She had never
spoken a word to her sister-in-law for three days; but
I she had likewise dropped her fretful Complainmg, and
we found it a great comfort. Heathcliff had not the
habit of bestowing a single unnecessary civility on'Miss
Linton, I knew. Now, as soon as he beheld her, his
first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the
house-front. I was standing by the kitchen window,
I but I drew out of sight. He then stepped across the
pavement to her, and said something. She seemed
embarrassed and desirous of getting away ; to prevent
it, he laid his hand on her arm. She averted Iacx: ia.^^
He apparently put some question wliicVv sYieVvaAxvo t«^
to answer. There was another rapid ^^xvc^ ^^ \
louse; and supposing himself unseen, t\ve scowvx^^^
^^ ^nipudence to embrace her.
no WUTHERING.aMGirrR
*'Judas I traitor 1 " I ejacu^tedi /VSfouare a
crite, too, are you — a deliberate jdw»i^ril'j r.i.
" Who is, Nelly ?'* said Catherinftte :y«Nice At my (
I had been over-intent on watchitog.*he pair outsi
mark her entrance.
" Your worthless friend ! " I answered warnjly—
pneaking rascal yonder. Ah, he has caught k gl
of us ; he is coming in ! I wonder will he hav
heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to
when he told you he hated her ? "
Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself free, an <
into the garden ; and a minute after Heathcliff o
the door. I couldn't withhold giving some loose 1
indignation ; but Catherine angrily insisted on si
and threatened to order me out of the kitchen
dared to be so presumptuous as to put in my in
tpngue.
" To hear you, people might think you were th <
tress I ** she cried. " You want setting down in
right place I — Heathcliff, what are you about, r
this stir ? I said you must let Isabella alone !
you wilj, unless you are tired of being received
and wish Linton to draw the bolts against you ! "
" God forbid that he should try ! " answered the
villain. I detested him just then. ** God keep
meek and patient ! Every day I grow madder
sending him to heaven ! "
** Hush ! " said Catherine, shutting the inner
" Don't vex me. Why have you disregarded n
quest ? , Did she come across you on purpose ? "
'* What is it to you ? " he growled. " I have a
to kiss her, if she chooses ; and you have no ri§
object. I am not your husband ; you needn't be j <
of me. "
" I'm not jealous of you, " replied the mistress-
jealous for ypu. Clear your face; you shan't sec
me/ If you like Isabella, you shall marry her.
do you hke her? Tell the trutYi, Uea.\:tv!ettgi,'
you won't answer.'I'm certain you dou'i:'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Ill
" And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrjdng
that man ? " I inquired.
" Mr. Linton should approve, " returned my lady de-
cisively.
" He might spare himself the trouble, " said Heath-
diff ; " I could do as well without his approbation.
And as to you, Catherine, I have a mind to s^eak a
few words now, while we are at it. I want you to be
aware that I kfww you have treated me infernally—^
kfemally ! Do you hear ? And if you flatter yourself
fcat I don't perceive it, you are a fool ; and if you
fcink I can be consoled by sweet words, you are an
idiot ; and if you fancy I'll suffer unrevenged, I'll con-
vince you of the contrary in a very little while. Mean-
[time, thank you for telling me your sister-in-law's secret.
1 1 swear I'll make the most of it. And stand you aside. "
" What new phase of his character is this ? " exclaimed
Mrs. Linton, in amazement. " I've treated you infer-
naJly, and you'll take your revenge! How will you
take it, ungrateful brute? How have I treated you
mfemally ? "
'* I seek no revenge on you, " replied Heathcliff , less
vehemently. " That's not the plan. The tyrant grinds
down his slaves, and they don't turn against him; they
I crush those beneath them. You are wekome to torture
'me to death for your amusement, only allow me to
amuse myself a little in the same style, and refrain from
insvdt as much as you are able. Having levelled my
palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire ydur
own charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined
you really wished me to marry Isabel, I'd cut my
throat! "
" Oh, the evil is that I am not jealous, is it ? " cried
Catherine. " Well, I won't repeat my offer of a wife.
It is as bad as offering Satan a lost soul. Yout bl^ss
lies, like his, in inflicting misery. Yotl pto'^e \V, ^^^
(s restored from the ill- temper he gave Nva.^ ^ ^^ ^^
ymin^ I begin to be secure and traivQmY; -axA " :
St/ess to know us at peace, appear tesoVved. o'o
112 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
citing a quarrel. Quarrel with Edgar, if you pleas(
Heathcliff, and deceive his sister. You'll hit on exactl
the most ef & cient method of revenging yourself on me. "
The conversation ceased. Mrs. Linton sat down b
the fire, flushed and gloomy. The spirit which serve
her was growing intractable ; she coiild neither lay nc
control it. He stood on the hearth with folded arm:
brooding on his evil thoughts ; and in this position
left them to seek the master, who was wondering whs
kept Catherine below so 16ng.
" Ellen, " said he, when I entered, " have you see
your mistress I* "
" Yes; she's in the kitchen, sir, " I answered. " She
sadly put out by Mr. Heathcliff's behaviour; an <
indeed, I do think it's time to arrange his visits o
another footing. There's harm in being too soft, an
now it's come to this " And I related the scene i
the court, and, as near as I dared, the whole subsequer
dispute. I fancifed it could not be very prejudicial t
Mrs. Linton, unless she made it so afterwards by assun
ing the defensive for her guest. Edgar Linton had difi
culty in hearing me to the close. His first words reveale
that he, did not clear his wife of blame.
" This is insufferable ! " he exclaimed. " It is dij
graceful that she should own him for a friend, and fore
his company on me ! Call me two men out of the hal
Ellen. Catherine shall linger no longer to argue wit
the low ruf & an. I have humoured her enough. "
He descended, and bidding the servants wait in th
passage, went, followed by me, to the kitchen. li
occupants had recommenced their angry discussioi
Mrs. Linton, at least, was scolding with renewed yigou
HeathcUff had moved to the window, and hung h
head, somewhat cowed by her violent rating apparently
He saw the master first, and made a hasty motion tha
she should he silent ; which she obeyed abruptly, o
discovering the reason of his intimaWoiv.
''How is this ? " said Linton, addtessm^\\et. ^^ N^
^otioa of propriety must you Iciave to^ lOTv^m V^x^. ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. II3
the language which has been held to you by that black-
goard ? I suppose, because it is his ordinary talk, you
think nothing of it. You are habituated to his baseness,
and, perhaps, imagine I can get used to it too. "
" Have you b^n listening at the door, Edgar? "
jilsked the mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to
ffirovoke her husband, impl5dng both carelessness and
Dntempt of his irritation. Heathdiff, who had raised
is eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at
le latter — on purpose, it seemed, to draw Mr. Linton's
ttention to him. He succeeded ; but Edgar did not
lean to entertain him with any high flights of passion.
" I have been so far forbearing with you, sir, " he said
Dietly — " not that I was ignorant of your miserable,
egraded character, but I felt you were only partly
^sponsible for that ; and Catherine wishing to keep up
our acquaintance, I acquiesced — foolishly. Your pres-
, ace is a moral poison that would contaminate the most
, irtuous. For that cause, and to prevent worse conse-
j uences, I shall deny you hereafter admission into this
j wise, and give notice now that I require your instant
3 eparture. Three minutes* delay wiU render it involun-
iry and ignominious. "
Heathchff measured the height and. breadth of the
iker with an eye full of derision.
" Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull ! "
said. " It is in danger of splitting its skull against
knuckles. — By God, Mr. Linton, Tm mortally sorry
at you are not worth knocking down ! "
jMy master glanced towards the passage, and signed
1 to fetch the men. He had no intention of hazarding
personal encounter. I obeyed the hint ; but Mrs.
Qton, suspecting something, followed ; and when I
empted to call them, she pulled me back, slammed
1 door to, and locked it.
, " Fair means ! " she said, in answer to her husband's
ok of angry surprise. " If you have not courage to
him, make an apology, or allovj yowx^ii^V \.Ck \2«
fJJ^ten. It will correct von of feienini* tnore'^J?^c^^\T Vt\*?
114 WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
you possess. No, I'll swallow the key before y
get it ! I'm delightfully rewarded for my kiiK
each ! After constant indulgence of one's weak
and the other's bad one, I earn for thanks two
of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity ! Edga
defending you and yoius; and I wish Heathc
flog you sick for daring to think an evil thought (
It did not need the medium of a flogging to
that effect on the master.; He tried to wrest
from Catherine's grasp, and for safety she flun§
the hottest part of the fire ; whereupon Mr. Ed
taken with a nervous trembling, and his cour
grew deadly pale. For his life he could not av
excess of emotion; mingled anguish and hur
overcame him completely. He leant on the b£
chair, and covered his face.
*• O heavens ! In old days this would v
knighthood I " exclaimed Mrs. Linton. " We j
qui & hed I we are vanquished ! HeathcM would
Kft a finger at you as a king would march h
against a colony of mice. Cheer up ; you shan't 1
Your type is tot a lamb ; it's a sucking leveret. "
" I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, C
said her friend. " I compliment you on yon
And that is the slavering, shivering thing you j
to! the! I would not strike him with my fist,
kick him with my foot, and experience consideral
faction. Is he weeping, or is he going to faiat fo
The fellow approached and gave the chair o
Linton rested a push. He'd better have kepf
tadce.. My master quickly sprang erect, and str
full'on the throat a blow that would have le
slighter man. It took his breath for a minut
while he choked, Mr. Linton walked but by t
door into the yard, and from thence to thfe front e
" Ther^ ! you've done with coming here,
Catherine, " Get away, now. He'll letum with
of pistols and half a dozen assistaiv\s. \l\ve'
^ear us, of course he'd never iot^ve ^o\i
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. IIS
played me an ill turn, Heathcliff. But go — make haste !
rd rather see Edgar at bay than you. "
" Do you suppose I'm going with that blow burning
n my gullet? " he thundered.''By hell, no I Til
inish his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut before I cross
threshold I If I don't floor him now, I shall murder
some time ; so, as you value his existence, let me
: at him ! "
He is not coming, " I interposed, framing a bit of a
" There's the coachman and the two gardeners.
I'll surely not wait to be thrust into the road by
! Each has a bludgeon ; and master will very
ly be watching from the parlour windows, to see
at they fulfil his orders. "
The gardeners and coachman were there, but Linton
with them. They had already entered the court.
athclif!, on second thoughts, resolved to avoid a
aggl® against the three underlings. He seized the
leer, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made
fs escape as they tramped in.
Mrs. Linton, who was very much excited, bade me
ccompany her upstairs. She did not know my share
[contributing to the disturbance, and I was anxious
keep her in ignorance.
" I'm nearly distracted, Nelly ! " she exclaimed, throw-
EherseM on the sofa. " A thousand smiths'hammers
beating in my head ! Tell Isabella to shun me ; this
broar is owing to her ; and should she or any one else
gravate my anger at present, I shall get wild. And,
dly, say to Ed^, if you see him again to-night, that
m in danger of being seriously ill. I wish it may prove
He. He has startled and distressed me shockingly,
want to frighten him. Besides, he might come and
pin a string of abuse or complainings. I'm certain I
lould recriminate, and God knows where Nve ^\\ssv3\.^
mi ! Will )^u do so, my good Nelly ? Xow ^.x^ ^nn-^x^
hit I am no way Wamable in tYiis ma\AaT. ^\«
huessed Aim to turn listener ? HeatYvc\\ffi^ ^^^^ ^
tr^eous after you left us ; but 1 cou\d sjc > otv \x
1 1 6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant n
Now all is dashed wrong, by the fool's craving 1
evil of self that haunts some people like a demon.
Edgar never gathered our conversation, he woulc
have been the worse for it. Really, when he ope
me in that unreasonable tone of displeasiire after
scolded Heathcliff itill I was hoarse iov htnti I ^
care hardly what they did to each other ^-esj
as I felt I that, hoWever the scene closed, we sho
be driven asunder for nobody knows how long!
if I cannot keep Heathcliff for my friend — ^if Edg
be mean and jealous— ril try to break their hea
breaking my own. That will be a prompt way of
ing all, when I am pushed to extremity. But
deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope; Fd nc
Linton by surprise with it. To this point he ha
discreet in dreading to provoke me. You must re]
the peril of quitting that policy, and remind him
passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on
I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that c
nance, and look rather more anxious about me. "
The stolidity with which I received these instn
wasj no doubt, rather exasperating, for they we
livered in perfect sincerity ; but I believed a
who coiild plan the tutning of her fits of pass
account beforehand might, by exerting her will, n
to control herself tolerably, even while under th
fluence ; and I did not wish to " frighten " her hu
as she said, and multiply his annoyances for the pur
serving her selfishness. Therefore I said nothing \
met the master coming towards the parlour ; but
the liberty of turning back to listen whether they
resume their quarrel together. He began to speai
" Remain where you are,* Catherine, " he said, m
any anger in his voice, but with much sorrow!
spondency, " I shall hot stay. I am neither cc
wrangle nor be reconciled ; but 1 > w\s\v \\3 & \. \.c
whether, after this evening's events, " V^^ VtstetA
'jjiue your intimacy with—— "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. II7
I, for mercy's sake, " interrupted the mistress, stamp-
r foot — " for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of
! Your cold blood cannot be worked into a fever,
sreins are full of ice-water; but mine are boiling,
e sight of such chillness makes them dance. "
get rid of me, answer my question, " persevered Mr.
. " You w«sr answer it, and that violence does
irm me. I have found that you can be a & stoical
one, when you please. Will you give up. Heath*
ireafter, or will you give up me ? It is impos-
)r you to be my friend and his at the same time ;
ibsolutely require to know which you choose. "
require to be let alone ! " exclaimed Catherine
ly. " I demand it ! Don't you see I can scarcely
» Edgar, you — you leave'me ! "
rang the bell till it broke with a twang. I entered
!y. It was enough to try the temper of a saint,
enseless, wicked rages ! There she lay dashing
ad against the arm of the sofa, and gnnding her
so that you might fancy she would crash them
iters ! Mr. Linton stood looking at her in sudden
notion and fear. He told me to fetch some
She had no breath for speaking. I brought a
ull ; and as she would not drink, I sprinkled it
face. In a few seconds she stretched herself out
tid turned up her eyes, while her cheeks, at once
3d and livid, assumed the aspect of death. Linton
terrified.
ere is nothing in the world the matter, " I whispered,
lot want him to yield, though I could not help
iraid in my heart.
» has blood on her lips ! " he said, shuddering,
ver mind ! " I answered tartly. And I told him
le had resolved, previous to his coming, oh ex-
j a fit of frenzy. I incautiously gave the account
aiid she heard me, for she started up, Yi^kc \s2c > s:
yver her shoulders^ her eyes ftasViirvg, \)afi. xcoosf^^'^
aeck and arms standing out ptetexiiaVxa^^ • !^
y my mind for broken bones at \east \ \3{vx\. ^
Il8 WUTHERING HEIGHTa
only glared about her for an instant, and then.ru$h)e(
from the room. The master directed me to follow, -i;
did, to her chamber door. She hiiidered me fronj go^
farther by securing it against me.
As she never offered to descend to breakfast nejf
morning, I went to ask whether she would have somj
carried up.'* No ! " she replied peremptorily. Til
same question was repeated at dimier and tea, an
again on the morrow after, and received the same auswa
Mr. Linton, on his part, spent his time in the librat
and did not inquire concerning his wife's occupation!
Isabella and he had had an hour's interview, duii
which he tried to eHcit from her some sentin > ent
proper horror for Heathcliff's advances; but he con
make nothing of her evasive replies, and was oblig
to close the examination unsatisfactorily, adding, ho^
ever, a solemn warning that if she were so insane as
encourage that worthless . suitor, it would dissolve
bonds of relationship between herself and him. .
CHAPTER XII.
While Miss Linton moped about the park and gar(
always silent, ajid almost always in tears, and her broi
shut himself up among books that he never opem
wearying, I guessed, with a continual vague expectai
that Catherine, repenting her conduct, would come
her own accord to ask pardon, and seek a reconciJiatic
— and she fasted pertinaciously, under the idea, pro
ably, that at every meal Edgar was ready to choke t
her absence, and pride alone held him'from running-
cast himself at her feet, I went about my househo
duties, convinced that the Grange had but one sen^t]
soul in its walls, and that lodged in my body. I wastt^
no condolences on miss, nor any expostulations on
mistress; nor did I pay much attention to the
of my master, wijo yearned to Yveat \vvs \aA^'^
since he might not hear her voice. \ de.\Kroisife^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. II5
should come about as they pleased for me ; and though
it was a tiresomely slow process, I began to rejoice at
length in a faint dawn of its progress, as I thought at first.
Mrs. Linton on the third day unbarred her door, and
having finished the water in her pitcher and decanter,
desired a renewed supply, and a basin of gruel, for she
believed she was dying. That I set down as a speech
meant for Edgar's ears. I beheved no such thing, so
I kept it to myself, and brought her some tea and dry
i toast. She ate and drank eagerly, and sank back on
fier pillow again, clenching her hands and groaning.
* Oh, I will die, " she exclaimed, " since no one cares
anything about me. I wish I had not taken that. "
Then a good while after I heard her murmur, " No, I'll
not die — ^he'd be glad — he does not love me at all— he
would never miss me I "
" Did you want anyihing, ma'am ? " I inquired, still
preserving my external composure, in spite of her ghastly
countenance and strange, exaggerated manner.
" What is that apathetic being doing ? " she demanded,
[pushing the thick entangled locks from her wasted face,
'" Has he fallen into a lethargy, or is he dead ? "
" Neither, " replied I, " if you mean Mr. Linton. He's
'tolerably well, I think, though his studies occupy him
rather more than they ought. He is continually among
his books, since he has no other society. "
I should not have spoken so if I had known her true
condition, but I could not get rid of the notion that
she acted a part of her disorder.
" Among his books ! " she cried, confounded. " And
I dyeing — I on the brink of the grave ! My God ! does
he know how I'm altered ? " continued she, staring at
her reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite
wall. " Is that Catherine Linton ? He imagines me in
a pet — ^in play, perhaps. Cannot you inform him tha.^
it is frightful earnest ? Nelly, if it be not too ^aXfc,'i
soon as I leam how be feels I'U choose ^etweexv > i^w
ivo--either to starve at once (that wo\iVd be tvo ^xxri
^ent unless he had a ieart), or to recover, atvd\e»Nr^
I20 WUtHERING HEIGHTS.
country. Are yoti speaking the truth about him
Take care. Is he actually so utterly indifferent i
life? "
*'Why, ma'am, " I answered, " the master has r
of your being deranged ; and, of course, he do
fear that you will let yourself die of hungerJ "
" You think not? Cannot you tell him I ^
she returned. " Persuade him ; speak of you
mind ; say you are certain I will I "
: " No, you foi^et, Mrs. Lintony " I suggested,
570U have eaten some food with a relish this e-s
and to-morrow you will perceive its^good effects. "
'V^ If I were only sure it would kill him, " she inten
''I'd kill myself directly! These three kwful
I've never closed my Hds ; and oh, I've been torm^
I've been haimted, Nelly! But I begin to fane
don't like me. How strange I I thought, though
body hated and despised each 6ther, they cou
avoid loving me. And they have all turiied to e
in a few hours. They have, I'm positive — ^the
here. How dreary to meet death, surrounded b]
cold faces ! Isabella, terrified and repelled, afr
enter the room ; it would be so dreadful to watch Cal
go! And Edgar standing solemnly by to see it
then offering prayers of thanks to God for res
peace to his house, and goihg back to his books /
in the name of all that feels has he to do with
when I am dying ? "
She could not bear the notion which I had pi
hei* head of Mr. Linton's philosophical resigi
Tossing about, she increased her feverish bewild <
to madness, and tore; the pillow with her teeth;
raising herself up, all burning, desired that I woul(
the window. We were in the middle of winter, th
blew strong from the north-east, and I objected.
the expressions flitting over her face and the c
0/ ber moods began to alarm me tembly, and b
to my recollection her former S\ne^, ^xA > 3Dfc <
'njimction that she should not \)e. (aco^sfc^, ^s
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 121
previously she was violent ; now, supported on one
arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey her, she seemed
to fiiid childish diversion in pulling the feathers from the
rents she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet
according to their different species. Her mind had
strayed to other associations.
" That's a turkey's, " she murmured to herself, " and
this is a wild duck's, and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they
put pigeons'feathers in the pillows ; no wonder I couldn't
die ! Let me take care to throw it on the floor when I
ie down. And here is a moor-cock's ; and this — I
should know it among a thousand — it's a lapwing's.
Bonny bird, wheeling over our heads in the middle of
the moor. It wanted to get to its nest, for the clouds
bad touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. This
feather was picked up from the heath ; the bird was not
shot. . We saw its nest in the winter, full of little skele-
tons. Heathdiff set a trap over it, and the old ones
dare not come. I made him promise he'd never shoot
igL lapwing after that, and he dichi't. Yes, here are more !
bid he shoot my lapwings, NeUy ? Are they red, any
prfthem? Let me look. "
" Give over with that baby-work ! " I interrupted, drag-
ypng the pillow away, and turning the holes towards the
mattress, for she was removing its contents by handfuls.
" Lie down and ; shut your eyes; you're wandering.
There's a mess ! The down is flying about like snow. "
i went here and there collecting it.
" I see in you, Nelly, " she continued dreamily, " an
aged woman. You have gray hair and bent shoulders.
Uiis bed is the fairy cave imder Peniston Crag, and you
are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers, pretendmg,
while I am near, that they are only locks of wool. That's
^hat you'll come to fifty years hence. I know you are
not so now. I'm not wandering ; you're mistaken, ot
dse I should believe you really were that mt5cvete.^\Na.^
and 1: should think I was under Penistop. Ctsw^s.-iN'aa
'm conscious it's night, and there are two caxi^es
e table makmg the black press shine like ^et^
122 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
. " The black press ? Where is that ?''I asked. " Yo«
are talking in your sleep ! "
" It's against the wall, as it always is, " she replied
" It does appear odd. I see a face in it ! "
" There's no press in the room, and never was, " saic
I, resuming my seat, and looping up the curtain, that i
might watch her.
" Don't you see that face ? " she rnqidred, gaziii^
earnestly at the mirror.
; And say what I could, I was incapable of making hi|
comprehend it to be her own ; so I rose and covered i
with a shawl.
" It's behind there still ! " she pursued anxiousl]
" And it stirred. Who is it ? I hope it will not con
out when you are gone ! O Nelly, the room is haunted
I'm afraid of being alone ! "
I took her hand in mine, and bade her be compose!
for a succession of shudders convulsed her frame, an
she woidd keep straining her gaze towards the glass. j
'* There's nobody here ! " I insisted. ■'It was yoursdt
Mrs. Linton, You knew it a while since. " j
" Myself ! " she gasped ; " and the clock is strikiilj
twelve I It's true, then ; that's dreadful ! " ,
Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered then
over her eyes. I attempted to steal to the door, witi
an intention of calHng her husband; but I was surf
moned back by a piercing shriek. The shawl had droppel
from the frame.
" Why, what is the matter? " cried I.''Who i
coward now ? Wake up ! That is the glass — the mirrd
Mrs. Linton ; and you see yourself in it ; and there aii
I too, by your side. "
Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but th
horror gradually passed from her coimtenance. Its pale
ness gave place to a glow of shame.
" Oh dear ! I thought I was at home, " she sighed-
'^/ thought I was lying -itt my chainb^ at'Wutheiim
Heights. Because I'm weak, iKy ^3i^m %q > \. cs«A»sfcs
^d I screamed unconsciously. T > oxi'X sa.^ ^sK^^ema
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 23
but stay with me. I dread sleeping. My dreams appall
me. "
" A sound sleep would do you good, ma'ain, " I an-
swered ; " and I hope this suffering will prevent your
trying starving again. "
*'Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house ! ■'
she went on bitterly, wringing her hands. "'And that
yind soimding in the firs by the lattice. Do let me feel
it — ^it comes straight down the moor — do let me have one
Ireath! "
To pacify her, I held the casement ajar a few seconds.
A cold blast rushed through. I closed it, and returned
to my post. She lay still now, her face bathed in tears.
Exhaustion of body had entirely subdued her spirit.
Our fiery Catherine was no better than a wailing child;
" How long is it since I shut myself in here ? " she
asked, suddenly reviving.
" It was Monday evening, " I replied; ^* and this is
Thursday night, or rather Friday morning, at present. "
, " What ! of the same week ? " ^he exclaimed.'* Only
(Hiat brief time ? "
" Long enough to Hve on nothing but cold water and
ill-temper, " observed I.
. " Well, it seems a weary number of hours, " she mut-
tered doubtfully. " It must be more. I remember being
in the parlour after they had quarrelled, and Edgar being
cruelly provoking, and me nmning into this room desper-
ate. As soon as ever I had barred the door, utter black-
ness overwhelmed me, and I fell on the floor. I couldn't
explain to Edgar how certain I felt of having a fit, or
gioing raging mad, if he persisted in teasing me. I had
ao command of tongue or brain, and he did not guess
my agony perhaps; it barely left me. sense to try to
scape from him and his voice. Before I recovered
juffidently to see and hear, it began to be 4a.^NXi\ ^tA.
^elly, I'D tell you what I thought, and v/Yvat \l^ & > iR:?
Bcurring and recurring till I feared lot my te^fio^-
oaglij as I Jay there, with my head against ft^J^V Va
; and my eyes dimly discerning the gra^ sqaM
1 24 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the window, that I was enclosed in the oak-panelle <
bed at home ; and my heart ached with some grea
grief which, just waking, I could not recollect. I pon
dered, and worried myself to discover what it coulc
be ; and, most strangely, the whole last seven years o
my life gtew a blank ! I did not recall that they ha(
been at all. I was a child ; my father was just buried
and my misery arose from the separation that Hindlej
had ordered between me and Heathcliff. I was laiJ
alone, for the first time ; and rousing from a dismai
do^e, after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to pus!
the panels aside. It struck the table-top ! I swept i
along the carpet ; and then memory burst in. My lat
anguish was swallowed in a paroxj^m of despair. ]
cannot say why I felt so wildly wretched. It mui^
have been temporary derangement, for there is scarce!]
cause. But, supposing at twelve years old I had beeJ
wirenched frotti the Heights, arid every early association
arid my all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, aiu
beien converted at a stroke into Mrsw Linton, the ladj
of Thrushcross Grange, and the \^dfe of a stranger, aj
exile and outcast thenceforth from what had been mj
world — you may fancy a glimpse of the* abyss where ■
gtovelled ! Shake your head as you will, Nelly, ^oi
have helped to imsettle me ! You should have sp6kei
to Edgar — indeed you should — and compelled him ti
leave me quiet 1 Oh, I'm burning ! I wish I were oui
of doors I I wish I were a girl again, half savage an(
hardy and free, and laughing at injuries, not maddeninj
under them ! Why am I so changed ? Why does m]
blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words ? I'n
sure I should be myself were I once among the heathe
on those hills. Open the window again wide — fasten i
open I Quick ! Why don't you move ? "
" Because I won't give you your death of cold,^'!
answered.
^'You won't give me a chance oi Me, ^qwl mean,'
s^e said sullehly.'* However, Tm ivol \v^'^^ss. ^^
^^ open It znyselL "'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 12$
And sliding from the bed before I could hinder her,
rfie crossed the room, walking very uncertainly, threw
it back, and bent out, careless of the frosty air that
cut about her shoulders as keen as a knife. I entreated,
and finally attempted to force her to retire. But I
soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine
(she was delirious, I became convinced by her subsequent
actions and ravings). There was no moon, and every-
thing beneath lay in misty darkness. Not a light gleamed
l%om any house, far or near — all had been extinguished
hng ago ; and those at Wuthering Heights were never
visible — still she asserted she caught their shining.
" Look !'* she cried eagerly ; " that's my room with
the candle in it, and the tree swaying before it ; and the
other candle is in Joseph's garret. Joseph sits up late,
doesn't he ? He's waiting till I come home, that he
may lock the gate. Well, he'll wait a while yet. It's
a rough journey, and a sad heart to travel it ; and we
must pass by Gimmerton Kirk to go that journey I
We've braved its ghosts often together, and dared each
other to stand among the graves and ask them to come.
But, Heathcliff , if I dare you now, will you venture ?
If you do, I'll keep you. I'll not lie there by myself,
lliey may bury me twelve feet deep, and throw the
church down over me, but I won't rest till you are with
me. I never will ! "
She paused, and resumed with a strange smile. " He's
^nsidering ; he'd rather I'd come to him ! Find a way,
then — not through that kirkyard. You are slow 1 Be
»ntent ; you always followed me ! "
Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was
> lanning how I could reach something to wrap about
ler, without quitting my hold of herself (for I could not
rust her alone by the gaping lattice), when, to my
:onstemation, I heard the rattle of the door-handle,
ind Mr. Union entered. He had only tVveu cotc^ Vwyc
Ae library, and in passing through iVve \oV > > ni^ > cv!
7tJced oar talking, and been attracted \ > y cur^wvV^
tr, to examine what it signified, at tYwit \ate V\o > 3lt .
126 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" O sir ! " I cried, checking the exclamation risen 1
his Hps at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmo
phere of the chamber, *'my poor mistress is ill, and si:
quite masters me, I cannot manage her at aE. Pra;
come and persuade, her to go to bed. Fotget yoi
anger, for she's hard to guide any way but her own. "
" Catherine ill ? " he said, hastening to uB. " Shi
the window, Ellen !■ — Catherine 1 why "
He was silent. The haggardness of Mrs. Linton'
appearance smote him speechless, and he could onl
glance from her to me in horrified astonishment.
" She's been iretting here, " I continued, " and eatiu
scarcely anything, and never complainiixg. She woul
admit none of us till this evening, and so we couldn'
inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it oui
selves; but it is nothing. "
. I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly, Xh
master frowned;'*It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean?
he said sternly. " You shall accoimt more clearly fc
kee} > ing me ignorant of this 1 " And he took his wii
in Ms arms, and looked at her with anguish*
. At first she gave him no glance of recognition; h
was invisible to her abstracted, gaze. The delirium wa
not fixed, however; having weaned her eyes from cor
templatiiig the. outer darkness, by degrees she centre
her attention on him, and discovered who it was tha
held her.
. " .-Ah ! you are come > are you, Edgar Linton ? " sb
said, with angry animation. " You are one of thos
things that are ever found when least wanted, and whe
you are wanted, never 1 I suppose we shall have plent
of lamentations now — I see we shall; but they can'
keep me from my narrow home out yonder — my resting
place, where I'm bound before spring is over 1 There i
is-^not among the Lintons, mind, under the chape!
roof, but in. the open air, with a head-stone; and yo
may please yourseli whether you g|0 \o V\veav ox co^vs
tomei "
" Catherim, what have you doixe'? " coxwcsxesic^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I27
master, " Am I nothing to you any more ? Do you
love that wretch Heath "
" Hush I " cried Mrs. Linton — ** hush, this moment I
You mention that name, and I end the matter instantly
by a spring from the window ! What you touch at
present you may have; but my soul will be on that
mil-top before you lay hands on me again. I don't
vant you, Edgar. I'm past wanting you. Return to
your books. I'm glad you possess a consolation, for all
Jou had in me is gone. "
" Her mind wanders, sir, " I interposed—-*'she has
keen talking nonsense the whole evening ; but let her
lave quiet and proper attendance, and she'll rally;
Hereafter we must be cautious how we vex her. "
" I desire no further advice from you, " answered Mr,
llinton. ** You knew your mistress's nature, ■ and you
[encouraged me to harass her. And not to give me
ne hint of how she has been these three days I It was
lessl Months of sickness could not catise such a
hange ! "
I began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be
kmed for another's wicked wajrwardness,'* I knew
llrs. Linton's nature to be headstrong and domineering, "
eried I, ** but I didn't know that you wished to foster
ler fierce temper. I didn't know that, to humour her,
I should wink at Mr. Heathcliff . I performed the duty
of a faithful servant in telling you, and I have got a
faithful servant's wages ! Well, it will teach me to be
careful next time. Next time you may gather intelli*
gence for yourself . "
" The next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit
toy service, Ellen Dean, " he replied.
" You'd rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then,
Mr. Linton ? " said I.'* Heathcliff has your permission
to come a-courting to niiss, and to drop in at every
opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
the mistress against you ? "
Confused as Catherine was, her vni^ > w«t^ v^sxX. -^^^
appl3diig our conversation.
128 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
'* Ah! Nelly has played traitor! " she exclaim^ pa«
sionately — *'Nelly is my hidden enemy ! You witclt
So you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us ! Let me go, ani
I'll make her rue ! Til make her howl a recantation I'*
A maniac's fury kindled under her brows. Sh
struggled desperately to disengaige herself from linton*
arms. I felt no inclination to tarry the event; ai«
resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibilitj
I quitted the chamber. ■ . ■ y
In passing the garden to reach the road, at a plaa
where a bridle hook is driven into the wall, I saw some
thing white moved irregularly, evidently by anothi
agent than the wind. Notwithstanding my hurry, I
stayed to examine it, lest ever after I should have tM
conviction impressed on my imagination that it was i
creature of the other world. My surprise and perplexit
were great on discovering, by touch more than visicwi
Miss Isabella's springer, Fanny, suspended by a hand
kerchief, and nearly at its last gasp, I quickly releasei
the animal, and lifted it into the garden. I had seen i
follow its mistress upstairs when she went to bed, an <
wondered much how it could have got out there, axil
what mischievous person had treated it so. While ud
tying the knot roimd the hook, it seemed to me thati
repeatedly caught the beat of horses'feet gallopmg a
somie distance ; but there were such a number of thing
to occupy my reflections that I hardly gave the circunl
stance a. thought, though it was a strange soimd in tha
place at two o'clock in the morning.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from hi
house to see a patient in the village as I came up th
street, and my account of Catherine Linton's malad;
induced him to accompany me back immediately. H
was a plain, rough man ; and he made no scruple t
speak his doubts of her surviving this second attack
unless she were more submissive to his directions tha
sAe had shown herself before.
''Nelly Dean/'said he, *M can'fVveXp i?LTLC,Y«v% ^w
2^. extra cause for this. What laas tiaei^ Ad^wi. \» ^ks
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I2g
the Grange ? We've odd reports up here. A stout,
liearty la^ like Catherine does not fall ill for a trifle ;
and that sort of people should not, either. It's hard
ivork bringing them through fevers and such things.
How did it begin ? "
. " The master will inform you, " I answered ; " but
you are acquainted with the Earnshaws'violent dis-
positions, and Mrs. Linton caps them all. I may say
this : it commenced in a quarrel. She was struck during
1 tempest of passion with a kind of fit. That's her
jKcount, at least, for she flew off in the height of it, and
':ed herself up. Afterwards she refused to eat, and
iw she alternately raves and remains in a half dream,
kiowing those about her, but having her mind filled
vntti all sorts of strange ideas and illusions. "
" Mr. Linton will be sorry ? " observed Kenneth inter-
rogatively.
" Sorry ? He'll break his heart should anything
Iiappen 1 " I repHed. " Don't alarm him more than
necessary/^
" Well, I told him to beware, " said my companion ;
" and he must bide the consequences of neglecting my
warning. Hasn't he been intimate with Mr. Heatiichfi
lately ? "
" Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grange, " answered
I > " though more on the strength of the mistress having
blown him when a boy than because the master likes
his company. At present he's discharged from the
trouble of calling, owing to some presumptuous aspira-
tions after Miss Linton which he manifested. I hardly
think he'll be taken in again. "
" And does Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on him ? "
was the doctor's next question.
" I'm not in her confidence, " returned I, reluctant to
continue the subject.
" No ; she's a sly one, " he remarked, sYia.Vm^\is»\ifia.^
** She keeps ber own counsel. But sWs a. t^'aX ^^^'^
ooJ. I have it from good authority tYiat \as»\. ^v
J2d a pretty night it was) she and Ke?LVixc\\ft ^
ISO WITHERING HEXGHTS:
walking in the plantation at the back of your rh
above two hoxirs: ; and he pressed her not to go in a§
but just mount his horse and^ away with him.
informant said. she could only put hmi off by pled
her word of honour to be prepared on their first mee
after that. . When it was to be, he didn't hear;
you urg^Mr. Linton to look sharp/': ■.
This: news £lled; me with fresh fears. I outstrij
Kenneth, and ran most of ihey/2ty back. The little
was yelping in the garden yet* I spared a minut
open the gate for it, but instead of going to the h
door, it coursed up and down snuffingnthe grass,
would'hav^ escaped to the road had I not seized
conveyed it in. with me. On ascending to Isabc
room my suspicions: were confirmed^ It was tm
Had I been a few hourfe sooner, Mrs* Linton's ill
might have arrested her rash step* But what co.ul(
done now ?!'There was a bdre possibiKty of overta
them if pursued instantlyi I could not pursue tl
however ; and I dare not rouse the family, a*nd fill
place- with coniusibn-^till /le^ unfold the busin^^
my master^ absorbed as tie was in his ptresent calan
and having no heart, to spare if or a second grief . I
nothing for it but to hold my tongue, and suffer nia1
to take their course J; iand Kenneth being arrived, I \
with a badly composed ;a3untenahce to announce']
Catherine lay in a troubled sleep. Her husband
succeeded in soothing th^ excess of . frenzy* He
hung over her pillow^ watching every shade and .e^
change of her paii^fully expressive features. :
The doctor, on'examining the case for himself, s|
hopefully to him.bf Its having a favourable terminal
if we could only preserve aroiittd her perfect and coiis
tranquillity* To me he signified the threatening da:
was not so much death, as permanent . alienation ol
tfeUect;'. , <
I did not clos« my eyes, that night, nor did Mn Lii
— indeed, we never went to bed ;i and the servants ^
^ 1//? JdJ3^;. before the usual hoiwj, moving through
i
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I3I
liouse with stealthy tread, and exchanging whispers as
they encountered each other in their vocations. Every
one was active but Miss Isabella ; and they began to
lemark how sound she slept* Her brother; too, asked
tf she hiad risen, and seemed impatient for her presence,
md hurt that she showed so Uttle anxiety for her sister-
in-law* I trembled lest he should send me to call her ;
Imt I was spared the pain of being the first proclaimant
I her flight. One of the maids, a thoughtless girl, who
', been on an early errand to Gimmertcm, came panting
stairs, open mouthed^ and dashed into the -diamber;
!^ " Oh xiear, dear I What mun we have next ? Master,
master, our young lady "
" Hold your noise ! " cried I hastily, enraged at her
clamorous manner,
" Speak lower, Mary. What is the matter ? " said Mr.
linton. *'What ails your young lady ? "
" She's gone, she's gone I Yon HeathcM's run off wi*
her I " gasped the girl,
• " That is not true I " exclaimed linton, rising in
agitation, " It cannot be. How has thfe idea entered
your ihead ? — EUen Dean, go and seek her. It is in-
credible. It cannot be. " , .
As he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then
repeated his demand to know her reasons for such an
assertion, .. 1
*'Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk
bere, " she stammered, " and h^. asked whether we
iveren't in trouble at the Gran^,'I j|thought he meant
for missis's sickness, so I answered ^m. Then says hb^
There's somebody gone after'em, I guess ?'I staredi
He saw I knew nought about it, and he told how a
gentleman and lady had istopped to have a horse's shoe
iastened at a blacksmith's aiop, two miles out of Gim-
nert6n, not very long after midnight ; and > a. < y« " Oqr
blacksmith's lass had got up to spy ^v\\o \5cve^ " ^^^^
be knew them both directly. And sYi^ lao^c^^ ^
m—Heathcliffit was, she f elt xertain ; TvoV4. > y ^
132 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
mistake him, besides — put sl sovereign in her father*!
hand for payment. The lady had a cloak about ha
face ; but having desired a sup of water, while sh <
drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain; Heatlv
cliff held both bridles as they rode on, and they sd(
their faces from the village, and went as fast as the rougi
roads would let them.: The lass said nothing to ha
father, but she told it all over Gimmerton this moming.3
I ran and peeped, for form's sake, into Isabella.'^
room, confirming, when I returned, the servant's statd
ment. Mr. Linton had resumed his seat by the be <
On my re-entrance he raised his eyes, read the meanin
of my blank aspect, and dropped them without givin
an order or uttering a word, ii
'" Are we to try any measures for overtaking ara
bringing her back? " I inquired. " How should v^
do? " .
" She went of her own accord, " answered the master^
" she had a right to go if she pleased. Trouble me ni
more about her. Hereafter she is only my sister h
name — not because; I disown her, but because she ha
disowned me. " :
And that was all he said on the subject. He did no
make a single inquiry further, or mention her in an!
way, except directing me to send what property she hau
in the house to her fresh home, wherever it was, whei
I knew it. j
CHAPTER Xni. ]
For two monthS^he fugitives remained absent. Ill
those two months Mrs. Linton encountered and coni
quered the worst shock of what was denominated 4
brain fever. No mother could have nursed an onlj
child more devotedly than Edgar tended her. Day and
night he was watching and patiently enduring all the
annoyances that irritable nerves and a shaken reason
^nuld inflict; and though Kenneth remarked thai
mt he saved from the grave would only recompense
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 33
his care by forming the source of constant future anxiety
—in fact, that his health and strength were being sacri-
ficed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity — ^he knew no
limits in gratitude and joy when Catherine's life was
^declared out of danger ; and hour after hour he would
lit beside her, tracing the gradual return to bodily health,
itod flattering his too sanguine hopes with the illusion
ftat her mind would settle back to its right balance
and she would soon be entirely her former self.
The first time she left her chamber was at the com-
snceihent of the following March. Mr. Linton had
it on her pillow, in the morning, a handful of golden
;uses. Her eye, long stranger to any gleam of pleas-
•e, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as she
thered them eagerly together.
These are the earliest flowers at the Heights, " she
exclaimed. " They remind me of soft thaw winds, and
^arm sunshine, and nearly melted snow. Edgar, is there
t a south wind, and is not the snow almost gone ? **
The snow is quite gone down here, darling, " replied
ler husband, " and I only see two white spots on the whole
range of moors. The sky is blue, and the l^rks are sing-
'ing, and the becks and brooks are all brim full. Cath-
erine, last spring at this time I was longing to have you
under this roof; now I wish 5^u were a mile or two
ttp those hills ; the air blows so sweetly, I feel that it
would cure you. "
" I shall never be there but once more, " said the
invalid ; " and then you'll leave me, and I shall remain
for ever. Next spring you'll long/**gain to have me
under this roof, and you'll look back vend think you were
happy to-day. "
Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried
to cheer her by the fondest words ; but, vaguely regard-
ing the flowers, she let the tears collect on her lashes ^ssd
stream down her cheeks unheeding. We \uafiw ^ < &'^'^
re^y better, and therefore decided that \otv% cotv^
jentto a single pJace produced much oi this despoxAex
d It might be partially removed by a cYvaivg^e oi «
134 WUTKERING HEIGHTS.
The master told me to light a fire in the many-weeks
deserted parlour, and to set an easy-chair in the sunshim
by the window; and then he brought her down, am
she sat a long while enjoying the genial heat, and, at
we expected, revived by'the objects round her^ which
though familiar, were free from the dreary association
investing her hated sick chamber* By evening sh <
seemed greatly exhausted, yet no arguments couM
persuade her to return to- that apartment; arid I had
to arrange the parlour sofa for her bed, tiU anothd
toohi could be prepared. To obviate the fatigue d
moimting and descending. the stairs, we fitted up this
where you lie at present, . on the same floor with th
parlour ; and she was soon strong enough to movi
from one to the other, . leaning on Edgar's arm* Al|
I thought myself she might recover, so waited on ias sb
was. And there was double cause to desire it, for ofl
her existence depended that of another: we cherishei
the hope that in a little while Mr. Linton's heart would
be gladdened, and his lands secured from a strangen
gripe, by the birth of an heir; . d
I should nientioti that Isabella sent to her brothetj
some= six weeks from her departure, a short note an!
nouncing her : marriage with Heathcliff . It appeared
dry and cold, but at the bottom was dotted in witl
pencil an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind
remembrance and reconciliation, if her proceeding im
offended him, asserting that she could not help it then,
and, being done,, she. had now no power to repeal iti
Linton did not rejjvLto this, I believe; and in a fortnight
more I got a long\Jcter which I considered odd, coming
from the pen of a bride just out of the honeymooni Vi
read it, for I keep it yet. Any reUc of the dead is precious
if they were valued li\Tng.
Dear Ellen, it begins, I came last night to Wutherinj
Heights, and beaxd for the first tim^ that Catherine
^ been, and i$ yei,^ very ill. 1 mus^, xvol vrcA.^V > \v^i
mvppose, and my brother is €fl.t\i«: \oo as^^grj ot \
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, 1 35
listressed to answer what I sent him. Still, I must
nite to somebody, and the only choice left me is you.
Inform Edgar that Fd give the world to see his face
igain — that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange
a twenty-four hours after I left it, and is there at tins
nomenti full of warm feelings, for him and Catherine,
^ tan*t foUow it, though (those words are imderlined) ; they
leed not expect me ; and they may draw what conclusions
bey please, taking care, however, to lay nothing at the
loor of my weak will or deficient affection,
'The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I
rant to ask you two questions; the first is — How did
mu contrive to preserve the conunon sjmipathies of
luman nature when you resided here ? I cannot recog.-
0256 any sentiment which those around share with me.
The second question I have great interest in; it is
his — Is Mr. Heathcliff a man ? If so, is he mad ? And
f not, is he a devil ? I shan't tell my reasons for making
his inquiry, but I beseech you to. explain, > if you can,
srhat I have married — that is, when you call to see me;
nd you mtist call, Ellen, very soon. Don't write, but
ome, and bring me something from Edgar.
Now you shaJl hear how I have been received in my
lew home, as I am led to imagine the Heights will be.
t is to amuse m57self that I dwell on such subjects as
he lack of external comforts; they never occupy my
houghts, except at the moment when I miss them. I
hould laugh and dance for joy if I found their absence
vas the total of my miseries, and the rest was an im-
latural dream. ■ , •
The sun set behind the Grange as We turned on to the
loors ; by that I judged it to be six o'clock ; and my
ompanion halted half an hour to inspect the park and
lie gardens, and probably the place itself, as well as
e could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the
aved yard of the farmhouse, andyovvt oX^i^'ow-'^T^'^x^.
oseph issued out to receive us by t\ve \\^^. e^ ^ ^
ndle. He did it with a courtesy WxaX. xfe^o^xsv^^
f credit His first act was to elevate \oa totOcs.
1 36 WUTHERING HEIGHT &
level with my face, squint malignantly, project his und(
lip, and turn away. Then he took the two horses an
led them into the stables, reappearing for the purpose <
locking the outer gate, as if we Hved in an ancient castl(
Heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and I entered th
kitchen — a dingy, untidy hole. I dare say you woul
not know it, it is so changed since it was in your charge
By the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb an
dirty in garb, with a look of Catherine in his eyes an
about his mouth.
■ ** This is Edgar's legal nephew, " I reflected—'* min
in a manner. I must shake hands, and — yes — I mm
kiss him. It is right to estabhsh a good understandin
at the beginning.'*
I approached, and attempting to take his chubby fisi
said, —
" How do you do, my dear ? "
He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
" Shall you and I be friends, Hareton ? " was m
next essay at conversation.
An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I di
not ** frame off, " rewarded my perseverance.
" Hey, Throttler, lad ! " whispered the Httle wretcl
rousing a half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a coma
" Now, wilt thou be ganging ? " he asked authoritativelj
Love for my life m^ed a compHance. I stepped ovc
the threshold to wait till the others should enter. Mi
Heathcliff was nowhere visible, and Joseph, whom
followed to the stables and requested to accompan
me in, after staring and muttering to himself, screwe
up his nose and replied, —
** Mim ! mim ! mim ! Did iver Christian body hea
aught like it ? Minching un munching ! How can
tell whet ye say ? "
" I say I wish you to come with me into the house !
I cried, thinking him deaf, yet highly disgusted at hi
rudeness,
" None o'me. I getten summut e\sfc ^Q ^^^
nswered, and continued his work, txvo^tv^ > m & \tcc\:
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 3/
ws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and comite-
nce (the former a great deal too fine, but the latter,
a sure, as sad as he could desire) with sovereign con-
npt.
I walked round the yard and through a wicket to
other door, at which I took the Uberty of knocking, in
pes some more civil servant might show himself. After
short suspense it was opened by a tall, gaunt man,
thout neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly ;
features were lost in masses of shaggy h?ur that himg
his shoulders, and his eyes, too, were like a ghostly
therine's with all their beauty annihilated.
'What's your business here ? " he demanded grimly.
Vho are you ?*'
'My name was Isabella Linton,'* I reiplied. " You've
n me before, sir. I'm lately married to Mr. Heath-
*f, and he has. brought me here — I suppose by your
mission. "
'Is he come back, then ? " asked the hermit, glaring
B a hungry wolf.
* Yes, we came just now, " I said ;'* but he left me
the kitchen door, and when I would have gone in
or little boy played sentinel over the place, and fright-
ed me off by the help of a bull-dog.''
" It's well the hellish villain has kept his word ! "
Dwled my future host, searching the darkness beyond
B in expectation of discovering HeathcUff .; and then
! mdulged in a soliloquy of execrations, and threats
what he would have done had the " fiend " deceived
m.
I repented having tried this second entrance, and
as almost inclined to slip away before he finished
irsing ; but ere I could execute that intention he ordered
£ in, and shut and refastened the door. There was
great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apart-
tent, whose floor had grown a unifonxv ^^ " ^^ ^ss.^ *^icft.
ice brilliai?^ pewter dishes, which " uaeA \.o ^JCCfa^cX. tk^
^ when I was a girl, partook ot a. s\nviV^.t cS^soo^nN^
ited by tamisb and diist. 1 mqmceA. v4\ifi?Csi^ " t
138 WUTHERING HEIGHXa
might call the maid, and be conducted to a bedroon
Mr. Eamshaw vouchsaif ed no i answer. He walked u
and down, with'his hands in his pockets, apparenti
quite forgetting my presence ; and his abstraction ,w <
evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropica
that I shranik from disturbing him again.
You'll notbe surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particular!
cheerless, seated in worse than solitude on that inho!
!)itable hearth, and remembering that four miles distaj
ay my delightful home, c(mtaining the only, people i
loved on earth ; and there might as well be the Atlantj
to part us, instead of those four miles. I couki u
overpass them* I questioned with myself— Where mus
I turn for comfort ? and (mind you don't tell Edgs
OP Catherine) aboVe every sorrow beside, this ros
pre-eminent -^ despair at ^ding'nobody who could c
would^e my: ally against Heathcliff. I had sougl
shelter^t Wuthering Heights almost gladly, because
was: seeded by that arrangement from living alon
with hini ; but he knew the people we were Gomiii
amongst, land he did not ; fear their intermeddling,
I sat a|id thought a doleful time. The clock stnic!
eight, andmine, aaid still my companion paced to and fn
his head bent on his breast, and perfectly silent, unles
a groan oir i bitter ejaculation forced itself out at intei
vals. I listened to detect a woman's voice in the houa
and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismi
ahticipations, which at last spoke audibly in irrepressibl
sighing and weeping. I was « not awarie how openly
grieved, till Earnshaw halted opposite, in his measure
walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surpris*
Taking advantage of his recovered attention, I'e:
claimed,— ■■.■.'■
" I'm tired with my j6umey,iand I want to go to bed
Where is the maidservant ? Direct me to her, as si
won't come to me. "
" We have none/'he answered. " :You must wait o
yourself/'.
/ " Where must I sleep,, tiaj^xx ? •'1 ^ " bbed. \ ^^'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 39
yond regarding self-respect, weighed down by fatigue
and wretchedness.
" Joseph will show you Heathcliff's chamber, " said he.
''Open that door; he's in there. "
I was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me,
•tod added in the strangest tone, —
" Be so good as to turn your lock and draw your
jolt ; don't omit it ! "
Well ! " I said ; " but why, Mr. Eamshaw ? " I
id not relish the notion of deliberately fastening myself
with Heathcliff .'
'* Look here ! " he replied, pulling from his waistcoat
curiously constructed pistol, having a double-edged
" ig knife attached to the barrel. " That's a great
^ ter to a desperate man, is it not ? I cannot resist
{Ding up with this every night and trying his door. If
tace I find it open, he's done for ! I do it invariably,
6ven though the minute before I have been recalling
I hundred reasons that should make me refrain. It is
wne devil that urges me to thwart my own schemes
ly killing him. You fight against that devil for love as
Ong as you may ; when the time comes, not all the angels
& heaven shall save him ! "
^ I surveyed the weapon inquisitively. A hideous notion
struck me. How powerful I should-be, possessing such
In instriiment J I took it from his hand and touched
Bie blade. He looked astonished at the expression my
hce assumed during a brief second; it was not horror
^it was covetousness. He snatched the pistol back
[ealously, shut the knife, and returned it to its conceal-
tnent.
** I don't care if you tell him, " said he. " Put him
W his guard, and watch for him. You know the terms
we are on, I see. His danger does not shock you. "
" What has HeathcHfl done to you ? " I asked. " In
what has he wronged you, to warratvt lYis» ^y^-^^^^^
hatred ? Wouldn't it be wiser to bid baia cja^ " ^ ^
bouse!'''
''No f " thundered Eamshaw.''SYio\AA ^\e o^^^
I40 WUTIiERING HEIGHTS.
leave me, he*s a dead man. Persuade him to attenq
it, and you are a murderess. Am I to lose all withos
a chance . of retrieval ? Is Hareton to be a beggar
Oh, damnation ! I will have it back, and I'll have h
gold too, and then his blood, and heU shall have h
soul ! It will be ten times blacker with that guest tha
ever it was before ! "
YouVe acquainted me, Ellen, with your old mastei^
habits. He is clearly on the verge of madness. He wa
so last night at least. I shuddeired to be near him, a^
thought on the servant's ill-bred moroseness as con
paratively agreeable. He now recommenced his mood
walk, and I raised the latch and escaped into the kitche^
Joseph was bending over the fire, peering into a lajt|
pan that swung above it, and a wooden bowl of oatmfil
stood on the settle close by.. The contents of the p«
began to boil, and he turned to plunge his hand ia\
the bowl, I conjectured that this preparation w^
probably for our supper, and being hungry, I resolve
it should be eatable ; so, ci;ying out sharply, " FU ma!
the porridge ! " I renioved the vessel out of his reac|
and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habi
" Mr. Eamshaw, " t continued, " directs me to wait o
myself. I will. I'm not going to act the lady amon
you, for fear I should starve. "
" Gooid Lord ! " he muttered, sitting down and strol
ing his ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankJ
" If there's to be fresh ortherings, just when I gette
used to two maisters, if I mun hev a mistress set o'er m
heead, it's Hke time to be flitting. I niver did think to si
t'day that I mud lave th'owld place, but I doubt it
nigh at hand I "
This lamentation drew no notice from me. I wei
briskly to work, sighing to remember a period when
would have been all merry fun, but compelled speedil
to. drive off the remembrance. It racked me to reca
j?ast happiness: and the greater peril there was of coi
juring up its apparition, the quickei l\ife \^Mfex^5x\QjvMaj
^^Jid the faster the handfuU ot meal ifSl'^^. " ^ ^^ ^^ " ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I4I
^Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indig-
ppation.
I " Thearl " he ejaculated. " Hareton, thou willn't
Bip thy porridge to-neeght ; they'll be naught but
lumps as big as my neive. Thear, agean ! I'd fling in
bowl un all, if I wer ye ! There, pale t'guilp off, un
then ye'll hae done wi't. Bang, bang. It's a mercy t'
tx)thom isn't deaved out ! "
It was rather a rough mess, I own, when poured into
he basins. Four had been provided, and a gallon
dtcher of new milk was brought from the dairy, which
lareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling
from the expansive Hp. I expostulated, and desired
[that he should have his in a mug, affirming that I could
foot taste the Hquid treated so dirtily. The old cynic
^chose to be vastly offended at this nicety, assuring me
krepeatedly that " the bam was every bit bs good " as
1 1, " and every bit as wollsome, " and wondering how I
I could fashion to be ao conceited. Meanwhile the infant
NHiffian continued sucking, and glowered up at me defy-
ingly as he slavered into the jug.
" I shall have my supper in another room/'I said.
" Have you no place you call a parlour ? "
** Parlour / " he echoed sneeringly — " parlour ! Nay,
we've noa parlours. If yah dunnut loike wer company,
there's maister's; un if yah dunnut loike maister,
there's us. "
** Then I shall go upstairs, " I answered. " Show me
a chamber. "
I put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch
some more milk. With great grumblings the fellow rose
and preceded me in my ascent. We mounted to the
garrets. He opened a door now and then to look into
the apartments we passed.
** Here's a rahm, " he said at last, flinging back a
cranky board on hinges. " It's weel eneu^h to ate a
lew porddge in. There's a pack o'com'^ \! coTwes
tbear, meeterly clone. If ye're feared o* muc!^^vw^ ^
rand silk does, spread yer hankerchix o't'Vop o^v!
142 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
The ^*rahm " was a kind of lumber-hole'smellii
strong of malt and grain, various sacks of which article
were piled around, leaving a wide, bare space in tl
middle.
** Why, man ! " I exclaimed, facing him angril]
'* this is not a place to slefep in. I wish to see my be(
room. "
** Bedfume 1'^ he repeated, in a tone of mocker
'* Yah's see all t'bedrufnes thear is. Yori's mine. " ^
He pointed into the second garret, only differing froi
the first in being more naked about the walls, and havin
a large, low, cur'tainless bed with an indigo-coloured qui
at One end.
" What do I want with yours? " I retorted. "
suppose Mr. Heathcliff does not lodge at the top of tl
house, does he ? "
*'Oh, it's Maister Hathecliffs ye're wanting ? " crie
he, as if making a new discovery. " Couldn't ye ha'sai
soa, at oust ? Un then I tnud ha'telled ye, baht all th:
wark, that that's just one ye cannut see. He alias keef
it locked, un nob'dy iver riiells on't but hisseln. "'
" You've a nice house, Joseph, " I could not refrai
froni observing,'* and pleas'ant'inmates ; and I thin
the concentrated essence of all the madness in the worl
took up its abode in my brain the day I linked my fai
with theirs ! However, that is not to the present ptt
pose. There are other rooms. For Heaven's sake 1
qtrick, and let me settle somewhere I "
He made no reply to this adjuration, only ploddir
doggedly down the wooden steps, and halting befoi
an apartment which, from that halt and the superi <
quality of its furniture, I conjectured to be the best on <
There was a carpet— a good one — but the pattern ws
obliterated by dust ; a fireplace hung with cut pape
dropping to pieces ; a handsome oak bedstead with amp!
crimson curtains of rather expensive material and moder
make, hut they had evidently experienced rough usag
—the vallances hung in festoons,'S'jncetvc^^^ feotsY ^5 > m
^^S^, and the iron rod supporting ttiem > n2 & \ > ett\.
?c
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1/
an arc on one side, causing the drapery; to trail upc
the floor. The chairs were also damaged, many of the
severely, and deep indentations deformed the panels <
the walls. I was endeavouring to gather: resolution f <
entering and taking possession, when my fool of a gui(
announced, " This here is t'maister*s. " My supper l
this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patient
exhausted. I insisted on being provided instantly wii
a place of refuge and means of repose*
** Whear the divil ?'* began the rehgious elder.'* Tl
Lord bless us ! The Lord ^forgie us 1 Whear the Ju
wold ye gang, ye marred, wearisomie npwt ? Ye'i
seen all but Hareton's bit of a eham'er. There's n
'? another hoile to lig down in i'th'hahse I ■'
I was so vexed, I flung my tray and its contents c
the ground, and then seated myself at the stairs-hea
hid my face in my handSj. and cried.
id'" Ech ^'ech t ** exclaimed Joseph; " Weel done, Mi
Cathy ! wed done, Miss Cathy ! Howsiver, t'maist
saH just tum'le o'er them brocken . pots, un then we
hear summut—r-we's hear how it's to be. Gooid-fo
naught madling ! ye desarve pining fro'this to Churs
mas, flinging t'precious gifts o'God under fooit i'y
flaysome rages! But Fm mista'en if ye show y
sperrit lang. Will HathecHfl bide sich bonny Ways, thii
fe? I nobbut wish he may catch ye i'that plisk
nobbut wish he may. "
And so he went on scolding to his den beneath, takii
the candle with him, and I remained in the dark^ T]
period of reflection succeeding this silly action compell(
me to admit the necessity of smothering: my pride ai
choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove i
effects. An unexpected aid presently appeared in t]
fehape of Thirottler, whom I now recognLred as a son!
our old Skulker, It; hadspenlt its whelphood at t]
Grange, and was given by my father to Mt. t & wJis
I fancy it knew me. It pushed its ivos^ ^^^\SisX. " d
by way of salute, and then hastened to devoMx *0^^
ridge, while I groped from step to ste^, co^e.cXx«
144 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
shattered earthenware, and drying the spatters of mill
from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. Ouj
labours were scarcely over when I heard Eamshaw^i
tread in the passage. My assistant tucked in his tai
and pressed to the wall. I stole into the nearest door
way. The dog's endeavour to avoid him was unsuccess
ful, as I guessed by a scutter downstairs, and a prolonged
piteous yelping. I had better luck. He passed on
entered his chamber, and shut the door. Directly after
Joseph came up with Hare ton, to put him to bed.
had found shelter in Hareton's room, and the old man
on seeing me, said, —
" They's rahm for boath ye un yer pride now, I stu
think, i'the hahse. It's empty ; ye may hev it ail to yer
seln, un Him as alias maks a third i'sich ill company ! *'
Gladly did I take advantage of this intimation, anc
the minute I flung myself into a chair by the fire J noddec
and slept. My slumber was deep and sweet, though ove
far too soon. Mr. Heathcliff awoke me. He had jus
come in, and demanded, in his loving mourner, what \
was doing there. I told him'the cause of my staying uj
so late— that he had the key of our room in his pocket
The adjective our gave mortal offence. He swore i
was not, nor ever should be mine, and he'd But I'l
not repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct
He is ingenious and unresting in seeking to gain mj
abhorrence. I sometimes wonder at him with an in
tensity that deadens my fear ; yet I assure you a tige;
or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in me equa
to that which he wakens. He told me of Catherine's ill
ness, and accused my brother of causing it, promising
that I should be Edgar's proxy in suffering till he coulc
get hold of him.
I do hate him — I am wretched — I have been a fool
Beware of uttering one breath of this to any one at thu
Grange. I shall expect you every day. Don't disap
point me. Isabella.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I4S
CHAPTER XIV,
As soon as I had perused this epistle I went to the master
and informed him that his sister had arrived at the Heights,
and sent me a letter expressing her sorrow for Mrs. Lin-
ton's situation, and her ardent desire to see him, with a
wish that he would transmit to her, as early as possible,
some token of forgiveness by tne.
" Forgiveness ! " said Linton. " I have nothing to
forgive her, Ellen. You may call at Wuthering Heights
this afternoon, if you like, and say that I am not angry,
* but I'm sorry to have lost her — especially as I can never
think she'll be happy. It is out of the question my going
to see her, however ; we are eternally divided, and should
she really wish to obUge me, let her persuade the villain
she has married to leave the country. "
*'And you won't write her a little note, sir ? " I asked
imploringly,
** No, " he answered ; " it is needless. My communi-
I cation with Heathcliff's family shall be as sparing as his
with mine. It shall not exist. "
Mr. Edgar's coldness depressed me exceedingly, and
all the way from the Grange I puzzled my brains how
to put more heart into what he said, when I repeated it,
and how to soften his refusal of even a few lines to con-
sole Isabella. I dare say she had been on the watch
for me since morning. I saw her looking through the
lattice as I caine up the garden causeway, and I nodded
to her ; but she drew back as if afraid of being observed.
I entered without knocking. There never was such a
dreary, dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house
presented. I must confess that if I had been in the
young lady's place I would, at least, have swept the
hearth and wiped the tables with a duster. But she
already partook of the pervading spirit ol xife^^^^cX. ^\sss^
encompassed her. Her pretty face was waxv ^xv^ X^sJ^Ssis
her bair uncurled — some locks hanging \ax^ > j ^ov^c^.^'*
ome carelessly twisted rotind her head. I^to^^WV^s

146 WUTHERtNG HEIGHTS.
had not touched her dress since yester evening. Hind-
ley was not there. Mr, Heathcliff sat at a table, tuminf^
over some papers in his pocket-book ; but he rose whea
I appeared, asked me how I did, quite friendly, anA
offered me a chair. He was the only thing there- thafe
seemed decent, and I thought he never looked better^j
So much had circumstances altered their positioias thaW
he would certainly have struck a stranger as a bom iusiW
bred gentleman, and his wife as a thorough little slatt
She came forward eagerly to greet me, and held out on
hand to take the expected letter. I shook my he
She wouldn't understand the hint, but followed > me ■
a sideboard where I went to lay my bonnet, and ia
Eortuned me in a whisper to give her directly what ■
ad brought. Heatholiff guessed the meaning of he#
manoeuvres, and said,-— .^
** If you have got anything for Isabella — as no doubfe
you have, Nelly — give it to her. You needn't make 9r
secret of it. We have no secrets between us. " ? ^
*'Oh, I have nothing, " I replied, thinking it best to
speak the truth at oiice. *'My master bade me tell hi$ ^
sister that she must not expect either a letter or a visit
from him at present. He sends his love, ma'am, and
his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the
grief you have occasioned ; but he thinks that aftet
this time his household and the household here should
drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
keeping it up. "'.
Mrs. Heathcliff's lip quivered sUghtly, anci she returned j
to her seat in the window. Her husband took his stand
on the hearthstone near me, and began to put questions
concerning Catherine. I told him as much as I thought
proper of her illness, and he extorted from me, by cross-
examination, most of the facts connected with its origin,
I blamed her, as she deserved, " for bringing it all on her-
self, and ended by hoping that he would follow Mr,
Linton's example, and avoid iutuie mtetietewi^ ^tk his
ifniJy, for good or evil,
'" Mrs. Linton is now iust recoverm^,'^ 1 «»ai.^.''" Stv^ " ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I47
ever be like she was, but her Kfe is spaxed ; and if
ou really have a regard for her, you'll shim crossing
er way again — ^nay, you'll move out of this Country
ntirely ; and that you may not regret it, 1*11 inform
•ou Catherine Linton is as different now from your old
[iend Catherine Eamshaw as that young lady is differ*
nt from me* Her appearance is changed greatly, her
haracter much more so ; and the person who is com-
elled, of necessity, to be her companion'will only
astain his affection hereafter by the remembrance of
rhat she once was, by common humanity, and a sense
fduty/'
" That is qilite possible, " remarked Heathcliff, forcing
imself to seem calm—'* quite possible that your master
bould have nothing but common humanity and a sense
f duty to fall back upon. But do you imagine that I
hall leave Catherine to his duty and humanity? and
an you compare my feelings respecting Catherine to his ?
lefore you leave this house, I must exact a promise
•cm you that you-ll get me an interview with her.
onsent or refuse, I will see her ! What do you say .? "
*'I say, Mr. Heathcliff,*'I replied, " you must not.
ou never shall, through my means* Another en-
junter between you and the master would kill her
(together.''
" With your aid that may be avoided/'he continued ;
and should there be danger of such to eventr-^hould
3 be the cause of adding a single trouble more to
»r existence — ^why, I think I shall be'justified in
> ing to extremes. I wish you had sinicerity enough
) tell me whether Catherine would Suffer greatly from
is loss; the fear that she would restrains me* And
lere you see the distinction between our feelings:
id he been in my place, and I in his, though I hated
:m with a hatred that turned my life to g^l, I never
ould have raised a hand against him. " Yaw tcvs?3 VssJ^
[Credulous if you pJease. 1 never v^ovi^'^ X^aN^ Xsj^jsv
led him from h^r society as long 3js ^tA ^l^vs:^^
e moment her regard ceased, 1 v/oaAOl \vaN^ ^^^^
148 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
heart out and drunk his blood ! But till then — if yoa
don't believe me you don't know me — till then I would
have died by inches before I touched a single hair d
his head ! " -^
** And yet, " I interrupted, " you have no scruples in
completely ruining all hopes of her perfect restoratiod
by thrusting yourself into her remembrance now, whea
she has nearly forgotten you, and involving her in i
new tumult of discord and distress.**'1
" You suppose she has nearly forgotten me ? " h
said. " O Nelly, you know she has not ! You knoi
as well as I do that for every thought she spends ai
Linton, she spends a thousand on me ! At a- mos
miserable period of my life I had a notion of the'kint:
It haunted me on my return to the neighbourhood laA
summer ; but only her own assurance could make rod
admit the horrible idea again. And then Linton wouij
be nothing, nor Hindley, nor all the dreams that eve|
I dreamt. Two words would comprehend my future-Ji
death and hell ; existence, after losing her, would hi
hell. Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment that sh|
valued Edgar Linton's attachment more than mitiei
If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, hi
couldn't love as much in eighty years as I could in 2
day. And* Catherine has a heart as deep as I have i
the sea could be as readily contained in that horse-
trough as her whole affection be monopolized by himi
Tush ! He is scarcely a degree dearer to her than hd
dog or her horse. It is not in him to be loved like me
How can she love in him what he has not ? "
" Catherine and Edgar are as fond of each other a <
any two people can be,** cried Isabella with sudden
vivacity. " No one has a right to talk in that manner
and I won*t hear my brother depreciated in silence ! **
" Your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn*1
he ? ** observed Heathclif! scornfully. " He turns yet
adrift on the world with surprising alacrity/*
,. ^'^G IS not aware of what I sufter,** s\v.e t^^^^.''
^da't tell him that "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I49
»u have been telling him something, then. You
Titten, have you ? "
say that I was married, I did write ; you saw the
id nothing since ? "
> , "
1 young lady is looking sadly the worse for her
of condition, " I remarked. " Somebodyfs love
short in her case obviously. Whose, I may
but perhaps I shouldn't say. "
should guess it was her own, " said Heathcliff,
degenerates into a mere slut. She is tired of
to please me uncommonly eariy. . You'd hardly
it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was
g to go home. However, she'll suit this house
h the better for not being ovemice, and Fll take
le does not disgrace me by rambling abroad. "
2II, sir, " returned I, ** I hope you'll consider that
leathcliff is accustomed to be looked after and
on, and that she has been brought up like an
laughter, whom every one was ready to serve.
ust let her have a maid to keep things tidy about
nd you must treat her kindly. Whatever be
otion of Mr, Edgar, you cannot doubt that she
capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn't
bandoned the elegances, and comforts, and friends
former home to fix contentedly in such a wildei-
this with you, "
e abandoned them imder a delusion, " he an-
, " picturing in me a hero of romance, and ex-
\ unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous
)n. I can hardly regard her in the light of a
.1 creature, so obstinately has she persisted in
% a fabulous notion of my character, and acting
false impressions she cherished. But at last I
she begins to know me, I don't pexc^\ > j^ ^Cc^a.
Tiiles and grimajces that provoVLed xckfc ^\. ^'^^•^
? senseless incapability oi d\scetmTv% ^SoaX. " V ^ " ^
St when I gave her my opimou ol Yvex'vc & aX > aa.\^J
I so WUTHERING HEIGHT &
and herself. It was a marveUous efiort of perspicacit]
to discover that I did not love her. I believed, at oiu
time, no lessons could teach hear that. And yet it* i
poorly learned, for this morning she announced; as i
piece of appalling intelligence, that I had actually sue
ceeded in making her hate me — a positive labour o:
Hercules, I assure you ! If it bt achieved, I have.caus(
to returxi thanks. — Can I trust your assertion, Isabella i
Are you sure you hate me ? If I let you alone for hail
a day, won't you come sighing and wheedling .■ to nil
agslin ? — I dare say she woidd rather I had seemed a|
tenderness before you ; it wounds her vanity to bavli
the truth exposed. But I don't care who knows thai
the passion was wholly on one side ; and T never tolj
her a lie about it. She cannot accuse me of showinj
one bit of deceitful softness. The first thing she sawmi
do on coming out of the Grange was to hang up her litti
dog, and when she pleaded -for it, the first words I uttere <
were a wish that I had the hanging of every being belonjf
ing to her, except one; Possibljr she^ took that exceptioi
for herself. But no brutality disgusted her. I suppo*
she has an innate admiration of it, if only her precioui
person were secure from injury. Now, was it not thi
depth of absurdity, of genuine idiocy, for that pitiful
slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that I could lovi
her ? Tell your master, Nellys that I never^ in all mj
life, met with siach an abject thing as she is. She evei
disgraces the name of Linton ; and I've sometime
relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiment
on what she could endure and still creep shamefuU;
cringing back. But tell him also to set his fratema
and magisterial heart at ease; that I keep= strictlj
within the Hmits of the law. I have avoided, up to thi
period, giving her the slightest right to claim a separa
tion; and, what's more, she'd thank nobody f6r dividini
us. If she desired to go, she might ; the nuisance o
Aer presence outweighs the gratification to be deriva
^om tormenting her. "
''Mr. Heathcliff/'said I,'* this \ & t\» ta & L oi ^.tm
WUTHE^RING HEIGHT & 151
aan. Your wife, most likely, is convinced you are mad,
nd for that reason she has borne with you hitherto ;
)ut now that you say she may go, she'll doubtless avail
lerself of the permission. — You are not so bewitched,
na'am, are you, as to remain with him of your^ own
iccord? "
" Take care, Ellen ! " answered Isabella, her eyes
jjarkling irefuUy. There was no misdoubting, by their
apression, the full success of her partner's endeavours
kp make himself detested* " Don't put faith in a single
irord he speaks. He's a lying fiend — a monster, and
lot a human being ! I've been told I might leave
lim before, and I've made the attenrpt, but I dare not
iiepeat it. Only, Ellen, promise you'll not mention a
jyllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or
^therine. Whatever he may pretend, he wishes to
ttovoke E^gar to desperation. He sajTS he has married
oe on purpose to obtain power over hun; and he shan't
> btain it. I'll die first 1 I just hope — I pray— that he
nay forget his diaboUcal prudence and kill me I The
ingle pleasure I can imagine is to die or to see him
lead! "
" There — that will do for the present ! ** said Heath-
liff. — " If you are called upon in a court of law you'll
emember her language, Nelly. And take a good look
t that coimtenance ; she's hear the point which would
nit nie.---No ; you're not fit to. be your own guardian,
sabella, now ; and I, being your legal, protector, must
itain you in my custody, however distasteful the obliga-
.on may be* Go upstains j I have something to say
> Ellen Deian in private. That's not the way. Up-
tairs, I tell you 1 Why, thi^ is the road upstairs,
liild. "
He seized and thrust her from the room, and returned
luttering, —
" I have no pity I I have no pity I Xh < t tsvo\^ " ^^css.
'orms writhe, the more I yeam to civi^ o\i\ ^^^s: ^^-
ails I It is a moral teething ; and 1 grav^ :w^Oa ^^'^'^^
ergy in proportion to the incre3Lse ot paixL^
152 WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
''Do you understand what the word pity means ?'
I said, hastening to resume my bonnet. *'Did you evei
feel a touch of it in your hfe ? *'
*'Put that down ! " he interrupted, perceiving m.}
intention to depart. " You are not going yet. Com <
here now, Nelly. I must either persuade or compd
you to aid me in fulfilling my determination to se(
Catherine, and that without delay. I swear that 1
meditate no harm. I don't desire to cause any dia
turbance, or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton. I onlj
wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she haH
been ill, and to ask if anything that I could do wouU
be of use to her. Last night I was in the Grange gardeil
six hours, and Til return there to-night ; and every ni^
I'll haunt the palace, and every day, till I find an oppon
tunity of entering. If Edgar Linton meets me I shall
not hesitate to Imock him down, and give him enou^
to assure his quiescence while I stay. If his servants
oppose me I shall threaten them off with these pistols
But wouldn't it be better to prevent my coming ii
contact with them or their master ? • And you coulci
do it so easily. I'd warn you when I came, and thei
you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she wai
alone, and watch till I departed, your conscience quit*
calm. You would be hindering mischief. "
I protested against pla3H[ng that treacherous part it
my employer's house, and, besides, I urged the crueltj
and selfishness of his destroying Mrs. Linton's tran-
quillity for his satisfaction. " The commonest occurrence
startles her painfully, " I said. " She's all nerves, anc
she couldn't bear the surprise, I'm positive. Don'i
persist, sir, or else I shall be obliged to inform my mastei
of your designs, and he'll take measures to secure hi <
house and its inmates from any such unwarrantable
intrusions ! "
" In that case, I'll take measures to secure you, wo-
jTjsn,'* exclaimed Heathcliff . " You shall not leav <
Wuthering Heights till tomorrow moitv\tv%, W. \^ ^
oa/JsA story to assert that Catherine cou!L^ tMQ\. > Qfe^'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 153
;ee me ; and as to surprising her, I don't desire it. You
nust prepare her; ask her if I may come. You say
> he never mentions my name, and that I am never men-
tioned to her. To whom should she mention me if I
am a forbidden topic in the house ? She thinks you are
all spies for her husband. Oh, Fve no doubt she's in
hell among you ! I guess by her silence, as much as
anything, what she feels. You say she is often restless
and anxious-looking. Is that a proof of tranquillity ?
You talk of her mind being imsettled. Hgw the devil
could it be otherwise in her frightful isolation ? And
Biat insipid, paltry creature attending her from didy
taid humanity y from pity and charity ! He might as well
[Jant an oak in a flower-potj and expect it to thrive, as
imagine he can restore her to vigour in the soil of his
fallow cares ! Let us settle it at once. Will you stay
bere, and am I to fight my way to Catherine over Linton
ind his footman ? or will you be my friend, as you have
> een hitherto, and do what I request ? Decide, because
here is no reason for my lingering another minute if
pu persist in your stubborn ill-nature, "
Well, Mr. Lockwood, I argued and complained, and
iatly refused him fifty times; but in the long run he
breed me to an agreement. I engaged to carry a letter
rom him to my mistress; and should she consent, I
ffomised to let him have intelligence of Linton'^s. next
.bsence from home, when he might come, and get in
s he was able. I wouldn't be there, and miy fellow-
ervants should be equally out of the way. Was it
ight or wrong ? I fear it was wrong, though expedient.
thought I prevented another explosion by my com-
iliance, and I thought, too, it might create a favourable
risis in Catherine's mental illness. And then I remem-
ered Mr. Edgar's stem rebuke of my carrying tales, and
tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject by
fl & rming, with frequent iteration, Haai \?Qal \)fe\x'»:^'^
f trust, if it merited so harsh an appe\\aXAOXv^ ^csvj^^Xsi
le iBst Notwithstanding, my ^OMnv^y Yiota^^N^^ " ?
dder than my journey thither, and txvaxi^ TcissQ^^
t54 WUTHEJRING HEIGHTSr.
I had ere I cbuld prevail on myself to put themissm
into Mrs. Linton's hand; "
But here is Kenneth. Til go down and < tell Mm= ho\»
much better you are. My history is dree, as we say*
and will serve to while away another morning, : ■
Dree and dreary, I reflected, as the good woman dei
scended to receive the doctor, and not exactly of th»
kind which I should have chosen to amuse me, Bufl
never mind. TU extract wholesome mfedicines froflfi
Mrs. Dean's bitter herbs ; and firstly, let me beware thl
fascination that lurks in Catherine HeathclifP$ brillianl
eyes. I should be in a curious taking if I surrendereJ
my heart to that young person, and the daughter tumeJ
out a second edition of the mother. :P
:t
CHAPTER : XV. f
Another week over, and I am so many days nearer
health and spring ! I have now heard all my neighj
hour's history, at different sittings, as the housekeeper
could spare time from more important occupatira^
I'll continue it in her own words, only a little condensed!
She is, on the whole, a very fair narrator, and I don'^t
think I could improve her style.
In the evening, she said-^the evening of my visit to
the Heights-^I knew, as well as if I saw him, that Mr;
Heathcliff was about the place ; and I shunned going
out, because I still carried his letter in my pocket, and
didn't want to be threatened or teased any more. I had
made up my mind not to give it till my master went
somewhere, as I could not guess how its receipt wotiH
affect Catherine. The consequence was that it did not
reach her before the lapse of three days. The fourth was
Sunday, and I brought it into her room after the family
were gone to church. There was a mai^sarvant left to
^ < ?^ the house with me, and we genetaSLY m^^'b ^'yrai: > aEi
^ Jacking the doors during the boars Q > i sccw:^\ \s
WUTHERING HEIGHT & ISS
n that occasion the weather was $0 warm and pleasant
lat I set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement^
s I knew who would be coming, I told my companion
bat the mistress wished very much for some oranges,
nd he must rim over to the village and get a few, to be
aid for on the morrow, He departed, and I went up-
tairs*
Mrs* Linton sat in a loose, white dress, with a light
hawl over her shoulders, in the recess of the open window
s usual. Her thick» long hair had been partly, removed
t the banning of her illness, and now she wore it
imply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and
eck. Her appearance was altered, as I had told Heath-
liff; but when she was calm there seemed unearthly
eauty in the change* The flash of her eyes had been
ucceeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness ; they
longer gave the impression of looking at the objects
round her ; they appeared always to gaze beyond, and
IT beyond — you would have said out of this world. Then
le paleness of her face — ^its haggard aspect having
anished as she recovered flesh — and the peculiar ex-
ression arising from her mental state, though painfully
iggestiye of their causes, added to the touching in-
jrest which she awakened, and — invariably to me, I
now, and to any person who saw her, I should think
-refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and
amped her as one doomed to decay,
A book lay spread on the sill before her, and the
arcely perceptible wind fluttered its leaves at intervals,
believe Linton had laid it there, for she never endeav-
ired to divert herself with reading or occupation of any
nd, and he would spend many an hour in trying to
itice her attention to some subject which had formerly
jen her amusement. She was conscious of his aim, and
her better moods endured his efforts placidly, only
lowing their uselessness by now and Ibe-u ^\xY^\^'5aYs\^
wearied sigh, and checking him at last w\Xv ^i!!afc's;^^^^^'^
siw'Jes and kisses. At otiier times dcve > NO\i^^'^^'^
tulantly away, and hide her iace m Vvet Y^axAs*^
156 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
even push him off angrily; and then he took care
let her alone, for he was certain of doing no good.
Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing, and t
full, mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothing
on the ear. It was a sweet substitute for the yet abse
murmur of the summer foliage which drowned th
music about the Grange when the trees were in leaf, j
Wuthering Heights it always sounded on quiet da
following a great thaw or a season of steady rain* Ai
of Wuthering Heights Catherine was thinking as &
listened — that is, if she thought or listened at all ; b
she had the vague, distant look I mentioned before, whii
expressed no recognition of material things either 1
ear or eye.
" There's a letter for you, Mrs. Linton, " I said, gent
inserting it in one hand that rested on her knee. " Yi
must read it immediately, because it wants an answe
Shall I break the seal ? " " Yes, " she answered, wit
out altering the direction of her eyes. I opened it;
was very short. " Now, " I continued, " read it
She drew away her hand, and let it fall. I replaced
in her lap, and stood waiting till it should please h
to glance down ; but that movement was so long delay
that at last I resumed, —
" Must I read it, ma'am ? It is from Mr. Heathclifl
There was a start and a troubled gleam of recolk
tion, and a struggle to arrange her ideas. She lift
the letter, and seemed to peruse it, and when she car
to the signature she sighed ; yet still I found she hi
not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to he
her reply, she merely pointed to the name and gazed
me with mournful and questioning eagerness.
" Well, he wishes to see you, " said I, guessing h
need of an interpreter. " He's in the garden by tl
time, and impatient to know what answer I shall bring
As I spoke I observed a large dog lying on the simi
^ass beneath raise its ears as if about to bark, and the
r smoothing them back, announce, \ > y a -^^a^ o\ \}e^^ \:
3t some one approached whom \t did tvo\. coTkSv^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 5;
stranger. Mrs. Linton bent forward and listened breath
lessly. The minute after a step traversed the hall. Th(
open house was too tempting for Heathcliff to resis
^^king in. Most hkely he supposed that Iwas inclinec
*o shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his owi
iaudacity. With straining eagerness Catherine gazec
liowards the entrance of her chamber. He did not hi'
le right room directly. She motioned me to admii
m, but he found it out ere I could reach the door
id in a stride pr two was at her side, and had he:
sped in his arms.
He neither spoke nor loosed Ins hold for some fiv <
lUtes, during which period he bestowed more kissei
ever he gave in his life before, I dare say ; but thei
iny mistress had kissed him first, and I plainly saw thai
fee could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look intc
bar face. The same conviction had stricken him as me
ftom the instant he beheld her, that there was no pros
Ipect of ultimate recovery there ; she was fated, sure to die
** O Cathy ! O my Hfe ! how can I bear it ?''wai
khe first sentence he uttered, in a tone that did noi
tiBeek to disguise his despair. And now he stared at hei
leo earnestly that I thought the very intensity of hi*
[gaze would bring tears into his eyes ; but they bumec
with anguish — they did not melt.
" What now ? " said Catherine, leaning back anc
^returning his look with a suddenly clouded brow. Hei
'humour was a mere vane for constantly varying ca.
^ prices. " You and Edgar have broken my heart, Heath-
^ cliff ! And you both come to bewail the deed to me, as
if yoi€ were the people to be pitied ! I shall not pitj
you, not I. You have killed me — and thriven on it, ]
think. How strong you are ! How many years do yot
mean to live after I am gone ? "
Heathchff had knelt on one knee to embrace her, K^
attempted to rise, but she seized his hair aivd Ve^VXxv
down.
;'/ wish I could hold you, " she con^iTOxed \ > V < X£
till we were both dead I I shouldn't caie vi > c\a.\.
158 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
suffered. 1 care nothing for your sufferings^ W
shouldn't you suffer ? I do ! Will you foi^get m
Will you be happy when I am in the earth ? Will >
say twenty years hience,'That's the grave of Gather
Eamshaw* I loved her long ago, and was wretche.d
lose her ; but it is past. IVe loved many others sin
My children are dearer to me than she was, and at de£
I shall not rejoice that I am- going to her ; I shall be so]
that I must leave tbem.'Will you 3ay so, Heathdiff ?
!* Don't torture me till. I'm'as mad as yourself, " cr
he, wrenching his head free and grinding his teeth.
, The two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fe
iul picture. Well might Catherine deem that hea,^
would be a, land of exile to her, xmless with her mo?
body she cast away her moral character also. I
present countenance had a wild vindictiveness in
white cheek, and a bloodless Up and a scintillating e^
and she retained in her closed fingers a portion of i
locks she had been grasping. As to her compani <
while raising himself with one hand,i he had taken ]
arm with the other, and go inadequate was his stock
gentleness to the requirements of her condition that
his letting go I saw four distinct impressions left blue
the colourless skin;
** Are you possessed with a devil, " he pursued savage
" to talk in that ;manner to me when you are dyin
Do you reflect that all those words wiU be branded
my memory, and eating deeper eternally after you he
left me? You know you lie to say I have killed yc
and, Catherine, you know that I could as soon fori
you as my existence ! Is it not sufl & cient for your
femal selfishness that, while you are at peace, I sh
writhe in the torments of hell ?';'
'" I shall not be at peace, " moaned Catherine, recal
to a sense of physical weakness by the violent, uneqi
throbbing of her heart, which beat visibly and audil
under this excess of agitation. She said nothing furtl
f the paroxysm was over, then sha coi\\iwa^ xc
WUTPIERINO HEIGHTS. IS9
** I'm not wishing you greater torment than I have,
Heathcliff. I only wish us never to be parted ; and
should a word of mine distress you hereafter, think I
feel the same distress underground, and fbr my own
sake forgive me ! Come here and kneel down again.
You never harmed me in your life. Nay, if you nurse
inger, that will be worse to remember than my harsh
words. Won't you come here again ? Do ! "
Heathcliff went to the back of her chair and'leant
•ver, but not so far as to let her see his face, which was
Hvid with emotion. She bent round to look at him.
He would not permit it. Turning abruptly, he walked
to the fireplace, where he stood, silent, with his back
towards us.'Mrs. Linton's glance followed him sus-
piciously. Every movement woke a new sentiment in
her. After a pause and a prolonged gaze she resumed,
addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment, —
** Oh, you see, Nelly, he would tiot relent a moment
to keep me out of the gravel That is how Vm loved J
Well, never mind. That is not my Heathcliff . I shall
love mine yet, and take him with me ; he's in my soul.
And, " added she musingly, " the thing that irks me most
is this shattered prison, a;fter all. I'm tired of being
enclosed here. I'm wear5dng to escape into that glori-
ous world, and to be always there—not seeing it dimly
through tears, and yearning for it through the waUs of
an aching heart, but really with it and in it. Nelly,
you think you are better and more fortunate than I,
in full hedth and strength. You are sorry for me. Very
soon that will be altered. I shall be sorry for you, I
shall be incomparably beyond and above you aD. T
wonder he won't be near me ! " she went oh to herself.
" I thought he wished it. — Heathcliff dear, you shotQd
not be sullen now. Do come to me, Heathcliff. "
In her eagerness she rose and supported herself on
the arm of the chair. At that earnest appe^Xvfe Xmt^v^
to her, looking absolutely desperate.'SL\9» e.^^, " ^ " ^^
ind wet, at last Hashed fiercely = on " feet \ V^s > Nste
eaved convttlsrvely. An- instant the^ Yv^\^ ^^^^
l6o WUTHBRJNG- HEIGHTS.
and then how they met I hardly saw, but Catherine madfl
a spring, and he caught her, and they were locked in
an embrace from which I thought my mistress woulcj
never be released alive— rin fact, to my eyes, she sejemed
directly insensible. He flung himself into the nearest
seat, and on my approaching hurriedly to , ascertain il
she had fainted, he gnashed at me and foamed like a
mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy jealousy^
I did not feel as if I were in. the company of a creature ol
my own species. It appeared that he would not undas
stand, though I spoke to him, so I. stood off and held
my tongue in great perplexity.
A. movement of Catherine's relieved me a littlj
presently. She put up her Jiand to clasp his neck, aiuj
bring her cheek to his as he held her ; while he, in retunij
covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly,— |
" You teach me now how cruel you've been— crud
and false. Why did you despise me ? Why did yon
betray your own heart, Cathy ? I have not one wonj
of comfort. You deserve this. You have killed yomy
sfelf. Yes, you may kiss me, and cry, and wring out mj
kisses and tears; they'll blight ypu— they'll damn
you. You loved me ; then what right had you to leav^
me ? What right — answer me— for the poor fancy yoc
felt for Linton ? Because misery, and degradation, an < ]
death, and nothing that'God or Satan : could inflid
would have parted us, youy of your own will» did it
I have not broken your heart — you have broken it ;
and in breaking it you have broken mine. So much the
worse for me that I am strong. Do I want to live i
What kind of living will it be when you O God
would you like to live with your soul in the grave ? "
" Let me alone!, let me alone! " sobbed Catherine
** If I've done wrong, I'm dying for it. It is enough
You left me too ; but I won't upbraid you. I forgive
you. Forgive me. "
^^It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and
feej those wasted hands, " he answered, " l^v^ xcv^ ^^^
o < / < k > ii't let me see your eyes. 1 ioig^ve NAisaX ^a\x\¥^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l6l
done to me, I love my murderer — but yours! How
can I ? "
They were silent — their faces hid against each other,
and washed by each other's tears. At least, I suppose
the weeping was on both sides, as it seemed Heathcliff
cotdd weep on a great occasion like this.
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile, for the after-
noon wore fast away, the man whom I had sent o£E
returned from his errand, and I could distinguish by
the shine of the western sun up the valley a concoursa
thickening outside Gimmerton chapel porch. .
" Service is over, " I annoimced. *'My master will be
here in half an hour. "
Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Catherine
doser. She never moved.
Ere long I perceived a group of the servants passing
up the road towards the kitchen wing. •■ Mr. Linton wasi
not far behind. He opened the gate himself, and saim-
tered slowly up, probably enjojdng the lovely afternoon,
that breathed as soft as summer.
" Now he is here ! " I exclaimed. ** For Heaven's
sake hurry down ! You'll not meet any one on- the
front stairs. Do be quick, and stay among the trees
till he is fairly in. "
" I must go, Cathy, " said Heathcliff, seeking to ex-
tricate himself firom his companion's arms. " But ii
I live I'll see you again before you are asleep. I won't
stray five yards from your window. "
" You must not go ! " she answered, holding him as
firmly as her strength allowed. " You shaU not, I tell
you. "
'* For one horn:, " he pleaded earnestly.
" Not for one minute, " she replied.
" I must ; Linton will be up inunediately, " persisted
the alarmed intruder.
He would have risen and unfixed tei fea% < K»\s^ *^^
act; she clung fast, gasping. ThieTe YJ2kS» xasA x^'ss^
ion in ber face,
''No! " she shrieked. " Oh, dorft, doD!\. ?,o^ ^
l62 WUTHERING HEDGHTSi
the! last time ! Edgar will not hurt, ui Hcathclif
shall die ! I shall die !''
'^Dainn the fool ! There he is ! V aried Heathc
sinking back into his seat. " Hiish, my .darling! Hi
hushj Catherine ! I'll stay. If - h6 shot me so, I'd
pire with a blessing on my. lips. " ^
'And there'they were fast again. . I heard my mai
mounting the itairsw The cold sweat, ran from my f <
head; I was horrified. ■
''* Are; you going to listen to her ravings ? " Is
passionately. . " She does not know what shie. SJ
Will'you tuin her because she (has not wit to help^l
self ? Get up ! You could be free instantly. Tha
the most diabolical deed that ever you did* We.
all done for — ^master, mistress, and seorvant.f'
;; I wrung my hands and cried out, and Mr. Lin
hastened his step at the noise; In the midst of.
agitation I was sincerely glad to observe that Catherij
arms had fallen relaxed, and her he^d hung down*
" She's fainted or dead, " I thought ; " so much
better. Far lietter. that she should be -dead than lini
ing a burden and a miseryrmaker to all aboilt her. "
r Edgar sprang to his unbidden = guest, .blanched v
astonishment and rage. What he meant to do I can
teE. ■■ However, the .(bther stopped all demonstratiojij
once by placing the lifelese-looking ifoniL in his arms.
'" Look there ! " : he said* i " Unless- 3K)u be .ai fi€
help her first ; then you shall speak to me 1 "
He walked into the ■. . padour and sat down*
Linton summctoed ihe, aiid with great difficulty, j
after resorting to many means, we managed to resi
her to sensation* but she was all bewildered.
sighed and moaned^ and kniBW nobody. lEdg^r, in
anxiety for her, . forgot her hated friend I did i
I went at the earliest opportunity and besought him
depart, affirmihg that Catherine was better^ and: he she
Aear from me in the moming > how shift ipasa^d the nighi
^^f sAaJ] not refuse to go out oi doots,'* \ie ^aaasw*
^^tO: I shall st^y in the gairdeni ^ni^^^^^'Kfi^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. V
keep your word to-morrow. I shall be under the
larch trees. Mind ! or I pay another visit, wheth
Linton be in or not. "
He sent a rapid glance through the half-open do
of the chamber, and, ascertaining that what I stated w
apparently true, deUvered the house of his luckle
presence.
CHAPTER XVI.
y^ About twelve o'clock that night was bom the Catheri
you saw at Wuthering Heights — a puny seven montl:
'4 child ; and two hours after, the mother died, havh
ar never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss Heat
cliff or know Edgar. The latter's distraction'at 1:
^'A bereavement is a subject too painful to be dwelt oi
^) its after effects showed how deep the sorrow, sank.
^•'great addition, in my eyes, was. his being left witho
an heir. I bemoaned that as I gazed on the feet
b- orphan, and I mentally abused old Linton for — ^wh
■r- was only natural partiality — the securing his estate
his own daughter instead of his son's. An unwelcotn^
infant it was, poor thing ! It might have wailed out
life and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hou
of existence. We redeemed the neglect afterwards, b
its beginning was as frieiidless as its end is likely to be.
Next morning — bright and cheerful Out of doorfr
stole softened in through the blinds of the silent rooi
and suffused the couch and its occupant with a mello^
tender glow. Edgar Linton had his head laid on tl
pillow, and his eyes shut. His young and fair featur
were almost as deathlike as those of the form besi <
him, and almost as fixed ; but his was the hush of e
hausted anguish, and hers of perfect peace. Her brc
smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expressi(
of a smile — no angel in heaven could be tcvot^ \ > ^a»iC\
than she appeared. And I partook oi \bfc m^mX,^ ^
In which she lay. My mind was never m «t\vc?»cisx ^
tboD while I gaaed on that untroubled Vm^^e o\ ^
1 64 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
rest. I instinctively echoed the words she had uttered
a few hours before. " Incomparably beyond and above
us all ! Whether still on earth or now in heaven, her
spirit is at home with God ! "
'I'don't know if it be a peculiarity in me, but I am
seldom otherwise than happy while watching in the
chamber of death, should no frenzied or despairing
mourner share the duty with me. I see a repose that
neither earth nor hell can break, and I feel an assurance
of the endless and shadowless hereafter — the eternity
they have entered — ^where hfe is boundless in its dura?;
tion, and love in its sympathy, and joy in its fullness;
I noticed on that occasion how much selfishness therfl
is even in a love like Mr. Linton's, when he so regretted
Catherine's blessed release. To be sure, one might have
doubted, after the wayward and impatient existence
she had led, whether she merited a haven of peace a1
last. One might doubt in seasons of cold reflection, bid
not then, in the presence of her corpse. It asserted itii
own tranquillity, which seemed a pledge of equal -qtiiel
to its former inhabitants.
Do you believe such people are happy in the othisi
world, sir ? I'd give a great deal to know.
I declined answering Mrs. Dean's question, whicll
struck me as something heterodox. She proceeded, — ,
Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear w€
have no right'to think she is ; but we'll leave her witi
her Maker.
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soonaftei
sunrise to quit the room and steal out to the pure re-
freshing air. The servants thought me gone to shake ofl
the drowsiness of my protracted watch ; in reality, mj
chief motive was seieing Mr. Heathcliff. If he hid
remained among the larches all night he would hav^
heard nothing of the stir at the Grange — ^unless, perhaps,
he might catch the gallop of thie messenger going tc
Gimmerton. If he had come nearer ba vrauld probably
fe aware, from the lights flitting to and iio, ^xidt \i«ii o^\^
''and shutting of the outer doors, > ;ba\. aSi v^^s x^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 165
right within. I wished yet feared to find him, I felt
the terrible news must be told, and I longed to get it
over ; but how to do it I did not know. He was there
—at least a few yards farther in the park — leant against
an old ash tree, his hat off, and his hair soaked with
the dew that had gathered on the budded branches,
and fell pattering round him. He had been standing a
long time in that position, for I saw a pair of ousels passing
and repassing scarcely three feet from him, busy in build-
ing their nest, and regarding his proximity no more than
that of a piece of timber. They flew off at my d.pproach,
and he raised his eyes and spoke.
" She's dead ! " he said. " I've not waited for you to
feam that. Put your handkerchief away; don't snivel
before me. Damn you all ! she wants none of your tears ! "
I was weeping as much for him as her ; we do some-
times pity creatures that have none of the feeling either
for themselves or others. When I first looked into his
kce, I perceived that he had got intelligence of the
catastrophe ; and a foolish notion struck me that his
heart was quelled, and he prayed, because his lips moved,
and his gaze was bent on the ground.
" Yes, she's dead 1 " I answered, checking my sobs
and drying my cheeks — " gone to heaven, I hope,
where we may, every one, join her, if we take due warn-
ing and leave our. e\Til ways to follow good I "
" Did she take due warning, then? " asked HeathcUff,
attempting a sneer. " Did she die Uke a saint ? Come,
give me a true history of the event. . How did "
He endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could
not manage it ; and conipressing his mouth, he held a
silent combat with his inward agony, defjdng. meanwhile,
my sympathy with an unflinching ferocious stare. " How
did she die ? " he resumed at last, fain, notwithstanding
his hardihood, to have a support behind him ; for,
after the struggle; he trembled, in spite oi \ivcc^^^ Xk
\i\% very Anger-ends.
''Poor wretch 1''I thought, " you Yi^.ve ^Yve.'bxV ^
enres the same as your brother men \ N^^^V ^^ " ^^
1 66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
be aaxious to conceal them ? Your pride cannot blind
God. You tempt Him to wring them till He forces
a cry of humiliation. "
.''Quietly as a lamb ! *'I answered aloud.'* She
drew a sigh, and stretched herself, like a child reviving,
and sinking again to sleep ; and five minutes after I
felt one little pulse at her heart, and nothing more ! " ,
. *'And — did she ever mention me ? *'he asked, hesi-
tating, as if he dreaded the answer to his question would
introduce details that he could not bear to hear.
" Her senses never returned. She recognized nobody I
from the time you left her,'* I said. " She lies with a i
siweet smile on her face, and her latest ideas wandered J
back to pleasant early days. Her Hfe closed in a gentle
dream. May she wake as kindly in the other world 1'*
" May she wake in torment !'* he cried with frightful
vehemence, stamping his foot and groaning in a sudden
paroxysm of ungovernable passion.'* Why, she's a
liar to the end. Where is she ? Not there — not in
heaven — not perished — where? — Oh! you said you
cared nothing for my sufferings ! And I pray one praj^
— I repeat it till my tongue stiffens — Catherine Eam-
shaw, may you not rest as long as I am hving ! You
said I killed you — haimt me, then I The murdered do
haimt their murderers, I believe. I know that ghosts
have wandered on earth. Be with me always — take any
form — drive me mad — only do not leave me in this abyss,
where I cannot find you ! O God ! it is unutterable 1
I cannot live without my life 1 I cannot live without my
feouir*'
He dashed his hekd against the knotted trunk, and,
lifting up his eyes, howled — not like a man, but like a
savage beast being goaded to death with knives and
spears. I observed several splashes of blood about the
bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead were both
stained ; probably the scene I witnessed was a repetition
ol others acted during the night. It hardly moved my
ompassion — it appalled me ; stiBi 1 ie\t x^\ictaBJe \.ci
vt him so. But the moment, Yie xfeco\kc\.eA > kwcq«^
4
I WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l6
'enough to notice me watching, he thundered a comman
for me to go, and I obeyed. He was beyond my ski
to quiet or console.
Mrs. Linton's funeral was appointed to take place o
•^,{ the Friday following her decease, and till then her cofi &
-j remained uncovered and strewn with flowers and scente
_f leaves in the great drawing-room. Linton spent his daj
^j and nights there, a sleepless guardian ; and — a circun
4 stance concealed from all but me — Heathcliff spent hi
, I nights, at least, outside, equally a stranger to repose
T I held no communication with him. Still, I was consciou
'of his design to enter, if he could ; and on the Tuesday
^'a little after dark, when my master, from sheer fatigue
r- had been compelled to retire a couple of hours, I wer
. and opened one of the windows, moved by his persevei
" ance to give him a chance of bestowing on the fade
^ image of his idol one final adieu. He (fid not omit t
.'; avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and briefiy-
J^ too cautiously to betray his presence by the sHghtej
noise. Indeed, I shouldn't have discovered that h
had been there, except for the disarrangement of th
drapery about the corpse's face, and for observing o
the floor a curl of light hair fastened with a silver threac
which, on examination, I ascertained to- have been take
from a locket hung round Catherine's neck. Heathcli
had opened the trinket and cast out its contents, rcplacin
them by a black lock of his own. I twisted the two, an
enclosed them together.
Mr. Eamshaw was, of course, invited to attend tt
remains of his sister to the grave. He sent no excu &
but he never came ; so that, besides her husband, th
mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servant;
Isabella was not asked.
The place of Catherine's interment, t6 the surprise (
the villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carve
monument of the Lintons, nor yet oy Wve \.otcto & ^\ >
own relations oufsicfe. It was dngorci ^ ^^fcxv'^
in a comer of the Jrirkyard, where tiae vj^ > ^ ^
that heath and bilberry plaiits \\ave e\\xtv\^^ ^
l68 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
from the moor, and peat mould almost buries it. Her
husband Hes in the same spot now, and they have each
a simple headstone above, and a plain gray block at
their feet, to mark the graves*
CHAPTER XVn,
That Friday made the last of our fine days for a month;,-
In the evening the weather broke ; the wind sbiftect
from south to north-east, and brought rain first, and
then sleet and snow. On the morrow one could hardly
imagine that there had been three weeks of summ^— t
the primroses and crocuses were bidden under windy
drifts, the larks were silent, the ypung leaves of the
early trees smitten and blackened. And dreary, and
chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over! My
master kept his room ; I took possession of the lonely
parlour, converting it into a nursery, and there I wa^,
sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid on my
knee, rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile,
the still driving flakes build up the imcurtained window,
when the door opened, and some person entered, out
of breath and laughing. My anger was greater than
my astonishment for a minute, I supposed it one of
the maids, and I cried, —
" Have done ! How dare you show your giddiness
here ? What would Mr. Linton say if he heard you ? "
" Excuse me, " answered a familiar voice ; ** but I know
Edgar is in bed, and I cannot stop myself. "
With that the speaker came forward to the fire, pant-
ing and holding her hand to her side.
" I have run the whole way f rom Wuthering Heights, "
she continued, after a pause, " except where I Ve flown.
I couldn't count the number of falls I've had. Oh,
I'm aching all over I Don't be alaxmed I There sball
^ aj2 explanation as soon as 1 can ^ve M, oxi^^ Va & x
've the goodness to step out and otdet > L\ve c»xT\aj?
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 169
take me on to Gimmerton, and tell a servant to seek
ip a few clothes in my wardrobe/'
The intruder was Mrs. Heathcliff. She certainly
eemed in no laughing predicament. Her hair streamed
)n her shoulders, dripping with snow and water ; she
vas dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore,
)efitting her age more than her position — a low frock
nth short sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck;
The frock was of hght silk, and climg to her with wet,
ind her feet were protected merely by thin slippers ;
dd to this a deep cut imder one ear, which oiAy the
old prevented from bleeding profusely, a white face
cratched and bruised, and a frame hardly able to sup-
lort itself, through fatigue, and you may fancy my first
right was not much allayed when I had had leisure to
xamine her.
" My dear young lady, " I exclaimed, " Fll stir no-
fhere, and hear nothing, till you have removed every
rticle of your clothes, and put ort dry things ; and cer-
ainly you shall not go to Gimmerton to-night, so it is
eedless to order the carriage. "
" Certainly I shall, " she said — " walking, or riding.
!'et I've no objection to dress myself decently. And —
ih, see how it flows down my neck now ! The fire. does
lake it smiart. "
She insisted on my fulfilling her directions before she
'ould let me touch her ; and not till after the coach-
lan had been instructed to get ready, and a maid set to
ack up some necessary attire; did I obtain her consent
)r binding the wound, and helping to change her gar-
lents.
" Now, Ellen, " she said, when my task was finished
nd she was seated in an easy-chair on the hearth,. with
cup of tea before her, " you sit down opposite me, and
ut poor Catherine's baby away. I don t like to see it.
'ou mustn't think I care Uttle for C^tivfefcaa \3fc^-a:oafc
behaved so foolishly on entering. Yn^ cnsA.^ ^-^^
tterly—yes, more than any one. e\se Yvas t^^%«tL " ^^ " ^
e parted unreconciled, you remexsiber^ .^^xv^ ^ ^^^
I70 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS.
forgive myself. But, for all that, I was. not going
sympathize with him — the brute beast t Oh, give
the poker !'This is .the last thing of his I have ab <
me: " She slipped the gold ring from her third fing
and threw it on the floor*''F 11 smash it I *• she o
tinued, striking it with childish spite, " and thaen
burn it ! ■* And she took and dropped the misused'arti
among the coals. *'Th^e;! he shall buy another if
g^ts me back again. He'd be capable of coming
seek m^, to tease Edgar. I dare not stay, lest that not
should possess his wicked head! And besides, Edj
has not been kind,Jms.he ? And I won't come suing
his assistance^ nor will I britig him into more tnoul
Necessity compelled me to seek shelter: here, though
I had not learned he wasi out of the way, Td have hal
at the kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, ,
you io bring what I wanted, arid departed again
an37where out of the reach- of my accursed^ — of t
incarnate goblin ! Ah, he was in stich a fury 1 If
had caught me/! It's a pity Eamshaw is not. his ma
in strength. I wouldn't Tiave run till I'd seen him
but demolished^ had Hindley been able to do it. "
*''Well, don't talk so- fast, miss, " I interrupte
" you^ll difeirder'the > i handkerchief T have tied roi
your face, and make the cut bleed again. Drink y
tea, and fake breath, and give -over laughing; laugh
is sadly out of place undecthis roofj and in yolir c
dition!^'•:'.. ■. / ^-.■ >'■-.. .■■..•:■■•■■ • [■•.
" An urideniable: tnithjV she replied.'• Listen
that child t Itmiintaiiis ia constant wail. Send it <
of my hearing for an hour ; I shan't stay any longer.'
= I rang the bell and committed: it to a servant's a
and then I inquired what had ui^ed her to escape fr
Wuthering Heights in such an utiUkely plight, and wh
she meant toigOj afe die refused remaining with us.
" I o*ugbt and I wiih to remain,-'answered she —'
cAeer Edgar'Riid take care of < the baby, for two thii
Bnd because ^heGralnge is .my ri^Yvt \«w!ftfc; .^vx?t\\
Pou he J wouldn't let me. Do you, timxiliL \\b tsoxs^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I J
to see me grow fat and merry, could bear to think thi
ve were tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning oi
comfort ? Now, I have the satisfaction of being sui
that he detests me to the point of its annoying hii
seriously to have me within earshot or eyesight,
notice, when I enter his presence, the muscles of h
countenance are involuntarily distorted into an expre
sion of hatred, partly arising from his knowledge of tl:
good causes I have to feel thsit sentiment for him, an
partly from original aversion. It is strong enough 1
make me feel pretty certain that he would not chase n
over England supposing I contrived a clear escape, an
therefore I must get quite away. I've recovered froi
my first desire to be killed by him ; I'd rather he'd ki
himself I He has extinguished my love effectually, an
so I'm at my ease. I can recollect yet how I loved hin
and can dimly imagine that I could still be loving hin
if — ^no, no ! Even if he had doted on me, the devilis
nature would have revealed its existence somehox
Catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem hii
so dearly, knowing him so well. Monster ! Would that 1:
could be blotted out of creation and out of my memory !
** Hush, hush ! He's a human being, " I said. ** I
more charitable. There are worse men than he is yet.'^
*'He's not a human being, " she retorted, ** and 1
has no claim on my charity. I gave him my heart, an
he took and pinched it to death, and flung it back 1
me. People feel with their hearts, Ellen ; and since 1
has destroyed mine, I have not power to feel for hir
and I would not, though he groaned from this to h
dying day, and wept tears of blood for Catherine ! N <
indeed, indeed, I wouldn't ! " And here Isabella bega
to cry ; but, immediately dashing the water from b
lashes, she recommenced. ** You asked, what has drive
me to flight at last ? I was compelled to attempt i
because I had succeeded in rousing hi & t^.^ < ^ " & . ^ " ^
above his malignity. Pulling out t^e xvexv^^ > ^^ ^
hot pincers requires more coolness tYvan VxvoOkvtv.^ o^
IieacL He was worked up to forget t\ve feeti^^ ^^
1 72 WUTHERI N & : ilEIGHTS*
he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous'violence
I experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate hino;
the sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation
so -I fairly broke free ; and if ever I come into his hand
again, he is welcome to a signal revenge.
" Yesterday^ you know, Mr. Eamshaw should have
been at the funeral. He kept himself sober for the
purpose, tolerably sober — not going to bed mad at sb
o'clock and getting up drunk at twelve. Consequentl}
he rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church aj
for a dance ; and instead, he sat down by the fire anc
swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfub.
. *'Heathcliff — I shudder to name him ! — ^has been t
stranger in the house from last Sunday till to-day
Whether the angels have fed him, or his kin beneath, ]
cannot tell ; but he has not eaten a meal with us io\
nearly a week. He has just come home at dawn, anc
gone upstairs to his chamber, locking himself in— as i
anybody dreamt of coveting his company ! There h(
has continued, praying like a Methodist — only the deit]
he implored is senseless dust and ashes ; and God
when addressed, was curiously confounded with his owi
black father ! After concluding these precious orisoni
— and they lasted generally tiU he grew hoarse and hi
voice was strangled in his throat — ^he would be off again
always straight down to the Grange I I wonder Edga
did not send for a constable, and give him into custody
For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it was im
possible to avoid regarding this season of dehverana
from degrading oppression as a holiday.
" I recovered spirits sufficient to hear Joseph's etema
lectures without weeping, and to move up and.dowi
the house less with the foot of a frightened thief thai
formerly. You wouldn't think that I should cry at any
thing Joseph could say ; but he and Hareton are detest
able companions. I'd rather sit with Hindley, and hea:
his awiul talk, than with * t'little maister'and hi
stanch supporter y that odious old manX Wcvexv^'^XJc
^n£fjs in, Fm often obliged to seek \3ae ki^chexv ^xAX^cvs
IWUTHERING HfilGHTK 17
. society, or starve among the damp miinhabited chamben
When he is not, as was the case this week, I estabUsh
table and chair at one comer of the house fire, and neve
mind how Mr. Eamshaw may occupy himself ; and h
does not interfere with my arrangements. He is quiet€
DOW than he used to be, if no one provokes him^^moi
sullen and depressed and less furious. Joseph affirm
he's sure he*s an ialtered man, that the Lord has touchy
Us heart, and he is saved'so as by fire.'I'm puzzle
to detect signs of the favourable change ; but it is nc
ny buisiness.
" Yester-evening I sat in my nook reading some ol
books till late on towards twelve. It seemed so dismt
to go upstairs, with the wild snow blowing outside, an
my thoughts continually reverting to the kirkyard'ari
the new-made grave. I dared hardly lift my eyes froi
the page before me, that melancholy scene so instauatl
nsoiped its place. Hindley sat opposite, his head lean
OQ his hand, perhaps meditating on the same subject
He had ceased drinking at a point below irrationalitj
and had neither stirred nor spokieh during two oi: thre
hours. There was no sound through the house but th
moaning wind, which shook the windows every now an
then, the faint crackling of the coals, and the click c
my snuffers as I removed at intervals the long wick t
the candle. Hareton alnd Joseph were probably fas
asleep in bed. It was very,, very sad ; and while I rea
I sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished froi
the world, never to be restored.
" The doleful silence was broken at length by th
sound of the kitchen latch. Heathdiff had retume
from his watch earlier than usual, owing, I suppose, t
the sudden storm. That entriance was fastened, and w
heard him coming round to get in by the other. I ros
with an irrepressible expression of what I felt on m
lips, which induced my companion, who bsLd\ > ewa.^\axvs
towards the door, to turn and'look at live.
'" TJI keep him out five minutes,* \\e.eyL.cSs^
'You won't object ?':
y
id
a
174 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
**'No ; you may keep him out the whole night fa
me/ I answered * Do ; put the key in the lock, am
draw the bolts,'
" Eamshaw accomplished this ere his guests reachec
the front He then came and brought his chair to th(
other side of my table, leaning over it, and searching ii
my eyes for a sympathy with the burning hate thai
gleamed from his. As he both looked and felt like ail
assassin, he cotildn't exactly find that ; but he discovered
enough to encourage him to speak. ]
" * You and I,'he said, * have each a great debt ta
settle with the man out yonder. If we were neither oi
us cowards, we might combine to discharge it. Are yoi
as soft as your brother ? : Are you willing to endure ti
the last, and not once attempt a repajmient ?'i
" Tni weary of enduring now,'I leplied,'and Fd bi
glad of a retailiation that wouldn't recoil on mj^sdf j
but treachery and violence are spears pcAnted at botl
«ids. They wound those who resort to them worse thai
their enemies.'\
"'Treachery and violence are a )ust return for treachen
and violence I'cried Hindley. * Mrs. Heathcliff , I'll asl
you to do nothing but sit still and be dumb. Tell nM
now, can you ? I'm sure you would have as mud
pleasure as I in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend'ji
existence. He'U be your death unless you overread
him ; and he'll be my ruin. Danm the hellish villains
He knocks at the door as if he were master here already i
Promise to hold your tongue, and before that clock strike
— ^it wants three minutes of one — you're a free woman !
" He took the implements which I described to you ii
my letter from his breast, and would have turned dowa
the candle. I snatched it away, however, and seizec
his arm.
** * I'll not hold my tongue/ I said ;'you muatn'i
touch him. Let the door remain shut, and be quiet.!
" "'No ! I've formed my resolMtion, and b^God I'l
^ecute it !'cried the despearate beisift,'\'\i ^ T^
wdaess in spite of yourself, and Haxetoix \v»^^x:»\ ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I,
you needn't trouble your head to screen me ; Catheri
is gone. Nobody alive would regret me, or be ashame
though I cut my throat this minute; and it's time
make an end ! *
" I might as well have struggled with a bear
reasoned with a lunatic. The only resource left me w
to run to a lattice and warn his intended victim of t
fate which awaited him.
"'You'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-nigh
I exclaimed, in rather a triumphant tone.'Mr. Ear
ti|ihaw has a mind to shoot you, if you persist in endeavoi
ing to enter.*
"'You'd better open the door, you ,'he answere
addressing me by some elegant term that I don't ca
to repeat.
"'I shall not meddle in the matter,'I retorted agai
*Come in and get shot, if you please. I've done my dut;
*'With that I shut the window and returned to r
place by the fire, having too small a stock of hjrpocri
at my command to pretend any anxiety for the dang
erfthat menaced him. Eamshaw swore passionately
toe, affirming that I loved the villain yet, and calli
me all sorts of names for the base spirit I evinced. Ai
I, in my secret heart (and conscience never reproach
d^ me), thought what a blessing it would be for hint shou
Heathcliff put him out of misery ; and what a blessi
kfc me should he send Heathcliff to his right abod
As I sat nursing tiiese reflections, the casement behii
me was banged on to the floor by a blow from the latl
> individual, and his black countenance looked blighting
through^ The stanchions stood too close to suffer 1
shoulders to follow, and I smiled, exulting in my fanci
security* His hair and clothes were whitened with sno
and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed by cold ai
wrath, gleamed through the dark.
" * Isabella, let me in, or I'll make " njom x^-^t^V
'gimed,'as Joseph cells it.
y "'/ cannot commit murder,* 1 repVieA;. * ^'^ •'^
f stands sentinel with a. knife and loaded \»s\o\-'
yo
ot:
lai
ic:
ci
D
y.
:e:
:
ir
176 WITHERING HEIGHTS.
'/ * Let me in by the kitchen door/: h6 said.
" * Hindley will be there before me/ I answered-
* and that's a poor love of yours that cannot bear i
shower of snow ! We were left at peace in our beds ai
long as the summer moon shone, but the moment £
blast of winter returns, you must run for shelter ! Heath-
cliff, if I were you, I*d go stretch myself over her grav <
and die like a faithful dog. The world is surely nol
worth living in how, is it ? You had distinctly impressed
on me the idea that Catherine was the . whole joy ol
your life. I can't imagine how you think of surviving
her loss/ i
"'He's .there, is he ?'exclaimed my companion^
rushing to the gSJp. * If I can get. my arm out I can hil
him !'J
" I'm afraid, Ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked {
but you don't know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't hav^
aided or abetted an attempt on even his life for anything;
Wish that he were dead, I must ; and therefore I wiM|
fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for thu
consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung hinlj
self on Eamshaw's weapon and wrenched it from hil
grasp..''J I'1
'^ The charge exploded^ and : the knife, in springinjj
back; closed into its owner's wrist. Heathclift pUlledil
away by main force, slitting up the flesh as it passed OB|
land thrust it rdripping into ^s pocket. He then torf
a. stone,'struck down the division between two window$
and Sprang in. His adversary had fallen senseless witl
excessive pain and the flow of blood that gushed; fj^on
an artery. or a large vein. The ruffian kicked aiM
trampled on, him, ajod dashed his head. repeatedly again«
the flags, holding me with one hand meiantime to. prevem
me summoning Joseph. He exerted preterhuman sell
denial in abstaining from finishing him completely ; buJ
getting out of breath he finally = desisted, andrdraggec
tAe apparently inanimate body otv to the ^ttle. . l^lSsci
^tore. off the sJeeve ofi £arnshav/*s coaA., ^si^\«asssj^ -vr
& e wound with brutal roughaesfev^piltiii^a «Q^^^^Q^^
WUTH'ERING HEIGHTS. I77
ng the operation as energetically as he had kicked
re. Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking the
servant, who, having gathered by degrees tl^e pur-
of my hasty tale, hurried below, gasping as he
ended the steps two at once.
'What is ther to do now — ^what is ther to do now ?'
'There's this to do,'thundered Heathcliff,'that
• master's mad ; and should he last another month,
lave him to an asylum. And how the devil did you
e to fasten me out, you toothless hound ? Don't
d muttering and mumbhng there. Come, I'm not
g to nurse him. Wash that stuff away; and liiind
sparks of your candle — ^it is more than talf brandy.'
'And so ye've been murthering on him !'exclaimed
ph, lifting his hands and eyes in horror. : * If iver
id a seeght loike this ! May the Lord-— ^ —'
Heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the
He of the blood, and flung a towel to him ; but
jad of proceeding to dry it up, he joined his hands
began a prayer, which excited my laughter from
)dd phraseology. I was in the condition of mind to
tiocked at nothing ; in fact, I was as reckless as some
'factors show themselves at the foot'of the gallows.
'Oh, I forgot you,'said the tyrant. * You shall do
. Down with you! And you conspire with him
QSt me, do you, viper ? There, that is work fit! for
!'. ■ ■
He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me
ie Joseph, who steadily concluded'his supplicatioiis,
then rose, vowing he would set off for the Grange
:tly. Mr. Linton was a magistrate, and though he
fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this. He
so obstinate in his resolution that Heathcliff deemed
cpedient to compel from my lips a recapitulation of
t had taken place, standing over mej heaving with
ivolence, as I reluctantly delivered tba ^.eccwa^ vcs.
ver to his questions. It required a gce^.V ^esSi cfs.
IT to satisfy the old man that Heat\v.c!iAfi. ^«»s. xvo\
^ffressor. especially with my YiatdXy-vrrafvc, xe^
X 78 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
However, Mr; Eamshaw soon convinced him that l
was alive still. Joseph hastened to administer a dose <
spirits, and by their succom " his master presently xi
gained motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aware ths
his opponent was ignorant of the treatment receive
while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated, an
said he should not notice his atrocious conduct furthei
but advised him to get to bed. To my joy, he left vk
after giving this judicious. counsel, and Hindley stretch^
himself on the hearthstone. I departed to. my om
room, marvelling that I had escaped so easily, j
" This morning .when I came down, about half ai
hour before noon, Mr. Eamshaw was sitting by the 6^
deadly sick. His evil genius, almost as gaunt an(
ghastly, leant against the'chimney. Neither appearai
inclined to dine ; and, having waited till all was cold a
the table, I commenced alone. Nothing hindered m
from eating heartily, and I experienced a certain a$na
of satisfaction and superiority as, at intervals, L cast. 1
look towards my silent companions, and felt the cotnfoi
of a quiet conscience within me; After I hJid done, ]
ventured on the imusiml : liberty of drawing near th
fire, going rouhd Eamshaw's seat,, and kiieeling in th
comer beside him,. • :: -'.
" Heathcliff did not glanc6 my way, and I gazed uj
and contemplated his feiaturesi almost as confidently n
if they had been turned to stone. His forehead, that^i
once thought so manly, and that I now think so dia
boHcal, was shaded- with a heavy cloud; his basilia
eyes were nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping
perhaps, fot the la^es were wet then.; ihis lips devoi
of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an expression <
unspeakable sadness. - Had it been another, I waul
have covered my face in the presence of such grief. I
hiscase, 1 was gratified; and, ignoble as it seems t
insuh a fallen ^nemy, I couldn't miss this chance :.(
sticking in a dart.'His weakness'was ttva otdy time whe
f couJd taste the delight of paying wtotv^ left -'wxa^^''
''i^i'e, i5e, miss! " I interrupted.'* 0«b tkli??bJl %\^^v
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1/9
> rou had never opened a Bible in your life. If God afflict
^our enemies, surely that ought to suffice you. It is both
nean and presumptuous to add your torture to His.'*
" In general rU allow that it would be, Ellen,*'she
ixmtinued ; " but what misery laid on Heatbclifi could
content me, unless I have a hand in it ? . Td rather Jbe
suffered less, if I might cause his sufferings, and: he might
kmm Aat I was the cause. Oh, I owe him so much!
On only one condition can I hope to forgive him. It
is, if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,
br every wrench of agony return a wrench, reduce him
to my level ; as he was the first to injure, make him
be first to implore pardon ; and then — ^why, then,
Blen, I might show you some genero3ity. But it is
htterly impossible I can ever be revenged, and therefore
I cannot forgive him. Hindley wanted some water, and
I handed him a glass, aiid asked him how he was.
■ "'Not as ill as I wish,'he replied.'But leaving out
my arm, every inch of me is as sore as if I had been
jilting with a legion of imps.'
i " * Yes, no wonder,'was my next remark.'Catherine
wed to boast that she stood between you and bodily
harm. She meant that certain persons would not hurt
you for fear of offending her. It's well people don't
nally rise from their grave, or last night she might
have witnessed a repulsive scene ! Are not you bruised
and cut over your chest and shoulders ?'
"'I can't say,'he answered ;'but what do you
mean ? Did he dare to strike me when I was down ?'
"'He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you
on the ground,.'I whispered.'And his mouth watered
to tear you with his teeth, because he's only half man —
not so much— -and the rest fiend.*
" Mr. Eamshaw looked up, like me, to the coimte-
lance.of our mutual foe, who, absorbed in his anguish,
^emed insensible to anything around bixa. T\Nfc Xcs^^^
le stood, the plainer his reflections teve^led \ > cveYt \^^0«
•ess tbrougb his features,
"'Oh, if God would but give me stteivg^V \o ste«s
l8o WUTHEtlING HEIGHTS.
him in my. last agony, I'd go to hell with joy/ groanec
the impatient man, writhing to rise, and sinking bad
in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the struggle.
** * Nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you,
I observed aloud. * At the Grange, every one knows
your sister would have been living now had it not beei
tor Mr. Heathcliff. After all, it is preferable to be hated
than loved by him. When I recollect how happy V9i
were, how happy Catherine was before he came, I'ni
fit to curse the day.'.i
" Most likely Heathcliff noticed more the truth ol
what was said than the spirit of the person who saii
it. His attention was roused, I saw, for his eyes raineq
down tears among the ashes, and he drew his bread
in suffocating sighs;'I stared full at him, and laughed
scornfully. The ■ clouded windows of hell flashed i
moment towards me ;'the fiend which usually looked
out, howei^er, was so dimmed and drowned that I die
not fear to: hazard another sound of derision.
" * Get up, and begone out of my sight,* said thi
mourner. •
** I guessed he uttered those words, at least, thougl
his voice was hardly intelligible. u
"'I beg your pardon,'I replied.'But I loved
Catherine too; and her brother requires attendance
which, for her'sake, I shall supply. Now that she^
dead, I see her in Hindley: Hindley has exactly hel
eyes, if you had not triied to gouge them out, and mad*
them black and red ; and her'1
" * Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you tc
death !'he cried, making a movement that caused mo
to make one also.
"'But, then,'I continued, holding myself ready to
flee,'if poor Catherine- had trusted you, and assumed
the ridiculous, contemptible, degracfcig title of Mrs;
HeathchS, she would soon have presented a similai
picture. She VouJdn't have borne ^om ^bdtoitiabk
- > ebaviour quietly. Her detestatioiv »uA: ^asj^^V Tcsna
•w? found voice/ ■'< ,. .V» \n /'"
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 8 1
The back of the settle and Earashaw-s person inter-
i between me and him ; so instead of endeavouring
lach me, he snatched a dinner knife from the table
flung it at my head. It struck beneath my ear j
stopped the sentence I wds uttering ; but, pulling it
I sprang to the door and deUvered another, which
pe went a httle deeper than his missile. The las*
pse I caught of him was a furious rush cm his part,
ked by the embrace of his host; and both fell
*d together on the heartK. In my flight through the
len I bade Joseph speed to his master.: I knocked
Hareton, who was hanging a litter of puppies irOAi
lair-back in the doorway; and, blest ■ as :a ; soul
ped from purgatory, I bounded, leaped, and flew
1 the steep road ; then, quitting its windings; shot
± across the- moor, rolling over banks, and wading
iigh marshes, precipitating myself, in fact, towards
beacon Hght of the .Grangei And far rather would
condemned to a perpetual dwelling in the infernal
»ns than, even for one night, abide beneath the
of Wuthering Heights again.*'■ : . i
ibella ceased speaMng, and took a drink of tea ; then
rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet and a great
rl I had brought, and turning a deaf ear to my
jaties for her to remain another hour, she stepped
a chair, kissed Edgar's and Catherine's portraits,
5wed a similar salute on me, and descended to, the
age, accompanied by Fanny, who yelped wild with
at recovering her mistress.. She was driven away,
r to revisit this neighbourhood; but ti regular
spondence was established between her and my
sr when things were more settled. I believe htr
abode was in the south, near London ;. theris she
a son bom, a few months subsequent to her escape,
^as christened Linton, and, from the first* she re-
sd him to be an ailing, peevish cteatviie,
-: HeathcIIff, meeting me one daA/ m > Jae. n^^^-.
red where she iived.. > L refused to \.ifc\i. ^^ ^^
d that it^vas not Of any momeaVotJiv'^^ " ^^^^
l82 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
beware of coming to her brother. She should not 1
with him, if he had to keep her himself. Though
would give no information, he discovered, through son
of the other servants^ both her place of residence ar
the existence of the child. Still he didn't molest he
for which forbearance she might thank his aversion,
suppose. He often asked about the infant, when 1
saw me; and on hearing its nanie, smiled grimly, ar
observed, —
*'They Wish me to hate it too, do they ? "
" I dotft think they wish you to know an5^ing abdi
it, " I answered. .■
*'But I'll have it, " he said,'* when I want it. Th^
may reckon on that. "
Fortimately its mother died before the time arrive
some thirteen 3^ars after the decease of Catherine, wb
Linton was twelve or a little more.
On the day succeeding Isabella's imexpected vi$it, <
had no opportunity of speaking to my master, f
shunned conversation, and was fit for discussing nothio
When I could get him to Hsten, I saw it pleaised him th
his sister had left her husband, whom he abhorred yii
an intensity which the mildness of Hds nature won
scarcely seem to allow. So deep, and sensitive was t
aversion that he refrained from going anjnvher^ whe
he was likely to see or hear of Heathcliff. Grief aj
that together transformed him into a coriiplete hernt
He threw up his office of magistrate^ ceased ev^
attend church, avoided the village oh ali occasions, ai
spent a life of entire seclusion within the limits of h
park and grounds, only varied* by solitary rambles (
the moors and visits to the grave of his wife, mostly i
evening, or eariy morning before other " wanderefs we
abroad. But he was too good to'be thoroughly u
happy long. He didn't pray for Catherine's soul
haunt him. Time brought resignation and a mela
clioly sweeter than common )oy ; Hft TecaSXad^Eseac \xvotdlo
" ^'th ardent, tender love, and YKspeVvi ^'" ^scav.% \. < >'
^er world, where he doubied tWit ste wa ^f»a^^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 83
And he had earthly consolation and affections also,
r a lew days, I said, he seemed regardless of the puny
xessor to the departed ; that coldness melted as fast
snow in April, and ere the tiny thing could stammer
word or totter a step, it wielded a despot's sceptre
his heart. It was named Catherine ; bi;t he never
lied it the name in full, as he had never called the firist
therine short, probably because HeathclifE had a habit
doing so. The Uttle one was always Cathy ; it formed
him a distinction from the mother^ and yet a con-
ation with her ; and his attachment sprang from its
ation to her far more than from its being his own.
I used to draw a comparison between him and Hindley
imshaw,.and perplex myself to explain satisfaictorily
ly their conduct was so opposite in similar circum-
ince»* " Thiey'bad both been fond husbands, and were
th attached to their children; and I could not see
w they shottlda't both have taken the same road, for
od or. evibii iBiitj I thought in my mind, ■ Hindley,
th amjaretitiy Ihe stronger head, has shown himself
Uy me'wpise.iand the weaker man. When his ship
nek, the'croUttu abandoned his post ; and the crew,
itead of tryfiia to save her, rushed into riot and con-
flon, leaving .Uo hope for their luckless vessel. Linton,
the contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyaJ
4 faithful soul; He trusted God, aiid God comforted
n. One hoped, and the other despaired. They chose
sir own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure
5m. But you'll not wsuit to hear my moralizing, Mr.
ckwood ; you'll judge as well as I can all these
ngSi At least, you-U think you will, and that's the
ne. The end of Eamshaw was what might have been
Dected : it followed fast on his sister's; there were
xcely six months between them. We at the- Grange
7cr got a very succinct account of his state preced-
: it ; all that I did learn was on occ^s\oi\. o\ ^^vcs% \.^
. in the preparations for the i\meiB!L»'^^^ " ^S^^TssvOJfe.
le to announce the event to my maslet;
Well, Nelly/'said he, riding into t\ie ^^T«^ ox^e^ss^^
1 84 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ing, too early not to alarm me with an instant presenti-
ment of bad news, " it's yours and my turn to go into
mourning at present. Who's given us the sUp now, do
you think ?'*
" Who ? " I asked in a flurry.
" Why, guess, " he returned, dismounting, and slinging
his bridle on a hook by the door. " And nip up the
comer of your apron. I'm certain you'll need it. "
" Not Mr. HeathcHfE, surely ? " I exclaimed.
" What ! would you have tears for hiin ? " said the
doctor.''No, Heathclifi's a tough young fellow ; hft
looks blooming to-day. I've just seen him. He's rapidly
regaining flesh since he lost hiis better half. "
" Who is it, then, Mr. Kenneth ? " I repeated im*
patiently. ^ /I'.i ■..• .i ii
" Hindley Eamshaw — your old frknidv Hlbdlff^, " h»
replied, *'and my wicked gossip, though ihs^s.. been to6
wild for me this long while. There !'il'!said.we > { should
draw water. But cheer up. He diedrftrue'ito* his char-
acter — drunk as a lord. Poor lad ! Ilm sbfry^^fK). One
can't help missing an old companion, iJbhov^ /he: iiad th^-
worst tricks with him that ever man;naupAed;^jand ha*
done me many a rascally turn. He'^rSwrely- twenty*-
seven, it seems ; that's your own agejl •^¥/|lbiwolild have
thought you were bom m one year ? "
I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock
of Mrs. Linton's death. Ancient associations lingered
round my heart. I sat down in the porch and wept
as for a blood relation, desiring Mr. Kenneth to get
another servant to introduce him to the master. I
could not hinder myself from pondering on the question,
" Had he had fair play ? " Whatever I did, that idea
would bother me. It was so tiresomely pertinacious that
I resolved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights
and assist in the last duties to the dead. Mr. Linton
was extremely reluctant to consent, but I pleaded
^Joquently for the friendless condition, in which he lay,
^d I said my old master an.d los\fti-\ > ito\hfcT: \v^^ ^
^^^ on my services as strong as bis ovm.^ .^^^-v^^^^
WUTHERING HEIGHT & 18$
jminded him that the child Hareton was his wife's
ephew, and, in the. absence of nearer kin, he ought to
:t as its guardian ; and he ought to and must inquire
ow the property was left, and. look over the concerns
f his brother-in-law. He was unfit for attending to
iich matters then, but he bade me speak to his lawyer,
nd at length permitted me to go. His lawyer had been
)amshaw's also. I called at the village, and asked him
) accompany me. He shook his head, and advised that
[eathcliff should be let alone^ affirming, if the Irutli were
nown, Hareton would be found little else than a beggar,
*'His father died in. debt,*'he said; . " the whole
roperty is mortgaged, and the sole chance for the
atural heir is to allow him an opportunity of creating
3me interest in the creditor's heart, . that he. inay he
iclined to deal. leniently. tbwards him.
When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had
ome to see everything carried on decently ; and Joseph,
^ho appeared in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction
t my presence. Mr. .HeatbcM said he did not.perceivie
!iat I was wanted ; but I might stay and order the
rrangements fot the funeral, if I chose.'.
** Correctly, " he remarked, " that fdol's body should
e buried at the cross-roads, without ceremony of ^ny
ind. I happened to leave him ten minutes yesterday
ftemoon, and in that interval he fastened the two doors
f the house against me, and he has spent the night in
rinking himself to death deliberately ! We broke in
lis morning, for we. heard him snorting Kke a horse;
ad there he was, laid over the settle ; flaying arid scalp-
ig would not have wakened him. I sent for. Kenneth,
nd he came, but not till the beast had changed into
urion. He was both dead and cold and stark ; and so
Du'll allow it was useless making more stir about him. "
The old servant confirmed this statement, but ijqxs.^-
jred, —
" 7W rayther he'.d gooxi hisseln ior \! eLDc > LOx\ V's.Ny
/ taen tent o* f maister better uor \i\m \ axi^LV^ " «^^
«(/ when I left, naught o't'soar! V "
tm WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
I insisted on the funeral being respectable, Mr, He
cliff said I might have my'Own way; there too ; < d
he de & ired me to remember that the money for
whole affair canae otitof his pocket. He maintaim
hard, careless deiportment, indicative of neither joy
sorrow ; if anything, it expressed'a flinty gratifica
at a piece of difficult'work sufecessfully eixecuted
observed once^ indeed, something like exultation in
aspect ;'it was juist when the pebple were bearing
coffin from the house. He had the hypocrisy to re
sent a mourner ; and previous to following with Hare
he hfted the uhfortunate child bri to the table,
muttered, with pciGuliar giisto, * " Now, my bonny
you SLtemifte / And we'fl see if one trefe won't grot
crooked as'another, with the same vnnd to tvdst i
The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this speechv
j^ayed with Heiathclm's whisker^ ^ and stroked
cheek; but r divined! its meaning, arid observed tai
^* That boy must go back with nfie to Thrushcross Gra
sir. There is nothing in the World less yours t
he is/': : = . -.'. •''■'■'
" Does Linton say so ? " he demanded.
** Of course; he has ordered me to take him,
replied.'■'• > i.
" Well, " said the fecouiidrel,*'^ Weil npt argue
subjfect now ; but I have a* fancy to try my h«m <
rearing a yOung one; so intimate to'your master th
must supply the'place of this with my owii, if he atte
to rerhove it. I don't engage to let Haretbn go
disputed, but I'll be'pretty sure 1 to make the o
come I Remember* to tell him/'
This hint was enough to bind our hands. I repe;
its substance on my return; and Edgar Liitton, 1
interested at the commencement, spoke no mor <
interfering. I'm not awire that he cbuld have dor
to any purpose, had he been ever so willing.
The gtiest was now tHe master oi^^)L\i«ftti% ^^\^
-f^e held firm possession, attd proved \^ci > i5^^'a.\.\syn
^^o, in his turn, proved it to Mr. l^xiloti^VfeaX.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 8
shaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned fc
cash to supply his mania for gaming ; and he, Heatl:
cliff, was the mortgagee. In that manner Hareton, wh
should now be the first gentleman in the neighbourhoo(
was reduced to a state of complete dependence on h
kther's inveterate enemy, and lives in his own house a
a serviant, deprived of the advantage of wages, quit
unable to right himself, because of his friendlessnes
and his ignorance that he has been wronged.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The twelve years, continued Mrs. Dean, following the
dismal period were the happiest of my life. My greatej
{\ troubles in their passage rose from our little lady
trifling illnesses, which she had to experience in commo
with all children, rich and poor. For the rest, after tt
fiffst six months, she grew like a larch, and could wal
and talk too, iii her own way, before the heath blossome
a second time over Mrs. Linton's dust. She was th
most winning thing that ever brought sunshine into
desolate house — a, real beauty in face, with the Ean
shaws'handsome dark eyes, but the Lintons'fair ski
and small features and yellow curhng hair. Her spir
was high,= though not rough, and qualified by a heai
sensitive and Uvely to excess in its affections. The
cai > acity for intense attachments reminded me of h(
mother. Still she did not resemble her, for she could t
soft and mUd as a dove, and she had a- gentle voice an
pensive expression. Her anger was never furious, h(
love never fierce. It was deep and tender. Howeve
it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her gift
A. propensity to be saucy was one ! and a perverse wil
that indulged children invariably acquire, whether the
be good-tempered or Cross. If a serv^tvl chaxv-c^^ \» n
her, it was always, " I shall teW pap^iX'* KxA " ^^
reproved her, even by a lookj you vjoaA^ Yia-ve^ ^^
Jt a heart-breaking business. 1 don't \ > e\\w^ " ^
l88 WtJTHERING HEIGHTS.
did speak a harsh word to her. He took her educat
entirely on himself, and made it an amusement. For
nately, curiosity and a quick intellect made her an-j
scholar. She learned rapidly arid eagerly, and did hom
to his teaching.
Till she reac^hed the age of thirteen, she had not oi
been beyond the range of the park by herself. ]
Linton would take her with him a niile or so outsi
on rare occasions; but he trusted her to no one el
Gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears ;
chapel the only building she had approached or enter
except her own home. Wuthering. Heights and ]
HeathcHff did not " exist for'her. s!he was a perf
recluse, and, apparently, perfectly contented. Soi
times- indeed. While survejdng the country from ]
nursery window,^ she would observe, —
" Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to *
top of those hills ? I wonder what lies on the ot]
side, is it the sea ? *'
" No, Miss Cathy, " I would answer ; " it is hills aga
just like thesie. " •
** And what are those golden rocks like when you sta
under them •?'* she once asked.
•The sLbrupt descent of Peniston Crags particula
attracted ■ her nbtice, especially when the setting «
shone on. it and the topmost heightsj, and the wh
extOTit of landscape befsides lay in shadow. I explair
that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enor
earth in their clefts to nourish a stunted tr^e.
'* And why are they bright so long after it is even:
here ? *'she pursued.
" Because they are a great deal higher up than we ar
replied I; " you could not climb them— they are *
high and steep. In winter the frost is always there bef'
it comes to us; and deep into summer I have fot
snow under that black hollow on the north-east side..''
^'OJi, you hkve been oh themV* sYifc cd^ ^^ie^
^■Then I can gd, too, when 1 am a \Mom»3i. ^^ ^
*ea, Ellen?'* . ..w .'

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I89
Papa would tell you, miss/'I answered hastily,
1 1 " that they are not worth the trouble of visiting. The
oors, where you ramble with him, are much nicer ;
d Thrushcross Park is the finest place ia the
■Id. "
" But I know the park, and I don't know those, "
jik murmured to herself, *'And I should delight to look
J; wmd me from the brow of that tallest point: My little
^ Kty Minny shall take me some time* "
U dne of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave quite
gj rned her head with a desire to fulfil this project. She
^ ised Mr, Linton about it, and he promised she should
■^ ive the journey when she got older. But Miss Catherine
;uj BasTired her age by months, and. " Now, am I old
ji l^h to go to Peniston Crags ? *^ was the constant
I itestion in her mouth* The road thither wound clos^
^'Wuthering Heights. Edgar had not the heart to
^ m it, so she received as constantly the answer, *'Not
*, love t not yet/',
iji ll'said Mrs- Heathcliff lived above a do2en years after
Bitting her husband. Her family were of a delicate
^^ mtitution; She and Edgar both lacked the ruddy
^th that you will generally meet in these parts: What
jjj er last illness was I am not certain. I conjecture they
" ^ of the same thing — a kind of fever, slow at its corn-
cement, but incurable, and rapidly consuming life
ds the close* She %vrote to inform her brother of
probable conclusion of a four months* indisposition
er which she had suffered, and entreated him to
e to her, if possible, for she had much to settle, and
wished to bid him adieu, and deliver Linton safely
his hands. Her hope was, that Linton might ba
It with him, as he had been with her. His father, she
Jmuid fain convince herself, had no desire to assume the
f > fir(Jen of his maintenance or education* My master
'ed not a moment in complying V\t\v \ve:T i^ofiKsiti
iant as he was to leave home at oidm-aLX^ c?i!^'^,'^
^ew to answer this, commending Cat^ietme. to ta^ ^eo:^
^ !a/jce^ in his absence, with reiterated oxdex^ ^^^ " ^
7

I go WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
must not wander out of the park, even under my es(
He did not calculate on her going unaccompanied;. .
He was away three weeks. Tlie first day or two
charge sat in a comer of the Ubrary, too sad. for ei
reading or playing. In that quiet state she caused
little firouble ; but it was succeeded by an intervj
impatient fretful weariness; and being too busy
too old then to nm up and down amusing her, I hi
a method by which she might entertain herself. I
to send. her on her travels round the groimds, no\
foot and how on a. pony, indulging her with a pa
audience of all her real and imaginary adventures, \
die returned.
The summer shone in full prime, and she took su
taste for this solitary, rambling that she often conti
to remain out from breakfast till tea ; and then
evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful tales
did not fear her breaking bounds, because the gates ^
generally locked, and I thought she would scai
venture forth alone, if they had stood wide open*
luckily, my confidence proved misplaced. Catherine c
to me one tnoming at eight o'clock, and said she
that day an Arabian merchant, going to cross the d <
with his caravan, and I must give her plenty of
vision for herself and beasts — a horse and three car
personated by a large. hound and a couple of poin
I got together good store of dainties, and slung the]
^ basket on one side of the saddle ; and she sprang
as gay as a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed
and gauze veil from the July sun, and trotted ofE
a merry laugh, mocking my cautious coimsel to a
galloping and come back early. The naughty t
never made her appearance at tea. One traveUer^
hound, being an old dog and fond of its ease, retun
but neither Cathy, nor the pony, nor the t^vo-poii
were visible in any directicMi. I dispatched einissj
domi this path and that path, and ^1 te^t'weivt wan
^g " in search of her mysell. lYiete vj^ au ^3aJa
working at a fence round a pVantaAioa, on \yv^\3
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I9I
[rounds. I inquired of him if he had seen our
idy.
w her at mom/'he replied, " She would have
ut her a hazel switch, and then she leapt her
y over the hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and
out of sight.**
nay guess how I felt at hearing this news. It
tie directly she must have started for Peniston
" What will become of her? " I ejaculated,
through a gap which the man was'repairing,
king straight to the highroad. I walked as if
iger, mile after mile, till a turn brought me in
the Heights ; but no Catherine could I detect
lear. The Crags He about a mile and a half
Mr. HeathcHff*s place, and that is four frorn^
Qge, so I began to fear night would fall ere I
ich them. " And what if she should have slipped
bering among them, " I reflected, " and been
: broken some of her bones ? " My suspense
ly painful ; and at first it gave me dehghtful
observe, in hurrying by the farmhouse, Charlie,
est of the pointers, lying under a window, with
lead and bleeding ear. I opened the wicket and
:he door, knocking vehemently for admittance,
m whom I knew, and who formerly lived at
ton, answered. She had been servant there since
h of Mr. Eamshaw.
'said she, " you are come a-seeking your little
! Don*t be frightened. She's here saf e ; but
. it isn*t the master. "
is not at home, then^ is he? " I panted, quite
3S with quick walking and alarm,
no,** she replied ;'* both he and Joseph are off,
link they won*t return this hour or more. Step
est you a bit.*'
;red, and beheld my stray lamb seaieA. otl *Ccsfc
•ocking herself in a little chair tiaai \i^jaL\i^eo.\v^^
when a child. Her hat was bxaae ^^-a^T^s^^ " ^
she seemed perfectly at home, Vaxx^vcv^ " ^
192 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to Hareton-^noil
a great, strong lad of eighteen — ^who stared at her witi
considerable curiosity and astonishment, comprehend!
ing precious little of the fluent succession of remarks aiwl
questions which her tongue never ceased pouring forth. J
" Very well, miss !'* I exclaimed, conceaHng my j(^
under an angry countenance. ** This is your last rid
till papa comes back. I'll not trust you over thethresll
old again, you naughty, naughty girl I'*
'• Aha, Ellen ! " she cried gaily, jumping up and runniii
to my side. *'I shall have a pretty story to tell to-nighi
And so you've found me out. Have you ever been hei
in your life before ? "
*'Put that hat on, and home at once,*'said I. " Vt
dreadfully grieved at you. Miss Cathy ; you've dofl
extremely wrong. It's no use pouting and crying ; thi
won't repay the trouble I've had, scouring the countrj
after you. To think how Mr. Linton charged mie t
keep yoti in ; and you stealing off so \- It shows yd
are a cunning little fox, and nobody will put faith fi
you any more. "
*'What have I done ? " sobbed she, instantly checked)
^'Papa charged me nothing. He'll not scold me, Elleo
he's never cross like you, "
" Cottie, (Gome ! " I repeated.'* I'll tie the ribboi:
NoW, let us have no petulance. Oh, for shame ! Yb^
thirteen years old, and such a baby ! " ; i
This exclamation was caused- by lier pushing " the- ha
ffom her head, and retreating to the chimney out of m;
reach.
" Nay,''said the servant; *'don't be hard on th
bonny lass, Mrs. Dean. We made her stop. She'd fai
have ridden forwards, aieard you should be uneas}
Hareton offered to go with her, and I thought he shoulc
It's a wild road over the hills. "
Hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hand
w his pockets, too awkward to speak, tYiOxxj^ YL't \ < :^ke
3s if he did not relish my intrusion.
"'How long am I to wait ? " 1 con\iivxxed, dasicfe^x^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I93
Oman's interference. ^^ It will be dark in ten
3S. — Where is the pony, Miss Cathy ? And where
enix ? I shall leave you, unless you be quick ;
Lse yourself/'
le pony is in the yard, " she replied, " and Phoenix
t in there. He's bitten, and so is Charlie. I was
to tell you all about it ; but you are in a bad
r, and don't deserve to hear. "
eked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it *
jrceiving that the people of the house took her
she commenced capering round the room j and
'giving chase, ran like a mouse over and under
ihind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for me
sue. Hareton and the woman laughed, ;and she
them, and waxed more impertinent still, till I
in great irritation,- —
ell, Miss Cathy, if you were aware whose house
you'd be glad enough to get out. "
s your father's, . isn't it? " said she, turning to
m. . .
ly, " he repUed, looking down, and blushing .bash-
could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes,
1 they were just his own.
hose, then — your master's ? " she asked,
coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered
h, and turned away. , ,
ho is his master? " continued the tiresome girl,
ing to me. " He talked about * our house,* and
tolk.'I thought he had beeii the owner's son.
3 never said miss. He should have done, shouldn't
le's a servant ? "
ston grew black aS a thunder-cloud at this childish
. I silently shook my questioner, and at last
ied in equipping her for departure.
)w, get my horse, " she said, addte^vcv^ Vet Nis\^
kinsman as she would one ol ttie ^V-aiXiAfc-Va^jS " ^
V2ge,''And you may come YO.\Yi me. \ ^^^
vhere the goblin-hunter rises in tVe t£\^€cv >'^
194 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
to hear about the fairishes, as you call them. Butmata
haste ! ■ What's the matter ? Get my horse, I say. " i,
" ril see thee damned before I be ihy servaiit ! "
growled the lad. ■:■?,
** You'll see me what ? " asked Catherine in surprise.
" Damned, thou saucy witch I " he replied. A
" There, Miss Cathy, you see you have got into pretljj
company, " I interposed.'* Nice words to be used to |
young lady! Pray don't begin to dispute with him
Come, let us seek for Minny ourselves, and begone. " \
*'But, Ellen, " cried she, staring, fixed in astonishmenl
" how dare he speak so to me ? Mustn't he be majde t <
do as I ask him ? — You wicked creature, I shall tell pap
what you said. Now, then ! " *
Hareton did not appear to fed this threat, so ti^
tears sprang into her eyes with indignation. " Ya
bring the pony, " she exclaimed, turning to the wo:
" and let my dog free this moment ! "
" Softly, miss, " answered she addressed ; " you'll 1(
nothing by being civil. Though Mr. Hareton there
not the master's son, he's your cousin ; and I was ne^
hired to serve you. "
" He my cousin ! " cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh*
*'Yes, indeed, " responded her reprover. i
'* O Ellen ! don't let them say such things, " shfl
pursued, in great trouble. " Papa is gone to fetch my
cousin from London. My cousin is a gentleman's sent
That my " She stopped, and wept outright, upset
at the bare notion of relationship with such a clown.
" Hush, hush ! " I whispered ; " people can have manj
cousins, and of all sorts. Miss Cathy, without being any
the worse for it ; only they needn't keep their company,
if they be disagreeable and bad. "
" He's not — he's not my cousin, Ellen ! " she went on,
gathering fresh grief from reflection, and flinging herseli
into my arms for refuge from the idea.
I was much vexed at her and the servant for theii
mutual revelations, having no doubt oi \AatociL^ ^
broaching arrival, communicated by ttie ioxiGet^bfcv
WtlTHERING HEIGHTS. I95
ported to Mr, Heathcliff, and feeling as conBdent that
itherine's first thought on her fa therms return would
s to seek an explanation of the latter's assertion con-
TOiTig her rude- bred kindred. Hareton, recovering from
s disgust at being taken for a servant^ seemed moved
i^ her distress ; and having fetched the pony round to
le door, he took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-
gged terrier- whelp from the kennel, and putting it into
n " hand bade her whist, for he meant nought. Pausing
her lamentations, she surveyed him with a glance of
ve and horror, then burst forth anew,
I could scarcely refrain from smiliug at this antipathy
i the poor fellow, who was a well-made, athletic youth,
> od-looking in features, and stout and healthy, but
tired in garments befitting his daily occupations of
orking on the farm and lounging among the moors
fter rabbits and game. Still, I thought I could detect
his physiognomy a mind owning better qualities than
s father ever possessed— good things lost amid a we-
ariless of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far over-
rpped their neglected growth : yet, notwithstanding,
idence of a wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant
ops under other and favourable circumstances. Mn
eathcliff, I believe, had not treated him physically ill
-^thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no tempta-
[ > n to that course of oppression. He had none of the
mid susceptibiUty that would have given zest to 01-
eatment, in Heathcliff's judgment. He appeared to
ive bent his malevolence on making him a brute. He
as never taught to read or WTitc, never rebuked for
ly bad habit which did not annoy his keeper, never
d a single step towards virtue or guarded by a single
recept against vice, And from what I heard, Joseph
mtributed much to his deterioration by a uarrow-
dnded partiality which prompted him to flatter and
st him, as a boy, because he was tiie \l^iA ^K " ^^ ^^^
wily. And ob he had been m tVie \v^\l oV ^^LK:?as\^
therine EamshRw and HeathcM, Vf\\fcti cJtflV^^'^^^
tnng the master past his patienc & jE^ot^^^'*^^
196 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
to seek solace in drink by what he termed their " ofEalld
ways/'so at present he laid the whole burden of Hareton'i
f aidts on the shoulders of the usurper of his propertylj
If the lad swore, he wouldn't correct him,, nor however
culpably he behaved. It gave Josieph satisfactionj
apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths. Hi'
allowed that the lad was ruined, that his soul was aboftl^
doned to perdition ; but then he reflected that HeathcJitf*
must answer for it, Hareton's blood would be. required
at his hands ; and there lay immense consolation in thai
thought. Joseph had instilled into him a pride of nai'
arid of his lineage. He would, had he dared, have foster
hate between him and the present owner of the Heights
but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition
and. he confined his feelings regarding him to mutterec
innuendoes and private comminations. I don't preteni
to be intimately acquainted with the mode of livini
customary in those days at Wuthering Heights. I onl]
speak from hearsay, for I saw little. The villager
affirmed Mr. Heathcliff was near, and a cruel hardj
landlord to his tenants; but the house inside had rc^
gained its ancient aspect of comfort under female manage^
ment, and the scenes of riot common in Hindley's tim^i
were not now enacted within its walls. The master wa &
too gloomy to seek companionship with any people, good
or bad ; and he is yet.
This, however, is not making progress with my story.
Miss Cathy rejected the peace-offering of the terrier,
and demanded her own dogs, Charlie and Phoenix.
They came limping, and hanging their heads ; and w^
set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us.
I could not wring from my little lady how she had spent
the day, except that, as I supposed, the goal of her
pilgrimage was Peniston Crags ; and she arrived without
adventure to the gate of the farmhouse, when Hareton
happened to issue forth, attended by some canine fol-
Jowers, who attacked her train. TYve^ Yv-ad ^ %raart
'^ttle before their owners could sep^iat^ \^«xi\ > Qca:
^rmed an introduction.'Catherme to\d " ^^x^^wpi ^'^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. igy
vas, and where she was going, and asked him to
her the way, finally beguiling him to accompany
He opened the mysteries of the Fairy Cave and
ty other queer places. But, being in disgrace, I
not favoured with a description of the interesting
:ts she saw. I could gather, however, that her
J had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by
jssing him as a servant, and Heathcliff's house-
3r hurt hers by calling him her cousin. Then the
lage he had held to her rankled in her heart.; she
was always " love,'* and " darhng,''and " queen, "
" angel, " with everybody at the Grange, to :be
ted so shockingly by a stranger ! She did not com*
ind it ; and hard work I had to obtain a pronuse
she would not lay the grievance before her father*
)lained how he objected to the whole household at
Heights, and how sorry he would be to find she
been there ; but I insisted most on the fact that
e revealed my negligence of his orders, he. would
ips be so angry that I should have to leave j and
Y couldn't bear that prospect. She pledged her
, and kept it, for my sake. After all, she was a
: httle girl. ;
CHAPTER XIX.
TTERi edged with black, announced the day of my
2r's return. Isabella was dead ; and he wrote to
ne get mourning for his daughter, and. arrange a
, and other accommodationsi for his youthful nephew.
3rine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming
ather back, and indulged most sanguine anticipa-
of the innumerable excellences of her " real "
n. The • evening of their expected arrival came.
early morning she had been busy ordering her
small affairs ; and now, attired m \ve.T -gk^ \5sa.0«.
-—poor thing ! her aunt's death. iirvpTe.?fi»ei^\vet ^*v^
inite sorrow — she obliged me, by coIvst^.t^l^o^T^'^^
r with her down through the gro\mAs to tm^ " ^ " ^^^
198 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Linton is just six months younger than I am,-
chattered, as we strolled leisurely over the swells
hollows of mossy turf, under shadow of the tr^es.'/
delightful it will be to. have him for a playfellow ! . .
Isabella sent papa a beautiful lock of. his hair. It
hghter than mine — more flaxen, and quite as fini
have it carefully preserved in a little glass box ;
IVe often thought what pleasure it would be to sc
owner. Oh ! I am happy-r-and papa, dear, dear p
Gbme, EUen, let us run ! Come, run !'V
She ran, and returned and ran again, many times b
my sober footsteps reached the gate ; and then she se
herself, on the grassy bank beside the path, and trie
wait patiently; but that was impossible* : She cou
be still a minute.
''How long they are I " she exclaimed. " Ah, ]
some dust on the road ; they are coming ? No ! \
will they be here ? May we not go a: little way-^
a mile, Ellen — only just half a mile ? Do say yej
that clump of birches at the turn ! "
I refused stanchly. At length her suspense
ended; the travelling carriage rolled in sight.
Cathy shrieked and stretched out her arms, as sbc
she caught her father's face looking from the win
He descended, nearly as eager as herself ; and a
siderable interval elapsed ere they had a thougl
spare for any but themselves. While they excha
caresses, I took a peep in to see after Linton. He
asleep in a comer, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined c
as if it had been winter — a. pale, delicate, effem
boy, who might have been taken for my master's yoi
brother, so strong was the resemblance ; but there
a sickly peevishness in his aspect that Edgar Li
never had. The latter saw me looking; and h^
shaken hands, advised me to close the door and ]
him undisturbed, for the journey had fatigued
Cathy would fain have taken one glance, but her f;
told her to come, and tiiey wa & ed \o^'eX > aet m^
/^^srk, while I hastened before ta pxepaxe > ^^ s«ct^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I99
" Now, darling, " said Mr. Linton, addressing his
daughter, as they halted at the bottom of the front
steps, " your cousin is not so strong or so merry as
you are, and he has lost his mother, remember, a very
short time since; therefore, don't expect him to play
JBoid run about with you directly. And don't harass him
much by talking. Let him be quiet this evening, at
least, will you ? "
" Yes, yes, papa, " answered Catherine ; ** but I do
Oit to see him, and he hasn't once looked out. "
he carriage stopped, and the sleeper being roused
lifted to the ground by his uncle.
[^ ** This is your cousin Cathy, Linton, " he said, putting
%eir little hands together. ** She's fond of you already ;
and mind you don't grieve her by oying to-night. Try to
jbe cheerful now ; the travelling is at an end, and you have
(bothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you please. "
" Let me go to bed, then, " answered the boy, shrinking
ffrom Catherine's salute ; and he put up his fingers to
remove incipient tears.
P " Come, come, there's a good child, " I whispered,
leading him in. " You'll make her weep too. See how
iorry she is for you ! "
I do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his
cousin put on as sad a countenance as himself, and
returned to her father. All three entered, and mounted
to the library, where tea was laid ready. I proceeded
I0 remove Linton's cap and mantle, and placed him on
j a chair by the table ; but he was no sooner seated than
he began to cry afresh. My master inquired what was
the matter.
I " I can't sit on a chair, " sobbed the boy.
" Go to the sofa, then, and Ellen shall bring you some
tea, " answered his uncle patiently.
He had been greatly tried during the journey, I felt
convinced, by his fretful ailing charge. lixvloT^ ^^^nS;n
tTBJled himself off, and lay down. Cat\vNj carcvb^'^ ^ad
stooJ and her cup to his side. At fast sYve. SiaX. ^^'^^
mt that could not last. She had tesoVved to m-sv^
200 WUTHBRING^ HEIGHTS.
pet of her little cousin, as she would have him to. t
and she commenced stroking his curls, and kissitajg
cheek, and offering him tea in her saucer, like a ba;l
This pleased him, for he was riot much better. He dr
his eyes, and Ughtened into a faint smile.
'* Oh, he'll do very well, " said the master to me, af
watching them a minute— " very well^ if we can k <
him, Ellen. The company of a child of his own i
will instil tiew spirit into him soon, and by wishing
strength he'll gain it. " • • • j
-* Ay, if we can keep him ! " . I mused to myself, a
sore misgivings came over me that there was sHght he
of that. And then, I thought, however will that weakli
live at Wuthering Heights ? Between.; his father a
Hareton, what playmates arid instructors < thJey'11 1
Our doubts were presently decided— rcven earlier thaa
expected. I had jiast taken the children upstaii:s,-df
tea was finished, and seen Lintori asleep — he would i
suffer me to. leave him till that= was the case ; I t
come down, and was standing by the: table in the h
lighting a bedroom candle for Mr, Edgar, when a m;
stepped- out of the kitchen and informed me that 1
Heathcliff's servant Joseph was at the door; and wist
to speak with the master.
'" I shall ask him what he -wants first, " I said,
considerable trepidation; *'A'very unlikely hour to
troubling people, and the instant they have retun
from i long journey,'I don't think the master can
him. "
Joseph had advanced through the kitchen as I uttei
these words, and now presented himself in the hall,
was donned in his Sunday garments, with his most san <
monious and sourest face ; and, holding his hat in (
hand and his stick in the other, he proceeded to clc
his shoes on the mat,
** Good-evening, Joseph, " I said coldly, ** What bi
ness brings you here to-night ? "
^'It's Maister Linton 1 mun spaVfcto " \m & ^ccvswe
KMi^ Tne disdairtfullv aside. y'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 20I
" Mr; Linton is going to bed ; unless you have some-
thing particular to say, Tm sure he won't hear it now, "
I continued. " You had better sit down in there, and
entrust your message to me. "
'Which is his rahm ? " pursued the fellow, surveying
the range of closed doors.
I perceived he was bent on refusing mj'mediation, so
Very reluctantly I went up to the library, and announced
the unseasonable visitor, advising that he should be dis-
nissed till next day. Mr. Linton had no time to em-
lower me to do so, for Joseph mounted close at my heels,
3 nd pushing into the apartment, planted himself at the
; ar side of the table, with his two fists clapped on the
I head of his stick, and began in an elevated tone, as if
. anticipating opposition, —
" Hathechff has sent me for his lad, and I munn't goa
hack'bout him. "
Edgar Linton was silent a minute ; an expression of
exceeding sorrow overcast his features; He would have
Etied the child on his own account ; but recalling
abella's hopes and fears, and anxious wishes for her
Ion, and her commendations of him to his care, he grieved
litterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and searched
[in his heart how it might be avoided. No plan offered
itself. The very exhibition of any desire to keep him
Would have rendered the claimant more peremptory.
There was nothing left but to resign him* However,
he was not going. to rouse him from his sleep:
" Tell Mr. Heathdiff, " he answered calmly,''that his
ton shall come to Wuthering Heights to-morrow* He is
in bed, and too tired to go the distance now. You may
also tell him that the mother of Linton desired him
to remain under my guardianship; and at present his
health is very precarious. "
*'Noa ! " said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on
the floor, and assuming an authoritative ak \ " ^^5^*5^^
that means naught Hathecliff maks no^'c^vxtlX. cJ ^
mother, nor ye norther, but he*\\ bi & v \x\% \^^. ^^^sv^
nun tak him ; soa now yc knaw T*
202 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" You shall not to-night I " answered Linton decisivelj
'* Walk downstairs at once, and repeat to your mastd
what I have said. — Ellen, show him down. — Go 1'*
And aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm
he rid the room of him, and closed the door.
** Varrah weell ! " shouted Joseph, as he slowly drei
off. " To-mom, he's come hisseln ; and thrust htm ouj
if ye darr I "
i
CHAPTER XX.
i
To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled,
Linton conmiissioned me to take the boy home early, oj
Catherine's pony ; and said he, — i
'* As we shall now have no influence over his destinjj
good or bad, you must say nothing of where he is gon
to my daughter. She cannot associate with him ho?^
after, and it is better for her to remain in ignorance q
his proximity, lest she should be restless and anxioi(
to visit the Heights; Merely tell her his father sent fd
him suddenly, and he has been obliged to leave us. " =^
Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bd
at five o'clock, and astonished to be informed that i{
must prepare for further travelling ; but I softened d
the matter by stating that he M^as going to spend sou
time with his father, Mr. Heathcliff, who wished to si
him so much, he did not like to defer the pleasure ti
he should recover from his late journey.
" My father ! " he cried, in strange p)erplexity. " Mamni
never told me I had a father. Where does he live ? I'
rather stay with uncle. "
** He lives a little distance from the Grange, " I replies
** just beyond those hills — not so far, but you may wal
over here when you get hearty. And you should I
glad to go home, and to see him. You must try to lo's
him, as you did your mother, and then he will love you
^'But why have I not heard of him before ? " askc
^inton, " Why didn't mamma sjid \ie \w^ Vo^^VJw
other people do ? "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 203
He had business to keep him in the north/'I an-
red, ** and your mother's health required her to
ie in the. south. "
And why didn't mamma speak to me about him ? "
«vered the child. " She often talked of uncle, and
Lmed to love him long ago. How am I to love papa ?
> n't know him. "
Oh, all children love their parents,''I said. *'Your
her, perhaps, thought you would want to be with
if she mentioned him often to you. Let us make
:e. An early ride on such a beautiful morning is
:h preferable to an hour's more sleep. "
Is she to go with us, " he demanded — *'the little girl
w yesterday ? "
Not now, " replied I.
Is uncle ? " he continued;
Nq ; I shall be your companion there, " I said,
inton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown
ly.
I won't go without uncle, " he cried at length. *'I
t tell where you mean to take me. "
attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness oi
ying reluctance to meet his father. Still he obsti-
jly resisted any progress towards dressing, and I had
all for my master's assistance in coaxing him out of
. The poor thing was finally got off, with several
isive assurances that his absence should be short,
t Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit him, and other
mises, equally ill-founded, which I invented and
erated at intervals throughout the way. The pure
ther-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle
ter of Minny relieved his despondency after a while,
began to put questions concerning his new home
[ its inhabitants with greater interest and liveliness.
Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrush-
3s Grange ? " he inquired, tmrning to takfc ^V^l^'^x^^^
) the valley, whence a light mist moxrale^ ^xv.^ torcofc^
wy cloud on the skirts of the blue.
't is not so buried in trees, " 1 rep^d^''^tl^Vl^s*^
204 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
quite so large, but you can see the country beautiftdl;
all round, and the air is healthier for you — fresher an
dryer. You will perhaps think the building old aa
dark at first, though it is a respectable house— the n6a
best in the neighbourhood. And yoii. will have such mc
rambles on the moors. Hareton Eanishaw— *that is Wfe
Cathy's other cousin, and so yours in a manner-— wi
show you all the sweetest spots;- and you can brin
a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow yoo
study ; and now and then your uncle may join you i
a walk. He does frequently walk out on the hills. "
** And what is my father like ?'* he asked, V Is ]g
as young and handsome as uncle ? "
** He's as young, " said I ; ** but he has black hair/aa
eyes, and looks sterner, and he is taller and bigge
altogether. He'll not seem to you so gentle and kui
at first, perhaps, because it is not his way ; still, mini
you be frank and cordial with him; and naturally hie'!
be fonder of you than any uncle, for you are his own, "
*'Black hair and eyes 1 " mused Linton. *'I can'
fancy him. Then I am not like him, am I ? "
*• Not much, " I answered ; not a morsel, I thougW
surveying with regret the white complexion and sliii
frame of my companion, and his large languid eyes — ^hi
mother's eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchines
kindled them a moment, they had not a vestige of he
sparkling spirit.
** How strange that he should never come to s©
mamma and me ! " he murmured. ** Has he ever seei
me ? If he has, I must have been a baby, I remembe
not a single thing about him. "
** Why, Master Linton, " said I, ** three hundred mile
is a great distance ; and ten years seem very differen
in length to a grown-up person compared with wha
they do to you. It is probable Mr. Heathdiff propose*
going from summer to summer, but never found a con
yenient opportunity; and now it is too late. Don'
^-^^ubJe him with questions on the s\ib\ecX \ *\^ vr^ ^
'him for no good. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. i205
The boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations
far the remainder of the ride, till we halted before the
farmhouse garden gate. I watched to catch his im-
pressions in his countenance. He surveyed the carved
front and low-browed lattices, the straggUng gooseberry
boshes and crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and
ften shook his head. His private feelings entirely dis-
ipproved of the exterior of his new abode. But he had
to postpone complaining. There might be com-
isation within. Before he dismounted I went and
Led the door. It was half-past six ; the family had
finished breakfast ; the servant was clearing and
wiping down the table, Joseph stood by his master's
4air, telling some tale concerning a lanie horse, and
Bareton was preparing for the hay-field,
" Hullo, Nelly 1 *'said Mr, Heathcliff when he saw me.
n feared I should have to come down and fetch my
property myself. You've brought it, have you ? Let
i see what we can make of it. "
He got up and strode to the door. Hareton and
oseph followed in gaping curiosity. Poor Linton ran
i frightened eye over the faces of the three.
" Sure-ly, " said Joseph, after a grave inspection, *'he's
Uropped wi'ye, maister, an'yon's his lass ! "
Heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of
confusion, uttered a scornful laugh.
" God ! what a beauty ! what a lovely, charming
thing ! " he exclaimed. *'Haven't they reared it on
aails and sour milk, Nelly ? Oh, damn my soul ! but
that's worse than I expected, and the devil knows I
was not sanguine ! "
I bade the trembling and bewildered child get down
and enter. He did not thoroughly comprehend the
meaning of his father's speech, or whether it were in-
tended for him ; indeed, he was not yet certain that "
»rim, sneering stranger was his latYiet. " BxiX. \v^ ^
to me with growing frepidation ; and on " tf^
akinga seat and bidding him ** come Yi\^
ce en my shoulder and wept.
206 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Tut, tut I " said Heathcliff, stretching out a ha
and dragging him roughly between his knees, andth
holding up his head by the chin. ** None of that iic
sense ! We're not going to hurt thee, Linton. Isn't tl:
thy name ? Thou art thy mother's child entirel
Where is my share in thee " , puling chicken ? " . -^'
He took: off the boy's cap and pushed back his: thi
flaxen curls, felt his slender arms and his small finge
during which examination IJnton ceased crying, a
lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector. m
*'Do you ktiow me ?. " askfed Heathcliff, having sal
fied himself that the limbs were all equally frail a
feeble. i'
'^ No, " said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fe^.
" You've heard of me, I dare say ? "
" No, " he replied again.'
" No I What a shame of your mother, never to wak
your fiMal regard for me I You are my son, then, j
tell you ; and your mother was a wicked slut to lea
you in ignorance of the sort of father you possess^
Now, don't wince and colour up. Though it is son
thing to see you have not white blood. Be a good h
and I'll do for you. — Nelly, if you be tired, you ra
sit down ; if not, get home again. I guess you'll i;ep <
what you hear and see to the cipher at the Grang
and this thing won't be settled while you linger about r
*'Well, " replied I, " I hope you'll be kind to the b <
Mr. Heathcliff, or you'll not ke6p him long; and h
all you have akin in the wide world that you will ^\
knowi remember. "
'* I'll be very kind to him, you needn't fear, " he sa
laughing. " Only nobody else must be kind to hi
I'm jealous t)f monopolizing his affection. And to be^
my kindness, Joseph, bring the lad some breakfast,
Hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work, — ^Y
Nell/'he added, when they had departed, ** my son
/prospective owner of your place, and i ihould not wi
AjJn to die till I was certain oi beuag Y^ saccfisswt. ^
sides, he's mine, and I want the ttmnxpti oi seiev^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 20
descendant fairly lord of their estates — my child hirin
their children to till their father's lands for wages. Th£
is the sole consideration which can make me endure tt
whelp. I despise him for himself, and hate him for tt
memories he revives. But that consideration is sufl & cien
He's safe with me, and shall be tended as careful!
as ypiir master tends his own. I have a room upstaii
furnished for him in handsome style. I've engaged
tutor also to come three times a week, from twent
miles distance, to teach him. what he pleases to lean
I've ordered Hareton to obey him ; and, in fact, r\
arranged everything with a view to preserve the superic
and the gentleman in him, above his associates. I d
regret, however, that he so little deserves the troubl
If I wished any blessing in the world, it was to find hii
a worthy object of pride ; and I'm bitterly disappointe
:ej with the whey-faced whining wretch I "
While he was speaking, Joseph returned bearing
i^ basin of milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton, wh
etij stirred round the homely mess with a look of aversioi
ne| and affirmed he could not eat it. I .saw the old mai
servant shared largely in his master's scorn of the chili
though he was compelled to retain the sentiment in h
heart, because Heathdiff plainly meant his underUng
to hold him in honour.
*'Cannot ate it ? " repeated he, peering in Linton
face, and subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear 4
being overheard;'* But Maister Hareton nivir ai
naught else, when he wer a Uttle un ; and what wer gooi
eneugh for him's gooid eneugh for ye, Fs rayther think. "
" I shan't eat it ! " answered Linton snappishl;
" Take it away. "
Joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brougl
it to us.
" Is there aught ails th'victuals ? " he asked, thrustir
the tray under Heathcliff's nose»
" What should ail them ? " he said.
./ " Wah ! " answered Joseph, " yoiv damt^ cJca?^
he cazmut ate'em. But I guess it's iaig\v > L. ^^s > x«
208 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
wer just soa : we wer a'most too mucky to sow t'coni
for makking h.T breead. " * i.
** Don't mention his mother to me, " said the masta
angrily. . " Get him something that he can eat, thafi
all. — What is his usual food, Nelly ? "
I suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeepe]
received instructions to prepare some: Come, I reflected
his father's selfishness may contribiite to his comfort
He perceives his delicate constitution, and the necessitrj
of treating him tolerably. Til console Mr. Edgar b|
acquainting him with the turn Heathcliff's humour hai
taken: Having no excuse for lingering longer, I slippec
out, while Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing th <
advances of a friendly sheep-dog* But he was too mucl
on the alert to be cheated. As I closed the door^ J
heard a cry, and a frantic repetition of the words, — -
" Don't leave me 1 Fll not stay here ! I'll not staj
here! "
Then the latch was raised and fell: They did nai
suffer him to coine forth. I mounted Minny, and urge*
her to a trot ; and so my brief guardianship ended. .
CHAPTER XXL
We had sad work with little Cathy that day. She rosi
in high glee, eager to join her cousin, and such passionate
tears aiid lamentations followed the news of his departure
that Edgar himself was obliged to soothe her by -affirm'
ing hie should come back soon. He added, however
" if I can get him, " and there were no hopes of that
This promise poorly pacified her; but tiir.5 was mbn
potent ; and though, still at intervals she: inquired oi
her father when Linton would return, before she did se <
him again his features had waxed so dim in her memorj
that she did not recognize him.
When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuth
er/i^ Heights, in paying business v\si\ & Vic > Cy«sawec\3OT
^jgsed, to ask hew the young master got on, iox \\a\sN <
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS, 209
" as secluded as Catherine herself, and was never
I be seen, I could gather from her that he continued
weak health, and was a tiresome inmate. She said
r. Heathcliff seemed to dishke him ever longer and
OFse, though he took some trouble to conceal H, He
d an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and couJd
it. do at all with his sitting in the same room vAth him
any minutes together. There seldom passed much
tlk between them. Linton learned his lessons and spent
IS evenings in a small apartment they called the parlour,
* else lay in bed all day, for be was constantly getting
)ughs^ and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort*
** And I never knew such a faint -hearted creature/'
Med the woman,''nor one so careful of hisseln. He
Hi go on if I leave the window open a bit !ate in the
ifentng. Oh, it*s killing, a breath of night air 1 And
e must have a fire in the middle of summer ; and Jo-
!ph*s bacca pipe is poison ; and he must alwa;j^ have
leets and dainties ^ and always milk, milk for ever^
Keding naught how the rest of us are pinched in w^inter ;
id there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair
i^ the fire, with some toast and water or other slop on
le hob to sip at ; and if Hareton^ for pity, comes to
muse him^Hareton is not bad-natured, though he's
lUgh^ — they're sure to part, one swearing and the other
ying, I believe the master would relish Earnshaw's
irashing him to a mummy, if he were not his son ;
id I'm certain he would be fit to turn him out of doors
he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln* But then
i won't go into danger of temptation. He never enters
le parlour, and should Linton show those ways in the
juse where he is, he sends him upstairs directly/'
I divined from this account that utter lack of sym-
lihy had rendered young Heathdif! selfish and dis-
jeeable, if he were not so originally ; and my interest
him consequently decayed, though sxWV 1 ^a^ tm^sm^^
tth a sense of grief at his lot, and a ^n^\i \\\^V " ^^'^'^^
m le^ with us. Mr, Edgar eiico\ita.^e < i ra^'^^ y^
motion. Jjulga^ht a great deaX aho^\V ^vvm
2IO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
fancy, and would have run some risk to see him
he. told me once to ask the housekeeper whether h
came into the village. She said he had only been
on horseback, accompanying his father, and both
he pretended to be quite knocked up for three c
days afterwards. - That housekeeper left, if I re
rightly, two years after he came, and another, w
did not know, was her successor. She lives there !
Time wore on at the Grange in its former pleasai
till Mis^ Cathy reached sixteen. On the annivers
her'birth we never manifested any. signs of rej-
because it was also the anniversary of my late mis
death. Her father invariably spent that day alone
library,'and walked at dusk as far as Gimmertor
yardy .where he would frequently prolong his stay I
midnight, . Therefore Catherine wds thrown on h(
resources for amusement. This .20th of Majdch
beautiful spring day, and when her father had r
my young, lady came down dressed for going ou
^aid she asked to have a ramble on the edge of the
with me. Mr. Linton had given her leave, if w <
only a short distance and were back within theiiioi
** So make haste, .Ellen ! *'she cried. ** 1 know
I wish to go — ^where a colony of moor game are s
I want to see ivhether they, have made their
yet. "
• :'*That must be a good distance up,*'I. ans
*'They don't breed on the edge of the moon "
'*;No, it's not, " she said- ** I've gone very nea
papa. "
I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking n
more Of the matter. She bounded before me, a
turned to my side, and was off again like a young
hound; and at first I found plenty of cntertainm
listening to the larks singing far and near/ and en
the sweet, warm sunshme, and watching her, n
^ and my delight f with her golden im^\«^'5» ^^i\^
^chind, and her bright chsek, a^ < soil aii^ ^\xx^
^looih as a wild rose, and her eyes t^aMLiiV vr^^
V
I WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 211
J less pleasure. She was a happy creature, and- an angel
I4 in those days. It*s a pity she could not be content.
'" Well, " said I,''where are your moor-game, Miss
Cathy ? We should be at them. The Grange park fena
is a great way off now. "
" Oh, a Uttle farther— only a little farther, Ellen/'was
^^ her answer continually.''Climb to that hillock, pass
[L that bank, and by the time you reach the other side ]
^ shall have raised the birds/'
^, . But there were so many hillocks and banks to climl
:jj, and pass that at length I began to be weary, and tolc
^;)ier.we must halt and retrace our steps. I shouted tc
J ^ her, as she had outstripped me a long way. She eithei
^r did not hear or did not rega^rd, for she still sprang on
^.Qjand I was compelled to follow. Finally she dived intc
a hollow j and before I came in sight of her again she wai
two miles nearer Wuthering Heights than her own home
^^ and I beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of whon
'^ jfelt convinced was Mr; Heathchff himself*
ji^, ■ Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, cm: a*
^^g |east hunting out the nests of the grouse. The Height
firere Heathcli£f*s land, and he was reproving the poacher
2^^ " Tve neither taken any nor found any, " she said, ai
tie I toiled to them, expanding her hands in corroboratioi
;^ej «t the statement. " I didn't mean to take them; bu
papa told me there were quantities up here, and I wishe(
jrjto see the eggs. "
Heathchif glanced at me with an all-meaning smile
expressing his acquaintance with the party, and, conse
quehtly, his malevolence towards it, and demanded wh <
'papa " was.
" Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Grange, " she replied
" I thought you did not know me, or you wouldn'
have spoken in that way. "
" You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected
3 then ? " he said sarcastically.
" And what are you ? " inquired Ca\]tv!ervu^s ^^ " ^
J curiously on the speaker. " That man. Tve ^^eaX^fc*
i Is he your son ? **
01
as
in
[lii
ret
tr
i
212 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
She pointed to Hareton, the other individual, ^
had gained nothing but increased bulk and strength
the addition of two years to his age ; he seemed as a
ward and rough as ever.
" Miss Cathy/'I interrupted, " it will be. three he
instead 6f one that we are out presently. We re
must go back. "'
" No, that man is not my son,''answered Heathc
pushing me aside. " But I have one, and you have s
hini before to6 ; and though your nurse is in a hu:
I think both you and she would be the better fo
little rest. Will you just turn this nab of heath ;
walk into my house ? You'll get home earlier for
ease, and you shall receive a kind welcome. "'
V I whispered Catherine that she mustn't on any acco
accede to the proposal. It was entirely out of the questi
; ** Why ? " . she asked aloud: *'I'm tired of runnii
and the ground is dewy. I can't sit here; Let us
Ellen. Besides, he- says I have seen his son: He's r
taken, I think ; but I guess where he lives — at the fa
house I visited in coming from Peniston Crags: Dc
you?'^
.*'I do. — Come, Nelly, hold your tongue; it will
a treat for her to look in on us. — Hareton, get forwa
with the lass. — ^You shall walk with me, Nelly. "
" No, she's not going to any such place, " I cri
struggling to release my arm, which he had seiz^
but she was almost at the door-stones already, scam|
ing roimd the brow at full speed:^ Her appointed c <
panion did not pretend to escort her ; he shied off
the roadside and vanished.
" Mr. Heathcliff, it's very wrong, " I continued. "'" 5
know you mean no good. And there she'll see Lint
and all will be told as soon as ever we return ; an
shall have the blame. "
" I want her to see Linton, " he answered. *'l
looking better these few days. It's not often he's
to be seen. And we'll soon peisuads \iet to ^l^s^
^sit secret Where is the harm oi it " ^ **
i » > •
WUTHERING HEIGHTS: 313
** The harm of it is that her father would hate me if he
found I suffered her to enter your house ; and I am
convinced you have a bad design in encouraging her to
do so, " I rephed.
" My design is as honest as possible, ril inform you
of its whole scope/'he said — " that the two cousins
may fall in love, and get married. I'm acting generously
to your master. His young chit has no expectations,
and should she second my wishes, she'll be provided for
ftt once as joint successor with Linton, "
" If Linton died, " I answered, " and his life is quite
wicertain, Catherme would be the heir. "
" No, she would not, " he said.'* There is no clause
in the will to secure it so. His property would go to
me. But to prevent disputes I desire their union, and
am resolved to bring it about. "
And I am resolved she shall never approach your
house with me again, " I returned, as we reached the
gate, where Miss Cathy waited our coming.
Heathcliff bade me be quiet, and preceding us up the
th, hastened to open the door. My young lady gave
several looks, as if she could not exactly make up
ker mind what to think of him ; but now he smiled when
ke met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing
ber ; and I was foolish enough to imagine the memory
of her mother might disarm him from desiring her in-
imy. Linton stood on the hearth. He had been out
ftvalking in the fields, for his cap was on, and he was
^ling to Joseph to bring him dry shoes. He had grown
tall of his age, still wanting some months of sixteea
His feiatures were pretty yet, and his eye and complexion
brighter than I remembered them, though with merely
temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and
genial sun.
" Now, who is that ? " asked Mr, HeathcUff, t\irivM^%
to Cathy. " Can you tell ? "
*'Your son ? " she said, having doubtivAVj swTve^^
Irst aae and then the other. .
" Yes, yes/'answered he. " But is t\us t^^ Q'^N'
214 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
you have beheld him ? Think ! Ah ! you have a
memory, — Linton, don't you recall your cousin thai
used to tease us so with wishing to see ? "
" What, Linton ! " cried Cathy, kindling into j
surprise at the name.'* Is that little Linton ?
taller than I am ! — Are you Linton ? "
The youth stepped forward and acknowledged hii
She kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wt
at the change time had wrought in the appearan
each. Catherine had reached her full height ; her i
was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, an <
whole aspect sparkling with health and spirits. Lir
looks and movements were very languid, and his
extremely slight ; but there was a grace in his mj
that mitigated these defects, and rendered him no
pleasing. After exchanging numerous marks of fon
with him, his cousin went to Mr. Heathcliff, who liU;
by the door, dividing his attention between the ol
inside and those that lay without — ^pretending, th
to observe the latter, and really noting the former £
'* And you are my uncle, then ! " she cried, rea
up to salute him. " I thought I liked you, thougl
were cross at first. Why don't you visit at the 6:
with Linton ? To live all these years such close r
hours, and never see us, is odd. What have you
so for? "
** I visited it once or twice too often before you
born, " he answered. **There^ — damn it! If you
any kisses to spare, give them to Linton — the;
thrown away on me. "
" Naughty Ellen! " exclaimed Catherine, flyir
attack me next with her lavish caresses. " W
Ellen, to try to hinder me from entering ! Bu
take this walk every morning in future — may I, und
and sometimes bring papa. Won't you be glad t
as ? "
" Of course I " replied the unde, w\Xv ^ Y^-axdV^
Pressed grimace, resulting iromlite 4eep wet%\oiv\i
rae proposed visitors. *^But stay " \ie c6i > & iM«»s
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 21;
3^ ing towards the young lady. " Now I think of it, Fc
" better tell you. Mr. Linton has a prejudice against me
We quarrelled at one time of our lives with: unchristiai
ferocity, and if you mention coming here to him he'1
put a veto on your visits altogether. Therefore yoi
must not mention it, unless you be careless of seeing
jjyour cousin hereafter: You may come if you will, bu
^^ you must not mention, it. "
^. " Why did you quarrel ? " asked Catherine, consider
ably crestfallen.
" He thought me too poor to wed his sister, " answerec
Heathcliff, " and was grieved that I got her. His piid
was hurt, and he'll never forgive it. "
" That's wrong! " said the young lady. " . " Some timt
I'll tell him so* But Linton and I have no share in yOu
iuarrel. I'll not come here then ; he shall come to th(
rrange. "
It will be too far for me, " murmured her cousin
to walk four miles would kill me. No, come here
Miss Catherine, now and then — ^not every morning, bu
j^jhnce or twice a week. "
yl'The father launched towards his son a glance of bitte
j'jj, contempt.
" I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour, " he mut
tered to me.''Miss Catherine, as the ninny calls hei
will discover his value, arid send him to the. devil.- Now
if it had been Hareton ! Do you know that^ twent;
limes a day, I covet Hareton, with all his degradation
Pd have loved the lad had he been some onie else. Bu
I think he's safe from her love. I'll pit him- against tha
paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly; We calcu
me it will scarcely last till it is eighteen. Oh, confouni
the vapid thing ! He's absorbed in dr3ring his feet, an(
i'J never looks at her*— Linton ! "
" Yes, father, " answered the boy.
" Have you nothing to show youi cowsvxv ^x^y^\sk
2}x)ut-^DOt even a rabbit or a weaseY^ xifc^X.'^.'^ "
her into the garden before you change ^}o\ix ^o < ^,
^mta the stable to see your horse. "
h
or
OT!
cm
u
jie
en
jec
.ti
OD
loi
ve
2l6 WUTIIERING HEIGHTS.
" Wouldn't yOu rather sit here?''asked Lintoi
addressing Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctan(
to move again.
'* I don't know, " she repUed, casting a longing loc
to the door,. and evidently eager to be active.
; He kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. -Heati
cHff rose and went into the kitchen, and from thence i
the yard, calling out for Hareton. Hareton responded
and presently the two re-entered; The young man hz
been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on h
cheeks and his wetted hair;
" Oh, I'll ask yoUy\mc\t,'* cried Miss Cathy, recollec
ing the housekeeper's assertion. " That is not n
cousin, is he ? " .
i " Yes, " he replied^- " your mother'^ nephew. Doji
you like him ? "
Catherine looked queer.
, " Is he not. a handsome lad ? " he continued.
'The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispen
a sentence in Heathchfi's ear. He laughed. Haretc
darkened; I perceived he was very sensitive to su
pected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of h
inferiority. But his master or guardian chased tl
frown by exclaiming, —
. " Yoa'll be; the favourite among us, Hareton ! 9
says you ar^ a > r^ — -- What was it ? Well, something vei
fluttering. Here 1 you go with her round the farm, Ai
behave like a gentleman, mind I Don't use any ba
words ; and don't stare when the young lady is not lool
ing at you, and be ready to hide your face when she i
and when you speak, say yoin: words slowly, and ke <
your hands out of your pockets* Be off, and enterta
her as nicely as you can. "
He watched the couple walking past the window
Earnshaw had his countenance completely averted fro
his companion. He seemed studying the familiar Ian
scape with a stranger's and an artist ? > interest. Catheri:
^ook a sly look at hini, expiessmg siwaSi ^tosst^ioj
iSfie then turned her attentioTi to seekm^ o\i\. o\5\efc\i
EwuTHERiNG HErcnTa'2(7
ent for herself, and trippod merrily on, lilting a
mie to supply the lack of conversation.
*'I've tied his tongue, " observed Heathcliff, " Hell
not venture a single syllable all the time I Nelly, you
recollect me at his age — nay, some years younger. Did
1 ever look so stupid — so'gaumless,'as Joseph calls
.It? "
I *^ Worse/'I replied,'* because more sullen with it/'
'" Fve a pleasure in him/'he continued, reflecting
I ibud*'* He has satisfied my expectations. If he were
I born fool I should not enjoy it half so much. But he's
'10 iool ; and I can sympathize with all his feelings,
'laving felt them myself, I know what he suffers now, for
ibstauce, exactly. It is merely a beginning of what he
mall suffer, though. And he'll never be able to emerge
Tom his bathos of coarseness and ignorance, I've got
liim faster than his scoundrel of a father secured me,
pid lower J for he takes a pride in his brutish ness. I've
^ taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and
^ leak. Don't you think Hindley would be proud of his
^ (m if he could see him^almost as proud as I am of
I nine ? But there's this difference : one is gold piit to the
of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to ape
service of silver. Mine has nothing valuable about
et I shall have the merit of making if go as far as
poor stuff can go. His had first-rate C|ualities, and
are lost, rendered worse than unavaihng. I have
jng to regret ; he would have more than any but me
aware of. And the best of it is, Hareton is damnably
d of me ! You'll own that I've outmatched Hindley
e. If the dead villain could rise from his grave to
se me for his offspring's wrongs, I should have the
lim of seeing the said offspring fight him back again,
indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend
k has in the w^orld, "
Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish lau^\\ a.t \\\^ \?i.e-a,
mde no reply, because I saw that \ve ex^^cA^^ ^^
yfeajitime our young companion, wlno s^at ^o^ xe^
om us to hear what was said, began to ev\TLce s-^T^g
2l8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
of uneasiness, probably repenting that he had denic
himself the treat of Catherine's society for fear of a litt
fatigue. His father remarked the restless glances wai
dering to the window, and the hand irresolutely extendi
towards his cap. .
" Get up,, you idle boy ! " he exclaimed, with assume
heartiness. *'Away after them ! They are just at tl
corner, by the stand of hives.*'
Linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. Tl
lattice was open, and as he stepped out I heard Cath
inquiring of her unsociable attendant what was thi
inscription over the door ? Hareton stared up, an
scratched his head hke a true clown.
*'It's some damnable writing, " he answered. "
cannot read it. "
. ** Can't read it ? " cried Catherine, *'I can read it
it's Enghsh. But I want to know why it is there. "
Linton giggled — the first appearance of mirth he ha
exhibited.
** He does not know his letters, " he said to his cousir
'* Could you beheve in the existence of such a colossi
dunce ? "
" Is he all as he should be ? " asked Miss Cathy ser
ously,'* or is he simple — not right ?. I've questione
him twice now, and each time he looked so stupid
think he does not understand me. I can hardly undcfl
stand him, I'm sure. "
Linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at Hareto
tauntingly, who certainly did not seem quite clear <
comprehension at that moment.
''There's nothing the matter but laziness — ^is ther
Eamshaw? " he said. " My cousin fancies you are a
idiot. There you experience the consequence of scomiu
* book-laming,'as you would say. — Have you notices
Catherine, his frightful Yorkshire pronunciation ? "
" Why, where the devil is the use on't ? " growk
Hareton, more ready in answering Tais da\IL^ coxxi^axdoi
He was about to enlarge further, but tYie two ^o > oax^\5
^oJce into a noisy fit of merriment, my g^d^^ TDi^ > w


II
btis
it
WCTTHERTNG HEIGHTS.
delighted to discover that she might turn ids strangi
^ talk to inatter of aniusement*
'Where is the use of the devU in that sentence ?
i tittered Linton, *'Papa told you not to say any had
words, and you can't open your mouth without one^
Bo try to behave like a gentleman — now do 1 " •
*'If thou weren't more a lass than a lad, I'd fell thel
s minute, I would, pitiful lath of a crater ! " re*
rted the angry boor, retreating, while his face bumec
h Hth mingled rage and mortification, for he was con*
mous of being insulted, and embarrassed how to res
int it. f
^'Mr. Heathcliff having overheard the conversation ai
*ell as 1, smiled when he saw him go, but immediateljj
afterwards cast a look of singular aversion on the fiippani
pairj who remained chattering In the doorway, the boi
nnding animation enough while discussing Hareton^
" ts and deficiencies and relating anecdotes of his
gs-on, and the girl relishing his pert and spitefu
,yings, withoiit considering the ill-nature they evincedi!
began to dislike more than to compassionate Linton^
to excuse his father, in some measure, for holdin|
cheap. I!
We stayed till afternoon — I could not tear Miss Cathj
away sooner ; but happily my master had not quittec
feis apartment, and remained ignorant of our prolonget
absence. As we w^alked home I would fain have en^
lightened my charge on the characters of the people wi
iv had quitted, but she got it into her head that I ^wai
prejudiced against them, I
" Aha !'* she cried, *'you take papa's side, Ellen
You are partial, I know^ or else yon wouldn't have cheatec
me so many years into the notion that Linton lived a
bng way from here. I'm really extremely angry, onlj
I'm so pleased 1 can*t show it. But you must hoU
your tongue about my uncle* He's m'y uiic\^,x^^vs\'5i:n & i«
imd 1*11 scald papa for quarrelling vA.t\i AvLxa.^'
And so she ran on, till I reUnquistved iVe ^^^^^^^
^convince her of her mistake. Sb^e 6id t^^^ ^^
220 WUTHERING HEIGHTS/
the visit that night, because she did not see Mr. lihi
Next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin, i
still I was not altogether sorry. I thought the biif
of directing and warning would be more efficiently be
by him than me. But he was too timid in giving. sia
factory reaJsons for his wish that she should shun c
nection with the household of the Heights, and Cath©
liked good reasons for every restraint that harassed
petted will;'
" Papa !'* she exclaimed, after the morning's sail
tions, " guess whom I saw yesterday in my walk on
moors. Ah, papa, you started ! You've not done ri|
have you, now ? I saw But listen,- and you s
hear how I found you out, and Ellen, who is in iea
with you, and yet pretended to pity me so when I i
hoping, and was always disappointed about Linti
coming back, "
She gave a faithful account of her excursion and
consequences ; and my master, though he cast more t
one reproachful look at me, said nothing till she
concluded: Then he drew her to him, and asked if
knew why i he had concealed Linton's near neighb <
hood from her. Could she think it was to deny h(
pleasure that she might harmlessly enjoy ? •
" It was because you disliked Mr. Heathcliff, "
answered.
" Then you believe I care more for my own feeli
than yours, Cathy ? " he said; " No, it was not beca
I disliked Mr. Heathcliff, but because Mr. Heath
disUkes me, and is a most diabolical man, delighting
wrong and ruin those he hates, if they give him
slightest opportunity. I knew that you coiild not b
up an acquaintance with your cousin without tb <
brought into contact with him, and I knew he wc
detest you on my account ; so for your own good,
nothing else, I took precautions that you should
see Linton again. I meant to exp\a.m \i» & ^iwrofc t
fsyou grew older, and Tm sorry 1 dAaye^xY "
n^f'But Mr; Heathcliff was quite cotd!ua!L, ^a.^i2^-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 221
served Catherine, not at all convinced ; *'and he didn't
object to our seeing each other. He said I might come
to his house when I pleased, only I must not tell you,
because you had quarrelled with him, and would not
forgive him for marr3nng Aunt Isabella. And you won't.
You are the one to be blamed. He is willing to let us
be friends — at least, Linton and I — and you are not.*'
'My master, perceiving that she would not take his
nvord for her uncle-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty
kketch of his conduct to Isabella, and the manner in
vhich Wuthering Heights became his property. He
»uld not bear to discourse long upon the topic, for though
le spoke little of it, he still felt the same horror and de-
ntation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his
leart evet since Mrs. Linton's death. " She might have
Jeen living yet if it had not been for him !'^ was his
fconstant bitter reflection; and in his eyes HeathcUff
heemed a murderer. Miss Cathy — conversant with nO
lad deeds except her owti slight acts of disobedience,
Qjustice, and passion, arising from hot temper and
loughtlessness; and repented of on the day they were
Itonmitted — was amaz^ at the blackness of spirit that
»ald brood on and cover revenge for years, and de-
iberately prosecute its plans without a visitation of re-
liorse. She appeared so deeply impressed and shocked
It this new view of human nature, excluded from all
fcer studies and all her ideas till now, that Mr. Edgar
ed it unnecessary to pursue the subject. He merely
led, —
" You will know hereafter, darling, why I wish you to
Lvoid his house and family. Now return to your old
ployments and amusemen s, and think no more about
lem.
Catherine kissed her father and sat down quietly to
her lessons for a couple of hours, according to custom ;
then she accompanied him into the gto\mS & , ^ " tA *^^
\ho\e day passed as usual. But in tYie evexvvcv^, v^\v«5
she had retired to her room, and 1 v/etit to V^^ V < ex
mdress, I found her crying on her ktiees Vi^ ^^^ ^^^
8
222 WUTHBillNG aEXC & HTS.
'*. Oh, fie, silly child.! /M exxtlaimed.''li you haid a
real griefs y < ^u*- < i beiashamiad ,to waste a :tear.oa.t
little (Contrarietyo) You. neVer had one shadow* ibf-isi
Stan tial- sorrow, Miss. C^therinei Suppose,'for a mini
that ma & ter. and I Wei*e4ead, and you were by your
in the world ;!. how would you feel then ? Compare
present occasion with su < bh. an affliction ds that, and
thankful for thei friends you have, instead of covet
more. " • ,.:•■ . ..;■; • •:•': ..
" I'm not .icr5dng.fQrmyselfi.. Ellen, " she answerec
" it's for him,. He expected to isee me again to-morr <
and there, h^'ll be. SQ. disappointed; and he'U wait
nje, and I ahaji't come.1'i i , ;;...-
•'Nonsense I " , said L I'iDanyou imagine he'.
thought, as much of you as you have of hiiu ? > Ha^
he Hareton.foi! a companion ? Not one in a hund
would weep^t losing a relation they had just: seen tw
for twQ afternoons. Linton vM conjecture how it
^nd trouble himself no further) j9.bout you. "
./[ But may I not write a ftote to tell him'why I can
come, " i$he a3kedi rising to her iQet,f. and just »
those books 1 1 promised to lend him ?, His books
not as nice as mine, and he • wanted. to i have them
tremely when I told. Jiim how interesting they w
May I. not, Ellen? " . ; .■ .
! " No,: indeed I no^ind^d ! " replied ly with decisi
"'Hien he would write to you,, and there'd never be
end -of it.i No, Miss Catherine, the acquaintance. m
be dropped entirely; so papa expects, and I shall
that it is done; " ,
'" But how can one. little note— i — " she recomimenic
putting on an imploring countenance^.
" Silence! " I interrupted. " We'll not begin v
your littlja i^Qtes. Get into bed. "'
She threw at: me a very naughty! jpok—'-so Jdaughty t
I would not kiss her good-night at first. I covered.
vj? and ^hut her door in great disple?,sure, but repeal
Aalf'way, I returned soltly» aB(4 V > \ ^^^ vq^ ^
standing at the table with, a bit ol \iVa3pa5.v\^^^T " ^
WUTHERTNO'HEilGttTS. 223
er aftd a pencil in her hand, whi < ih she guiltily slipped
at of sight on my entrance.'< =
" Yoti'U get nobody to take that, Catherine/'I said, *'if
ou write it ; and at present I shall put out your candle/-
I set the extinguisher on'the flame, receiving as I did
5 a slip on my hand; and a petulant " Cross thing I "
then quitted her again,'and she drew the bolt in one of
er worst, most peevish humours. The letter was fin-
ked and forwarded to its destination by a miHc-fetcher
rho came from the village ; but that I did not leam till
5me time afterwards; Weeks passed on, and Cathy
Bcovered her temper, though she greW wondrous fond
i stealing off to comers by herself ; and often^ if I came
icar her suddenly while reading, she would start and
lend over the book, evidently desirous to hide it, and I
ietected edges of loose paper sticking out beyond the
baves. She also got a trick of coming down early in
he morning and lingering- about the kitchen, as if she
»ere expecting the arrival of something ; and- she had a
mall drawer in a cabinet In the library which she would
Irifle over for hours, and whose key she took special
ibre to remove when she left it. ♦'
* One day, as she inspected this drawei:, I observed that
fte playthings and trinkets which recently formed its
contents were transmuted into bits of folded paper.
Hy curiosity and suspicions were aroused. I determined
to take a peep at her mysterious treasures ; & o at night,
'te soon as she and my master were safe upstairs, I
fearched and readily found among my hoii^-keys one
that would fit the lock. Having opened, I emptied the
Whole contents into my apron, and took theih with me
to examine at leisure in my own chamber. Tliough I
could not but suspect, I was still surprised to discover
fliat they were a mass of correspondence — daily, almost,
it must have been — from Linton Heathcliff, answers to
documents forwarded by her. The fearVv^t ^^\ft^^^^^
embarrassed and short; gradually, \iOVjev«ax, ^^'^ ^ " ^
^aded into copious Jove-fetters, iooVisYv, «^ ^^ ^^^.
» wn'ter rendered natural, yet with toxic^ve^ ^^'^^
224 WiUTHERING HEIGHTS.
there which I thought w«re borrowed from a more ex
perienced source. Some of them struck me as siftgularl;
odd compounds of ardour and flatness, commencing i
strong feeling, and concluding in , the afiectied, word;
style that- a schoolboy might use to a fancied, incorporea
sweetheart. Whether they satisfied Cathy I don't kno^
but they appeared very, worthless trash, to me. Afte
turning over as many as I thought proper, I tied then
in a handkerchief and set them aside, relocking tb
vacant drawer.
Following her habit, my yotmg lady descended early
and. visited the kitchen. I watched her go to the doo
on the arrival of a certain little boy,^ and while the dairy
maid filled his can, she tucked something into his jacke
pocket, and. plucked something out, I went round b;
the garden and laid wait for the messenger, who fought
valorously to defend his trust, .and we spilt the nSll
between us ; but I succeeded in abstracting the epistk
and threatening serious consequences if he did not lool
sharp home, I remained under the wall and penis©
Miss Cathy's ^ectionate composition. It was mor
simple and more eloquent than her cousin's — very prett
2ind very silly. I shook my head, and went meditatini
into the house. . The day being wet, she could not diver
herself with rambling about the park, so, at the conclusioi
of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace of tb
drawer. Her father sat reading at the table, and I, oi
purpose, had sought a bit of work in some unripped
fringes of the window curtain, keeping my eye steadil;
fixed oh her proceedings. Never did any bird fljdng bad
to a plundered nest which it had left brimful of chirpinj
young ones express more complete despair in its anguishes
cries and flutterings than she by her single ** Oh !'
and the change that transfigured her late happy counte
nance. Mr. Linton looked up.
" What is the matter, love ? Have you hurt your
self P''he sai±
His tone and look assured liet He YiaA iwoV \ > Qfc\i ^
^'scoverer of the hoard.
WUTHEKING HEIGHTS. 22$
" No, papa, " she gasped. — ** Ellen ! Ellen ! come up-
irs ! I'm sick ! "
[ obeyed her summons, and'accompanied her out.
'O Ellen, you have got them ! " she commenced ini-
idiately, dropping on her knees, when we were en-
sed alone. ** Oh, give them to mie, and I'll never,
6^er do so again ! Don't tell papa. You have not
d papa, Ellen? Say you have hot. I've been ex-
dingly naughty, but I won't do it any moiie ! "
With a grave severity in -my maniier I bade her stand
* So,'* I exclaimed, " Miss Catherine, you ar6 tolerably
on, it seems ; you may well be ashamed of them. A
e bundle of trash you study in your leisure hours, to.
sure. Why, it's good enough to be printed. And
lat do you suppose the itiaster Svill think when I dis-
ly it before him ? I haven't shown it yet, but you
sdn't imagine I shall keep your ridiculous secrets,
r shame !. And you must have led the way in writing
:h absurdities. He would not have thought of be-
ming, I'm certain.''
'I didn't ! I didn't ! " sobbed Cathy, fit to break her
irt. " I didn't once think- of loving him till— ^i-^ "
* Loving / " cri^d I, as scornfully as T could utter the
rd. " Loving / Did anybody ever Hear the like ? I
ght just as well talk of loving the miller who comes
2e a year to buy otir corn. Pretty lovine^ indeed- 1
d both times together 370U have seen Linton hardly
ir hours in your life \ NOw here is the babyish ttash.
1 going with it to the library, and we'll see what your
her says to such loving. " •
^he sprang at her precioiis epistlesj but I hfeld them
3ve my head ; and then she poufied Out further frantic
treaties that I would burn theni — do anything rather
in show them. And being really fully as much in-
led to laugh as scold — ^for I esteemed \1 iJ^ ^sS^^a.
nity — ^I at length relented in a measute, ^xA ^^^^^-7-
'// / consent to bum them, vafl. yow \ > tomv & fc K-axxX?^
/ neither to send nor receive a \e\lev: ^^^vcs.-» " ^ " ^ " ^
226 WUTHBRINQ IJEJGHTS.
bwppk (for I; perceive yqu;have sent him books^ norlocki
of hair, nor rings, nor playthings ?'*
• " We dorft.senfi,. playtliingsl'* pried Catherine,, he
pride overconiing b^r shapie; ; . .: = «
/'Nor anj^hingat all tja^n, my lady/ -I said. *'Unle§
you will, here J gp.'I . . • • . i ■ •
'* I promise, Ell^uJ *V ^he ,cried, catphing my dress
" Ohk put them in the fire l-rrdp, do ! " . -i'
But when I -proceeded. tO; qpen > -plac^ with tjie poke
the sacfificew^ too, pajiifyi to .bp* borne. , She eanjestl]
supplicated that I would spare her one or two.
'■ One lOr -two, Ellen, tP .k«ep ipr LinXoj^'s sajke !'*
I unknotted the handkerchief,, anid commenced. 4rqR
ping them in frpm an angle, and the flapf^ .curlied up tb
chimney^'.•.■ |. .■.- .■.■■:• ,■•/ , .,
^'I will Jiave one, you jCi:]iel wretch, " she scr^med
dartmg her hand into the fiiieand drawing foi;th sonji
half -consumed fragments, at tJie expense of her iingers..,
" Very well; aii4 1 will have some to exhibit to papalv
I answered, shaking .back tNi rest into the bundle, aoi
turning anew to the door. . . ,,,
She emptied^her blackened) pieces into the flam^, an <
motioned me to finish, th^ inipiolation, It::^a^ done-.. .
stirred- up the ashes, and iuiterred them under a ^ovelfu
of coals ; ^d she -mutely, -and with a sense of intent
injury, reitired to bear private apartment. I de^ce^died p
tell my m^gisterthat ibe young lady's qualm .pf sickne^
was almost gqne, but I judged it best fpr her to He dowi
a while. , Sh^ wouldn't dine ; .but she reappeared at tei
pale and .red,.about the eyes, and.imarvellously subdue
m outward aspect. Next morning I answered the lel^e
by a slip of po-per inscribedj»i " Master IJeatbcliff is re
quested to send no more note^ to Miss Linton^ ,as/si]|
will not receive them/'And thenceforth the litjtle bq
camq with y^camt pockets. . ; .
.v\
WUTHERING iHKIGHTS. 227
CHAPTEK XXII.
4MER drew to an end, and eady autumii,'It r was past
haelraas ; but the harvest was late tlat year, and a
of our fields were still uncleared. Mr. Linton and
daughter would frequently walk out among the
pers. At the carr5ang of the last sheaves they stayed
dusk, and the evening happening to be chill and
ip, my master caught a bad cold,;: that settled
tinately on his luiigs, and confined him indoors
)ughout the whole of the winter, nearly without in-
nission,
•oor Cathy, frightened from her little romance, had
Q considerably sadder and duller, since its abandofir
it ; and her father insisted on .her reading less, and
ing more exercise. She had his companionship no
yer. I esteemed it a duty to supply its lack, a & much
possible, > with mine — an inefficient substitute, for I
Id only spare two or three: hours from my numerous
mal occupations to follow her footsteps, and then my
tcty was obviously less desirable than bis.
)n an afternoon jin October or the beginning of Novem-
, a fresh, watery afternoon, when tiie turf and paths
e rustling with moist, withered leaves, and the cold
e sky was half hidden by cloudsr—dark gray streamers,
idly mounting from the west and boding abundant
1 — I requested my young lady to forego her ramble,
ause I was certain of'showers,, . She refused, and I
viUingly donned a cloak'and took my umbrella to
ompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park —
)rmal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited
d that she invariably was when Mr. Edgpx had been
:-se than ordinary) — a thing never known from his con-
don, but guessed both by. her and me frpm his in-
ised silence and the melancholy of Ivis cciXM^V^'w^sx^,
; went sadly on. There was no txmivmg, ox \i^ " SV5\^^^
; though the chiU wind miglit weW Yv-aNe Xaxcc^^^
to luce. And often, from the sidft cAm-^ «^^^^ ^^
?28 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
detect her raising^ a hand and brushing something ofl
her cheek. I gazed round ;for a naeans of diverting hei
thoughts. On one side of the road rose a high, rougli
bank, where hazels and'stunted oaks, with their nx)t(
half exposed^ held Uncertain tenured The soil was tod
loose for the latter, and strong winds had blown sooH
nearly horizontal. In summer Miss Catherine delightec
to climb along these trunks, and sit in the branches
swinging twenty feet above the ground ; and I, pleasec
with her agility and her Hght, childish heart, still con
sidered it proper to scold every time I caught her at sud
an elevation, but so that she knew there was no necessit]
for descending. From dinner to tea she would lie ii
her breeaje-rocked ctadle, doing nothing except singinj
old songs — ^my nursery lore — to herself, or watching thi
lards, joint tenants, feed and entice their yotmg ones tt
fly; or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, hal
iJreaming, happier than words can express.
*■ Look,'mi^ ! " I exclaimed, pointing to a nook undei
the roots of one twisted'tree; " winter is not here yet
There's a Uttle fldw^ up yorid^r^ — the last bud from thi
multitude of -blufebells that clouded those turf steps ii
July \rtth a lilac mist. Will you clamber up and plucl
it to.sho^y t(! > papa ? " "'■ -
- Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trein
bling in its earthy shelter, and replied at length, —'
'** No, ril not touch it. But it'looks melancholy, doe
it not, Ellen ? "
" Yes, "'I observed— ; " about as starved and sacklesi
as you. Your cheeks are bloodless. Let us take hoU
of hands and run. You're so low I dare say I shall keej
up with you. "
" No,''ishe repeated, and continued sauntering on
pausing at intervals to muse over a bit of nwss, or a tuf
of blanched grass, 6r a fungus spreading its bright orange
among the heaps of brown foliage ; and ever and anoi
Aer hand was lifted to her averted lace.
''Catherihe, why are you cty\tvg, \ov^ > *'\ ^^^«
approaching and putting my arm ovex \i.« ^ox^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 22$
fou mustn't cry because papa has a cold. Be thankful
s nothing worse. "
)he now put no further restraint on her tears; her
ath was stifled by sobs.
'Oh, it will be something worse ! " she said. " And
at shall I do when papa and you leav^^me, and I am
myself? I cafa't forget ypuT words, Ellen; they
slwsys in my ear. How fife ^11 be < thingfed; how
ary the world will -be, when papa'and you are
'None can tell whether you won't die before us, " I
Ued. " It's wfong-'to anticipate evil. Well hope
re are years and yeard to come before any of us go^
ster is young, and I am strong and hardly'forty-five,
mother lived till eighty, a canty idame-tb the last,
i suppose Mr. Linton Were sparal till he %w sixty,
t wotdd be more year^ than you have counted, miss,
i would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity above
mty years beforehand ? "
'But Aunt Isabella was :younger than papa, " she
larked, gadng up with tiihid hope to seek further
isolation. • •'■•'
* Aunt Isabella had ndt you and me to nurse her, "
jplied. " She wasn't as happy as r^asftdr ;* she hadn'^t
much to Uve for. All you need do is'to waLit wellon
ir father, and cheer himby letting him see»you cheerful,
I avoid giving him arixiety on any subjeet; . Mind that^
Jiy. I'll not disguise but you inight kill him if you
:e wild and reckless, and cherished a foolish, fanciful
jction for the son'of a person who would be- glad to
re him in his grave, and allbwfed him to discover that
I fretted over the separation he has judged it eX-
lient to make. "'. : ■
'I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness, "
wered my companion.''I care for notibdng in com-
ison with papa. And I'll never — ivevex — ^c^, x^^-^i^^^
ae I have my senses; do aft'act or s^ " y ^^ox^As^ ^'^'^
'. IJove him better than myseVi, ^Yexv, mA\^^^;;
y this: I pray every night t^at 1 tMcV " ^^ " ^ " ^
^ 230 WUTHERING HEK5HTS.
him, because I; would ratjhjer he miserable > than thai
he should be. That proves I love him better ^ thai
myself. " . . . . , .
" Good words/'I replied.'VBut .d^eds must prbve ii
also. And aftet he is well, remember you. don't iorigei
resolutions formed in the hour of f ear«'r.'i
As we talked, we neared a door that opened on th
road; and my young lady^ : Jightening into sunshine
again, climbed up and seated hets^ oil the t6p of thi
wall, reaching over to gather some hips that blbfomei
scarlet on the $ummit branches of the wild rose tree
shado\Vdng the! highway side. The lower finiit had dis
appeared, but only birds could, touch the upper^ excep
from Cathy's ipresent station. ■ In stretching to pull theaad
her hat feU offj aiidas the door was locked she proposeH
scrambling down to recover it. I bade her be cautioul
lest sh6 goit a fail,; and she nimbly disappeared, Butthi
return was nd such easy matter* The Stones were smoot)
and neatly cemented, and thel rose hushes and blackb^nq
stragglers could: yield no assistante in reasoetiding. I
like a fool, didn't recollect that till I heard her laughinj
and exclaiming, —
*'Ellen, ryou'D) have to fetch the. key, or else I nrasl
run round to'the porter's lodge. I can't scale the ram
parts on this sidei • i. i / i
" Stay where you are, " ; I answered. " I have xa]
bundle of keys in my pocket. Perbapis I may managi
to open it; if jaot, I'll go/*'.
Catherine . amused herseli with dancing to- a»d in
before the dOor, while I. tried all the large ke5^ ia sue
cession. I had applied the last, and foumd that! nom
would do. So, repeating my desire that she would re
main there, I was about to hurry home as fast as li ooold
when an approaching sound arrested me. It, w & s th <
trot of a horfeB. Cathy's dance stopp^ also.
" Who is that ? " I whispered. / ..'■ ■ 1,
. *'Ellen, I wish you could opexv th^ door, " whi^pcirtid
^aoJc my companion. fenxioualy, ■ •'■ ■'\
Ho. Miss iLintaa I " cried a deep vovc^ i < \bfc ti^«^v^
WUTHERTNG HEIGHTS. 23 1
]'m glad to meet you. Don't •■ be in haste to enterj
I have an explanation to ask and obtain. "
*I shan't speak to you, Mr. Heathcliff/*. answered
therine. " Papa says you are a wicked man, and you
te both him and me ; and Ellen says the same. "
'That is nothing to the purpose, " , said Heathcliff.
e it was.) " I don't hate my son, I suppose, and it
conoeming him that I demand your attention. Yies,
1 have caused to blush.- Two or three months since
re you not in the habit of writing: to Linton — making
e in play, eh ? You deserved, both of you, flogging
that — ^you especially, the elder, and less sensitive,
it turns out. I've got 5rour letters, arid if you give
any pertness I'll send them to your father, I pre-
ne you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it,
In't you ? Well, you dropped Linton with it into a
»ugh of Despond. He was ineamest-^in love, really,
true as I live, he's dying for you, breaking lus
irt at your fickleness — not figmratively, but actually,
ough Hareton has made him a stanmng Jest for six
eks, and I have used more serious measures, and
empted to frighten him out of his idiocy, he gets worse
ly ; and he'll be under the sod before sununer unless
1 restore him!'"
'How can y6u lie so glaringly to the poor child ? " I
led from the inside! " Pray ride on ! How can you
iberately get up such paltry falsehoods ? — Miss Cathy,
knock the lock off with a stone. You won't believe
Lt vile nonsense.* You can feel in yourself it is impos-
le that a person should die for love of a stranger/'■
* I was not aware there were eavesdroppers, " muttered
s detected villain. " Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you,
t I don't like your double-dealing, " he added aloud,
low could you lie so glaringly as to affirm I hated the
JOT child,'and invent bugbear stories to terrify her
m my door-stones ? Catherine Litvtoii VJ^^fc ^^t^ xv^ckv^
rms me), my bonny lass, I shaU be itoTCv\\.a«ve; " ^ " ^^k®.^
fir; go and see if I have not spoken ttMii\i% ^^ > — ^^^ " ^^
irJmg! Just imagine your iaitYieT'm tk^ " ^^^^-^ ^
232 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Linton in yours ; then think how you would value yotn
careless lover if he: refused to stir. a step to comfort. yoi
when your father himself entreated him ; and don't
from pure stupidity, fall into the same error. I. swear
on my salvation, he's going to his grave, and none bui
you can save him ! "
The lock gave ivay^ and. I issued out.
" I swear Linton is, dying, " repeated Hefathcliff, looking
hard at me. " Arid grief and disappointment are hasten;
ing his death. Nelly, if you won't let her go, you cai
walk over. yourself. But I shall not return till thisr tinw
next week; and I think your'iniaster himself. wouli
scarcely object ito her visiting her cousin. "
" Come in/'said I, taking ^Cathy by the arm and hdii
forcing her to re-enter; for she lingered,, viewing witl
troubled ayes, the featiire^ of the speaker, too stem U
express his inward deceiti ^
He pushed his horse clo^e, and bendiiag down, ob
served,--- ■ ■ •/ :
" Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have littii
patience with Linton ; and Hareton and Joseph hav«
less.'I'll owa that he's with a harsh set. He pines foi
kindness as well as love, and a kind word from you wouM
be his best medicine. Don't mind Mrs, Dean's crud
cautions, but be gi^nerous, an^! contrive ta s^e him. i He
dreams of you day and night, and canrtot be persuaded
that you don'^t hate him, since you neither write noi
call.^'
I. closed the door and rolled a stone to assist the loos-
ened lock in holding it, and spreading my umbrella, 1
drew my charge underneath, for the rain began to drive
through the moaning branches of the trees, and warned
us to avoid delay. Our hurry prevented any comment
on the encounter with Heathcliif as we stretched to-
wards home, but I divined instinctively that Catherine's
heart was clouded ridw in double darkness. Her f eat-
un^s were so sad they did not seem hers. She evidently
*^gnzxled wh^t she had heard as every sVVi'a^ > \^ Xx > 3^i
aSe master had retired to reat • beioi^ > n^ c^wfcfc >
" >
WUTHOERING HEIGHTS. 235
hy stole to his room to inquire how he was ; he had
sn asleep. She returned, and asked me to sit with
in the library. We took our tea together, and after-!
tis she lay down on the rug, and told me not to talk,
she was weary. I got. a book, and pretended to
i. As soon as she supposed me. absorbed in my dccu-
ion she recommenced her silent weeping ; it appeared,
present, her favourite diversion. I suffered Jier to
oy it a while, i then I expostulated, deriding and ridi-
ng all Mr. Heathcliff's assertions about his son,, as
! were certain she would coincide; Alas! I hadn't
I to counteract the effect his accoimt had produced ;
/as just what he intended.
'You may be right, Ellen, " she answered, " but I
II never feel at ease till I know. And I must tell
ton it is not my fault that I don't write, aiid convince
1 that I shall not change.'*
Vhat use were anger and protestations against her
y credulity ? We parted that night hostile, biit next
r beheld me on the road to Wuthering Heights by
side of my wilful young mistress's pony. I couldn't
ir to witness her sorrow, to see her pale dejected
mtenance and heavy eyes ; and I 5^elded; in the faint
ye that Linton himself might prove, by his reception
lis, how little of'the tale was founded on fact.
CHAPTER XXIII.; ;
E rainv night had ushered in a misty morning, half
St, half drizzle, and temporary brooks crossed our
:h, gurgling from the uplands. My feet were thor-
jhly wetted. I was cross and low — exactly the humour
ted for making the most of these disagreeable things.
t entered the farmhouse by the kitchen way, to ascer-
n whether Mr. Heathclii! were really abaeal^ VifecaMSR.
►ut slight faith in his own afhrmation,
'oseph seemed sitting in a sort oi eVv^iioittv «\otsfc,\5fc^^^^
Taring jjre, a quart of ale on the AaJsAfc xke»x. ^ " ^^
234 WUTHtERING HEIGHTS
bristling with large ; pieces of toasted oat-eake, and. this
black, short pipe in his mduth; Catherine ran to tin
hearth to warm herself. I asked if the master was in
My question remained; :so long unanswered that I thou^
the old man ^adgroWn deaf, aqd Irepeated it laudec.
I " Na — ay li " he snarled, or rather screamed through hk
nose. " Na-r-ay ! yahmuh goa back whear yah coon
trough.*''. ■ . V-:- :^'.':- : .'!.■■■. .■'•■'■ -J-.',
: " Joseph 1 " cried a peevi^.voiice, shtiultaiieously ,witt
me,,'from the inneri room. .. " Bow often ato 1 tp calj
you? There are only a few red ashes nowi Josephl
come, this, moment. " ■. i i ^.\\
Vigorous puffs and a resolute star6 into the grati
declated he* had " no- eat. for this appeal. The house
keeper and iHalreton were invisible-r-one gone on, a){
errand, and the other at his work probably. We knenj
Linton's tones, and entered. : t . i
" Ohi,'I hope ypu'll die in a garret, starved to death/1
said the boy, misiaking .our approach for that of hii
negligent attendant. . .; i , ili
:He stopped on observing his; error.- .His cousin fleli
to him.= ..••...,• ■ ...|
'" Is that you, Miss Linton ? " .he said; raising his hea^
from the. arm, Of the great. chair in'Nvbichhe reclined!
" No, doii't kiss imfe.; it takes! my breath, i Dear. me < l
Papa said you would call, " continued he, after recoverinj
a Uttle from Catherine's embrace, while she stood bj
looking very contrite, , " Will you shut the door, if yet
please ? You left it open ^ ^n5 those — those detestaUi
creatures won'tbring coalslto the«ftee. It's so cold ! " "
: I stirred up the cinderSi and fetched a scuttleful my
self. The. invalid complained =df being covered witil
ashes ;'but he had a tiresome cough, and looked ieverisl
and ill, so I did not rebuke his temper.
" Well, Linton; " murmured Catherine, when his eoi
rugated brow relaxed, *'• are y6u: glad to see me?, Caj
I do you any good?'-': - !;! r'h
■vy'^ Why: didn!t,yctn come-beioTeY " Yfe ^^VfiSL /v^«
^itmJd have'Cbmey instead «6i vnatiti®.'\^ 1^ \xwA. ^bfc ^«8
^THERING HEroHTS; 235
writing those long lettisrs. . rl'd faiJ''rather have
. to you. Now, I can ticithetbear.to talk noir any^
else. Iwonder where Zillah'is t'Will you " n-rrlook-
me — ** step into the kitchen and see ? " :
ad received no thanks for my- other *servicei and
unwilling to tun. to and fro at'his behest, I re-
obody is out there but Joseph, " . ; i
want to drink, " he exelainied* fretfully, turning
*'Zillah is constantly gadding off to Gimmer-
nee papa went ; it's miserable I And I'm obliged
me down here: they resolved never to hear me
.rs, . . ) . ■
. your father attentive to you, Master Heathcliff ? " •
ed, perceiving Catherine to be checked in her
ly advances, . ■ .» .'
ttentive ? He makes /A^w a little mdre. attentive
> t, " he cried. " The wretches ! . Do you know, Miss
1, that brute Hare ton laughs at ftiei! I hate himl
i, I hate them all I They are odibu J beings.'.':
hy began searching ioc some water j* she lighted on
:her in the dresser, filled, a tumble*, and brought
[e bade her add a spoonful of wine irom a bottle on
ible ; and having swallowed a.ismall. portion, ap»
i more tranquil, jlnd said she was very kind.
nd are you glad to sec me ? " asked she, reiterating
rmer Question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn
nile.
es, I am. It's something new to hear a voice like
! " he replied. " But I have been :vexed because
r^ouldn't'come. : And papa swore . it was owing to
He called me a pitifii^ shuffling, worthless tlung,
dd you despised me, andii he had'been ih my pla < ie
luld be more the master of the Grange than your
by this time. But you donlt xiespise me, d6 you,
> i
wish you would say Catherine,'ot C^^Qccgr ^sxV^^-
'my young lady. " Despise you > " ^oX " ^^i^^*^^
nd Ellen, I love you better thaxi a-wj^^^^ ^ " ^'^'
236 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
I don't love? Mr. ^Hcathcliff, though, and I dare not coitta
when he returns. Will he stay away many:days ? *•
" Not many/'answered Linton ; ** but he goes on to
the moors frequently since. the: shooting season com?
menced, and you might spend an hour or itwo \with me
in his absence. Do say you will. I think I; should noi
be peevish with you. You'd not provoke me, and you^t
always be ready to'help.mfc, wouldn't you? "
. *^'Yes, " said Catherine,: stroking his long soft hair. ** I:
I could only get papa's consent I'd spiend half my tirof
with you. Ptetty Linton I > I wish you were my brother,'
" And th^n you; would hke me as wellfeis your father ?'
observed he more cheerfully, *'But papa says ycj
^oiiid love 6ie« belter i than himi and all the- world'i
you were nily wife ;'so^i'd rather you were -that, "
" No, I should never love anybody better than papai-
she.'returned igrstvely. . " And [people hate their wivei
sornetimesj ibut not their sisters latld brothers ; and i
you were the iiattet yoti- .would) live with iis, andpapi
would be as iorid-ofyouas/hdis of me. " -
'Linton deiiied that people " ever hated their wives; biri
Cathy affirmed they did,! alid in her; wisdom instated
his own father's ^rversioh to her autit I ehdeaVourd
to stop her: thoughtless* toriguei I cotlldn't succeed til
everything she knew was but. i » Master Heathcliff, mud!
irritated, assctted her relation was false.'
" Papa lold tne, and papa'cjoes not. tell falsehoods, "
she answered pertly.
*^ My'papa scionis, yours i! " cried Linton. " He calh
him a sneaking fooll " ; . .
" Yours is a wicked mqui, " i retorted Catherine, " anc
you are very naughty, to dare to repeat wlhat hfe says
He utiust " be wicked toi haVe made Aunt Isabella leavi
him as she did, "'<
" She didn't leaiJ^ hini, " said the boy. " You shan'i
contradict me. "
''5Ae d/4''cried my young lady. ■
''nVeU, ru/tell you something, " said lisn^oxu ^*.X^
^™^r hated'your fBLtber. Now tiaeia.V c^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 237
'* Oh ! " exclaimed Catherine, too enraged to continue.
" And she loved mine, " added he,
" Yoa little liar I I hate you now I'* she panted, and
r face grew red with passion.
" She did ! she did ! " sang Linton, sinking into the
:es8 ofjhis qhair, and leining back his head to enjoy
2 agitation of the other disputant, who stood he-
ld. . :
'* Hush, Master Heathcliff ! " I said.'* That's yoUr
tier's tale too, I suppose. "
'* It isn't. You hold your tongue! " he answered. —
she did I she did, Catherine ! She did I she did ! "
Gathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and
used lum to fall against one arm. He was immediately
zed by la suffocating cough that soon ended his tri-
iph. It lasted so long that it frightened even me.
to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at
3 mischief she had done, though she said nothing.'I
Id him till the fit exhausted itself. Then he thrust
J away, and leant his head down silently, Catherine
elled her lamentationjs also; took a seat opposite,:'and
> ked solemnly into the fire.
'* How do you feel now. Master HeathclifE ? " I in-
ired, after waiting ten minutes.;
'* I wish sheAoit'as: I'do; " he replied— " spiteful, cruel
ng ! Hareton never touches me ; he never struck me
h^ life. And I'was better to-day ; and there — - "
s voice died in a whimper, :
'/ didn't strike you ! " muttered Cathy, chewing her
to prevent another burst of emotion.
He sighed and moaned like one under great suffering,
i kept it up for a quarter of an hour, on purpose to
tress his cousin, apparently, foir whenever he caught
itifled sob from her he put renewed pain and pathos
o the inflections of his voice.
* I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton, " she said at lea^tlx^
:ked beyond endurance. ** But I co\MrL\.\vKNi^^^*.^^
-t by that little push, and 1 had no Idea \ > aaJc^^^^^'^
er. You're not much,, are ^ou, \-.m\oTi. " > ^o\i*^
238 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
me go home thinking I've done you harm* Answer I
Speak to me ! " ^ .•'
•^ I can't speak to you, " he murmured. . " * Y6u*ve1iurt
me so that I shall lie awake all night choking withithis
cough. If yoii had it you'd know what it was ; but yo^'U
be comfortably asleep while I'm in agony^ and nobody
near me, I wonder how you would like to pass those
fearful nights. " And he began to wail aloud, for very
pity of himself.
*'Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,'*'
I said, *• it won't be miss who spoils your ease ; you'd
be the same had " she never come. However, she shall
hot disturb you again ; and perhaps you'll get quieter
when we leave you. " .'
*'Must I go ? " asked Catherine dolefully, bending over
him, ** Do you want me to go, Linton ? "
'* You can't alter what you've done, " he replied pel?^
tishly, shrinking from her, ** unless you alter it for the
worse by teasing me into a fever, " • ^ :!
" Well, then, I must go ? " she repeated.
'* Let me alone, at least, " said he. " *■ I can't bear your
talking. "
She lingered, and- resisted my persuasions to departure
a tiresome while ; but as he neither looked up lior spokei,
she finally made a movement to the door, and I followed.
We were recalled by a scream, Linton had slid from his
seat on to the hearth-stone, and lay writhing in the mere
perverseness of an indulged plague of a child, determined
to be as grievous and harassing is it can, I thoroughly
gauged his disposition from his behaviour, and saw at
once it wotild be folly to attempt humouring him^ Not
so my companion. She ran back in terror^ knelt down,
and cried, and soothed, and entre?ited, till he grew quiet
from lack of breath, by no means from compimction at
distressing her.
*'I shall lift him on to the settle, " I said,'* and he may
ro]) about as he pleases. We can't stop to watch him.
Thope you are satisfied, Miss CatYiy, \iiat v^ ^^^ isiat
" ^ person to benefit tdm, and ttiat Yias caci^XAoxt q
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 239
3aith is not occasioned by attachment to^;you. Now,
len, there he= isl Come away. " As soon as he knows
lere is nobody by to care. for his nonsense, he*ll;be glad
► lie still. " L.
She placed: a cjtishion under'his hekd, and offered him
►me water. He ^ejected the lattery and tossed imeasily
1 the former, as if it were a stone or a block of wood,
le tried to put it more comfortably. .
" I can*t do with that, " he said; " it's not high
lOugh. " r : . ! .
Catherine .trough tianothet to lay above it.
" That's too high, " murmured the provoking thing.
I'.How must I arrange it, then ? " she askfed despair-
giy. ■•
He twined'himself up to her, as- she half knelt by the
ttle, and converted her shoulder into a support.'
*'No, that won't doi, " I said. " You'll be c6ntent with
le cushion, Master Heathcliffi. Miss has wasted too
.uch time on you already ; we cannot r-femain five
inutes longer; " > ■ . : ■
" Yes, yes ; we can ! " replied Cathy. " He's good and
itient now. > He's beginning: to think I shall havie far
eater misery than he will to-ilfight if I believe he is the
orse for my visit, and then I dare not come again.—
^U the truth about it, Linton; for I mustn't come if I
ive hurt you. "
" You must come, to cure me, " he answered. " You
ight to come, because you have hurt me ;'you kiiow
)u have extremely. I wais not as ill when you entered
» I am at present— ^was L ? " .'/
" But you've made yourself ill by crying and being in
passion. " . ; •=
" I didn't do it all, " said his cousin. " However, we'll
3 friends now. And you , want me — you would wish
\ see me sometimes, really ? " . -
** I told you I " did, " hiK replied impatietitly. ^'Sit oti
le settle and let me lean on ycwii \tRa^ TtsaSC't* ^
amma used ,io do^ whole aitetivocm^ \xi^ < fc^^^- ^
He still andJdon't talk ;: but yoKSi tnaj^ svx^^'^ ^'^rss.^.
240 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
you can sing, or you may say a nice long inteie & ttng
ballad — one of those you promised to tesLch me — or a story:
rd rather hiave a ballad, though. Begin. " >
Catherine repeated the longest she could remember,
The employment pleased both mightily* Linton would
have another, and after that anothei^ notwithstanding
my strenuous objections ; and so they went on until the
clock struck twelve, and we heard Hareton in the court;
returning for his dinner.
" And to-morrow, Catherine — ^will you be here tCN
morrow ?'* aisked young HeathclifE, holding her frock
as she rose reluctantly.
:**.No,'* I answered, " nor next day neither. " She,
however, gave a different response evidently, for his'f < JKK
head cleared as she stooped and whispered iii his ear.
" You won't go to-nKMTow, recollect, miss, " I. com^
ihenced, when we were out of the house. " .You are hot
dreaming of it, are you ? "
She smiled.
" Oh, ril take good care, " I continued. " 1*11 haw
that lock mend6d, and you can escape by no way else: "
• " I can get over the wall, " she said, laughing. " The
Grange is not a prison, Ellen, and you are not my gaolen
And besides, Tm almost seventeen ; Fm a woman.
And Fm certain Linton would recover quickly if he had
me to look after him. I*m older than he is, you know,
and wiser — ^less childish, am I not ? And he'll soon do
as I direct him, with some slight coaxing. He's a pretty
little darling when he's good, I'd make such a pet of
him if he were mine. We should never quarrel, shoidd
we, after we were used to each other ? Don't you like
him, Ellen ? "
" Like him ! " I exclaimed. " The worst-tempered bit
of a sickly slip that ever struggled into its* teens. Hapr
pily, as Mr. HeathclifE conjectured, he'll not win twenty.
I doubt whether he'll see spring, indeed. And small
)oss to his family whenever he drops off. And lucky
'^ is for lis that his father took Yum: t\ie\ca\^et\K.Ni^
sted, the more tedious and selfisVi Wd\)^ Ytj\ ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2^1
)u have no chance of having him for a husband, Miss
itherine. "
My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech.
> speak.of his death so regardlessly wounded her feelings*
" He's younger than I, " she answered, after a jnrotracted
Luse of meditation, " and he ought to Uve the longest,
e will — ^hfe must live as long as I do. He's as strong
)w as when he first came into the north ; I'm positive
that. It's only a cold that ails him-^-the same as papa
Ls. You say papa will get better, and why shouldn't
" Well, well, " I cried, " after all we needn't trouble
irselves ; for Hsten, miss — and mind I'll keep my word :
you attempt going to Wuthering Heights again, with
without me, I shall inform Mr. Linton; and unless
allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be
vived. "
" It has been revived, " muttered Cathy sulkily,
" Must not be. continued, then, " I said.
" We'll see, " was her reply ; and she set off at a gallop,
iving me to toil in the rear.
We both reached home before our dinner-time ; my
ister supposed we had been wandering through the
rk, and therefore he demanded no explanation of our
sence. As soon as I entered I hastened to change my
iked shoes and stockings, but sitting such a wWle at
B Heights had done the mischief. On the succeeding
> ming I was laid up, and during three weeks I re-
lined incapacitated for attending to my duties — a
lamity never experienced prior to that period, and
ver, I am thankful to say, since.
My Httle mistress behaved like an angel in coming to
dt on me and cheer my solitude. The confineinent
Dught me exceedingly low — it is wearisome to a stir-
ig, active body; but few have slighter reasons for
tnplaint than I had. The moment Catherixva ki\.\ISs..
aton's room she appeared at iivy \)ed%\A & .'^'et ^i»^
5 divided between us; no aacrvvisercieiTvl \x^ax^^^^
ute. She neglected her meals, Tafet s\xx^^ > ^xA^
i42 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
play, and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched
She must have had a warm heart, when she loved he
father so, to give so much to me. I said her days wer
divided between us ; but the master retired. early i; ani
I generally needed nothing after six o'clock ;;:thuBi th
evening was her own; Poor thing ! I tiever considere
what she did with herself after tea. And though fri
queiltly, when. she looked in to bid me good-night;
remarked a frefeh colour in ^her cheeks and a piliknei
over her slender fingers, instead of fancying the hue boi
rowed from a cold ride across the moors, I laid it to tb
charge ;of a hot fire in the library. . "
CHAPTER. XXIV.
At the close of three weeks I was able to quit my chan:
ber and move about the house ; and on the first occasio:
of my sitting up in the evening I asked Catherine t
read to me, because my eyes were w^ak. We were i
the library, the master having gone to bed. She con
sented, rather unwillingly, I fancied ; and imagining m;
sort of books did riot suit her, I bade her please hersd
in the choice of what she perused. She selected one o
her own favourites, and got forward steadily about ai
hour ; then came frequent questions.
" Ellen, are not you tired ? Hadn't you better li
down now ?'You'll be sifck keeping up so long, Ellen. "
" No, no, dear; I'm not tired, " I returned continuallj
Perceiving me immovable, she essayed another niethoi
of showing her disrelish for her occupation. It changes
to yawning and stretching, and —
*^ Ellen, I'm tired. "
*'Give over, then, and talk, " I answered.
That was worse: She fretted and sighed, and looket
at her watch till eight, and finally went to her room
completely overdone with sleep, fudging by her peevish
Aeavy look, and the constant nibbmg ^\v^ m^cXfe^ ^
%r eyfes. The following tiight sYie ^letna^ moT^ \
J WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2^
f patient still, and on the third from recovering my. con
pany she complained of a headache and left me.
thought her conduct odd ; and having remained alor
a long while, I resolved on going and inquiring whetb
she were better, and asking her to come and lie on tl
sofa, instead of upstairs in the dark. No Catherii
could I discover upstairs, and none below. The servan
affirmed they had not seen her. I listened at M
Edgar's door ; all was silence* I returned to her apar
ment, extinguished my candle, and seated myself in tl
window.
The moon shone bright } a sprinkling of snow co^
ered the ground, and I reflected that she might possibl
have taken it into her head to walk about the garde
for refreshment. I did detect a figure creeping alor
the inner fence of the park, but it was not my your
mistress. On its merging into the light I recognize
one of the grooms,'. He stood a considerable perio <
viewing the carriage-road through the grounds, the
started off at a brisk pace, as if he had detected som
thing,: and xeappeared presently leading miss's ponj
and there she was, just dismounted, and walking by i
side. The jnan took his charge stealthily across tl
grass towards the stable* Cathy entered by the cas
fment window of the - drawing-room, and ghded nois
lessly up to where I awaited her. She put the doK
gaitJy to, slipped oft her saowy shoes, untied: her ha
and was proceeding, unconscious of my iespionage, i
lay aside her mantle, when I suddenly rose'and reveale
mjrself. The: surprise petrified her an instant; si
uttered an inarticulate exclaihation, and stood fixed.
" My dear Miss Catherine, " I began, too vividly ic
pressed by her recent kindness to break into a scol <
" where havfe you been riding out at this hour ? Ar
why should you try to deceive me by telling a. tale
Where have you beeta ? Speak ! **
" To the bottom of the pjairk, " sYife ^Vaxacofcx^^ *'
didn't tell a tale/'
''And nowhere eise ? " I demanded.
244 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
'* No, " was the muttered reply.
" O Catherine ! " I cried sorrowfully. " You know
you have been doing wrong, or you wouldn't be driven
to uttering an untruth to me. That does grieve me.
Fd rather be three months ill than hear you frame a
deliberate lie. "
She sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw
her arms round my neck. ^
" Well, Ellen, I'm so afraid of you being angry, " she
said. ** Promise not to be angry, and you shall know
the very truth. I hate to hide it. "
We sat down in the window-seat. I assured her I
would not scold, whatever her secret might be, and I
guessed it, of course ; so she commenced,^—
" I've been to Wuthering Heights, Ellen, and I've
never missed going a day since you fell ill, except thrice
before and twice after you left your room. I gave
Michael books and pictures to prepare Minny every
evening, and to put her back in the stable. You mustrft
scold Am either, mind. I was at the Heights by half*
past six, and generally stayed; till half-past eight, and
then galloped home. It was hot to amuse myself that
I went ; I was often wretched all the time. Now anii
then I was happy — once in a week perhaps. At first i
expected there would be sad work persuading you to
let me keep my word to Linton, for I had engaged to
call again liext day when we quitted him ; but as vcm
stayed upstairs on the morrow, I escaped that trouble.
While Michael was refastenihg the lock of the park door
in the afternoon, I got possession of the key, and told
him how my cousin wished me to visit him, because he
was sick and couldn't come to the Grange, and how papa
would object to my going ; and then I negotiated with
him about the pony. He is fond of reading, ajidhe
thinks of leaving soon to get married ; so'he offered, if
I would lend him books out of the library, to do what I
wished; but I preferred giving him my own, and that
^ati's£ed him better. ■'■ ■■ ^ ■ <
^'On my second visit Linton seetnedm^fevA^^^V^^
WUTHKRING HEIGHTS. 245
h (that is their housekeeper) made us a clean
i a good fire, and told us that, as Joseph was
prayer-meeting, and Hareton Eamshaw was off
dogs-^robbing our woods of pheasants, as I
terwards — ^we might do what we liked. She
me some warm wine and gingerbread, and
exceedingly good-natured ; and Linton sat in
chair, and I in the little rocking-chair on the
one, and we laughed and talked so merrily,
i so much to say. We planned where we would
^hat we would do in summer. I needn't repeat
ause you would call it silly,
time, however, we were near quarrelling. He
pleasantest manner of spending a hot July day
\ from morning till evening on a bank of heath
liddle of the moors, with the bees humming
about among the bloom, and the larks singing
)verhead, and the blue sky and bright sim shin-
ily and cloudlessly. That was his most perfect
heaven's happiness. Mine was rocking in a
[reen tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright
uds flitting rapidly above, and not only larks^
itles, and blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos
)ut music on every side, and the moors seen at
e, broken into cool, dusky dells, but close by
3lls of long grass undulating in waves to the
nd woods and sounding water, and the whole
ake and wild with joy. He wanted all to lie
asy of peace ; I wanted all to sparkle and dance
ious jubilee. I said his heaven would be only
:, and he said mine would be drunk ; I said I
11 asleep in his, and he said he could not breathe
and began to grow very snappish. At last we
try both, as soon as the right weather came ;
we kissed each other and were friends.
sitting still an hour, I looked at the g;ce,^l xowss.
mooth uncarpeted floor, and tYiow^X. \vc3W t^^'^i
> e to play in if we removed tYve \aXAfe% ^xA^
on to call Zillah in to help x^is, axvA. ^e'^^ " ^
246 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
a game atblind-ni,an's buff. She should tfy to catch. us
you used to, you know,= Ellen. He wouldn't. Tbei
was no pleasure in.it, he said.. But he consented to pda
at ball with me. We found two in a cupboard, among
heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores, an
shuttlecocks. One was marked C. and the other H.
wished to have the C, because that stood for Catherin <
and the H. might be for Heathclifi, his name ; but tt
bran came out of H., and'Linton didn't like it, I bes
him constantly, and he got cross again, and coughed, an
returned to his chair. That night, though, he easily n
covered his good-humour. He was charmed with t\i
or three pretty songs — y(mr songs, Ellen ; and when
was obliged to go he begged and entreated me to con
the following evening, and I promised. Minny and
went flying home as hght as air^ and I dreamt <
Wuthering Heights and my sweet darling cousin ti
morning.
** On the morrow I was sad^ partly because you wei
poorly, and partly that I wished my father knew an
approved of my excursions ; but it was beautiful mooi
light after tea, and as I rode on the gloom cleared,
shall have another happy evening, I thought to myseji
and, what delights me more, my pretty Linton wUl,
trotted up their garden, and was tumuig round to th
back, when that fellow Eamshaw met me, took my bridl <
and bade me go in by the front entrance. He patte
Minny's neck, and said she was a bonny beast, and aj
peareid as if he wanted me to speak to him. I only tol
him to leave my horse alone, or else it would kick hin
He answered in his vulgar accent, * It wouldn't do mite
hurt if it did, " and surveyed its legs with a smile,
was half inclined to make it try ; however, he move
o£E to open the door, and as he raised the latch he looke
up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupi
mixture of awkwardness and elation,— r
"'Miss Catherine, I can read yon now.'
"''Wonderful I'I exclaimed. * Pioj \e\. \3ks\\fcax ^qn
y^^ ar^ grown clever.'
I
r:i'Haret
ill "'-A]
^J that he
si " M
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2^
15 J " He spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the nam'
'Hareton Earashaw.'
And the figures ?'I cried encouragingly, perceivii
he came to a dead. halt.
cannot tell them yet,* he answered.
• Oh, you dunce !'I ;Said, laughing heartily at his failur <
n:( " The fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lip
cifand a scowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertai
e£ whether he might not join in my mirth — whether it wei
c: not pleasant familiarity, or what it really was, contemp
rc I settled his doubts by suddenly retrieving my gravit
\r and desiring him to walk away, for I came to see Lintoi
1 f not him. He. reddened — I saw that by the moonlight-
rt: dropped his hand from the latch, and skulked off, a pi(
I j ture of mortified vanity. He imagined himself to be i
cl accomplished as Linton, I suppose, because he coul
tii spell his own name j and was marvellously discomfite
that I didn't think the same. "
ri: " Stop,. Miss Catherine dear!'* I . interrupted. "
0^ shall not scold, but I don't like your. conduct there. .
■ you had remembered that Hareton was your cousin {
much as Master Heathcliff, you would have felt how in
f proper it was to behave in that way. At lea$t, it wi
praiseworthy ambition for him to desire to be as., accon
plished as Linton, and probably he did not learn merel
to show ofE. You had made him. ashamed of his ignx
ranee before, I have no doubt, and he wished to remed
it and please you. To sneer at his imperfect attemj
was very bad breeding. Had you been brought'up i
his circumstances, would you be less rude ? He was i
quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were, an
I'm hurt that he should be despised now > because thi
base Heathclift has treated him so vmjustly. "
" Well, EUen^ you won't cry about it, will yo^ ? " si
exclaimed, surprised at my eamestneiss, " But wai
and you shall hear if he conned .his A B C to ple.aa^ tcs
and if-rit were worth while being cwiX lo Ni?^fe \yociXfc-
entered. Linton was lying on the eeV^Xe, ^lA V^ & .
up to welcome me. ,
248 WUTHTJRING HEIGHTS.
"'Vm ill to-night, Catherine, love/ he said ;'and you
must have all the talk, and let me listen. Come and
sit by me. I was sure you wouldn't break your word,
and I'll make you promise again before you go.'-
" I knew now that I mustn't tease hiin, as he. was ill ;
and I spoke softly, and put no questions, and avoided
irritating him in any way. I had brought some of ihy
nicest books for him. He asked me to read a little of
oiie, and I was about to comply, when Eamshaw burst
the door open, having gathered venom with reflection.
He advanced direct to us, seized Linton by tlie arnii
and swung him off the seat.
"'Get to thy own room I'he said, in a voice almost
inarticulate with passion ; and his face looked swelled
and furious.'Take her there if she comes to see thee ;
thou shalln't keep me out of this. Begone wi'ye both !'
" He swore at lis, and left Linton no time to answer,
nearly throwing him into the kitchen ; and he clenched
his fist as I followed, seemingly longing to knock me
down. I was afraid for a moment, and I let one volume
fall ; he kicked it after me, and shut us ooit. I heard a
mialignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld
that odious Joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and
quivering.
" * I wer sure he'd sarve ye out ! He's a grand lad !
He's getten t'raight sperrit in him ! He knaws--^ay; he
knaws as weel as I do — ^who sud be t'maister yonder ! Ech^
ech, ech ! He made ye skift properly ! Ech, «ch, ech ! *
"'Where must we go ?'I asked of my cousin, dis-
regarding the old wretch's mockery.
" Linton was white and trembling. He was not pretty
then, Ellen— oh no 1 He looked frightful, for his thin
face and large eyes were wrought into an expression of
frantic, powerless fury. He grasped the handle of the
doorj and shook it ; it was fastened inside.
"'If you don't let me in I'll kill you 1 if you don't
Jet me in I'll kill you I'he rather shrieked than said.
'^ew7 / devil I FU kill you \ TW ViW^wxV
'^Joseph uttered his croaking \aug\i aft««v. ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 349
"'Thear, that's t* father !'he cried. -'That's father !
We've alias summut o'either side in us. Niver heed,
Hareton, lad — dunnut be'feard — ^he cannot get at thee !'
" I took hold of Linton's hands and tried to pull him
iway, but he slmeked so shockingly that I dared not
proceed. At last his cries were choked by a dreadful
& t of coughing. Blood gushed from his mouth, and he
fell on the ground. I ran into the yard, sick with terror,
md called for Zillah as loud as I could. She soon heard
ne. She was milking the cows in a shed behind the
)am, and hurrying from her work she inquired what
here was to do. I hadn't breath to explain. Drag-
ipiag her in, I looked about for Linton, Eamshaw had
xrnie out to examine the mischief he had caused, and
\e was then convejdng the poor thing upstairs. Zillah
uid I ascended after him ; but he stopped me at the
jop of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in — I must go
lome. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, and I
vould enter. Jb^eph locked the door,^^ and declared I
ihould do * no sich stuff,'and asked me whether I were
bahn to be as mad as him.'I stood crying till the house-
keeper reappeared. She afiirmed he would be better in
I bit, but he couldn't do with that shrieking and din ;
ind she took me and nearly carried me into the house.
" Ellen, I was ready to tear my hair off my head. I
obbed and wept so that my eyes were almost blihd;
md the ruffian you have such sympathy with stood
opposite,, presuming every now and then to bid me
wisht,'and denying that it was his fault ; and finally,
rightened by my assertions that I would tell papa, and
hat he should be put in prison and hanged, he com-
nenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide his
owardly agitation. Still I was not rid of him. When
:t length they compelled me to depart, and I had got
ome hundred yards off the. premises, he suddenly issued
rom the shadow of the roadside, and e\v & si) & fc,^ ^^^Knscc^
jid took hold of me.
'''Miss Catherine, I'm ill grieved,'\ie \ie%^^.'^
s rayther too bad'■ -
25^ WOTHERING HEK^HTS.
'" I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking pethi
he would murder me. He let go,'thundering one of
horrid curses, arid I galloped hoitie'more ihan .half «
of my senses,'• ■ A .■ .',
*'1 didn't bid you good-night that evening, anc
didn't go to Wuthering Heights the next'. I wished
go ^xceediii^lv, but I- was strangely excited, and dreac
to hear that Linton was dead, " sometimes, and sometir
shuddered at'the thought of encbunt^rilng Hareton. •
the third day I took cotid*age— at lesist I couldiiH b
l < mger isuspense, and stole oS once mxare. i went at f
o'clock, and walked,'fancying I might m'anage to en
into the house and u^ to Linton^ room unobserv
However, the dogs gave notice of my aj^oach. Zil
received me, and saying * the lad was mending nice:
showed me into a small, tidy, carpeted apartment, wh <
to my inexpressible joy,- 1 beheld Linton laid on a Hi
sofa, reading one of > < my books. But he would neit
speak to me nor look at rtie through a whole hour, Elle
he has such an xmhappy temper. And what quite c
founded me, when he did open his mouth it was toUl
the falsehood that I had occasioned the uproar, a
Hareton was Inot to blame! Unable to reply, exo
passionately, I got up and walked from the room,
sent after me a faint * Catherine !'He did not tecl
oh being ansfwered so. But I wouldn't turn back ; fc
the motrbw was the second day on which listayed
hom^, neatly determined to visit him no more. Bui
was so-'riiiserabie- going to bed and getting'up^'and ne
hearing anything about him, that my resolution mel
into air before it was properly formed. It -had appea:
wron^ to take the journey once, now it seemed wr <
to refrain. Michael came to ask if he must sad
Minny; I said'Yes,'and considered myself doin§
duty as she bore me over the hills. I was " forced
pass the front windows to get to the coiirt r it > ^as
use trying to conceal my presence.
'*'Young master is in the Tio\ise; s^A Z^^Jcv, ^
«w^ me making for the parlour. 1 vicat isv. ^£;arK
haps
> i his
[ out
nd
WUTHERING HEIGHT &
was there also, but he quitted the room directly,
ton sat in the. great armchair half asleep. Walkini
to the fire, I. began in a serious tone, partly meanii
to be true, — ^
As you don't like me, Linton, and as you thi
in-i 1 — J — — — » » — J — —
x(i tci come on purpose to hurt yau, and pretend that I c
adec every, time, this is our last meeting. Let us say g
imes bye ; and tell Mr. Heathcliff that 570U have no wis!
On sefe me, and that he mustn- 1 invent any more falseh
bear on the subject.'
: five **'Sit down and take 570ur hat off, Catherine,
;reer= answered.'You are so much happier, than I am,
-ved oaght to be better. Papa talks enough of my de
illah] ^^4 shows enough scorn of me to make it natui
:ely. should doubt myself. I doubt whether I am not
lere geflier as worthless as he calls me frequently ; and
iittlc I feel so cross and bitter, I hate everybody ! 1
ther worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, all
len :, always, and if you choose you may say good-bye ; y
con-j get rid of an annoyance. _ Only, Catherine, do me
itter
and
:ep:
He
kon
md
at
t it
ver
ted
justice : believe that if I might be as sweet, an^
kindj and as good as you are, I would be — as willii
and more so, than as happy and as healthy. And be
that your kindness has made me love you deeper
if I deserved your love; and though I couldn't
cannot help showing my nature to you, I regret it
repent it, and shall regret and repent it till I cSe ! .'
■ " I felt he spolie the. truth, and I felt I must foi
him ; and though he should quarrel the next mon
I must forgive him again. We were reconciled ; bn
edl cried, both of us, the whole time I stayed — ^not ent
ng I for sorrowj yet I was sorry Linton had that distc
He f nature. He'll never let his friends be at ease^ and
a I never = be at ease, himself. I have always'gone tc
to J little parlour since, that night, because his fathei
10 / tumea the day after.
'" About three times, I think, we liave > d^^x\ twk^
/hopeful, as we were the first evening', \ > cv^ " s^^'^X
visits were dreary and troubled — ^novj voVCa Vv=
252 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ness and spite, and now with his sufferings; but V\
learned to endure the former with nearly as little resen
ment as the latter. Mr. Heathcliff purposely avoic
me ; I have hardly seen him at all. Last Sunda;
indeed, coming earlier than usual, I heard him abiisir
poor Linton cruelly for his conduct of the night befor
I can't tell how he knew of it, unless he listened. Lintc
had certainly behaved provokingly. Howeverj; it W5
the business of nobody but me, and I interrupted M
Heathcliff's lecture by entering and telling him so. B
burst into a laugh, and went away, sa5dng he was g!a
I took that view of the matter. Since tiien Fve tol
Linton he must whisper his bitter things. Now, Eflea
you have heard all. I can't be preveiiteid'from going 1
Wuthering Heights except by inflicting misfery on t\i
people ; whereas, if you'll only hot tell papa, my goii:
need disturb the tranquillity of none. You'll'not tel
will you ? It will be very heartless if you da, " .-
" I'll make up my mind on that point by to^morro^
Miss Catherine, " I replied. " It requires some study
and so I'll leave you to your rest, and go tWnk it oven
I thought it over aloud, in my ihaster^s preseno
walking straight from her room to his, arid. relating tl:
whole story, * with the exception of her conversatioi
with her cousin, and any mention of/Hareton. M
Linton was alarmed and distressed, imore than he wouJ
acknowledge to me. In the morning Catherine leame
my betrayal of her confidence, and she learned alsoithi
her secret visits were to end. In vain she wept- an
writhed ajgainst the interdict, and implored her fath <
to have pity on Linton. All she got to comfort her wi
a promise that he would write and give him leave 1
come to the Grange when he pleased, but explaining thj
he must no longer expect to see Catherine at Wutherir
Heights. Perhaps, had he been aware of his nephew
disposition and state of health, he would have seen f
to withhold even that slight consolatiou.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 251
CHAPTER XXV.
" These things happened last winter, sir, " said Mrs.
Dean — *'hardly more than a year ago. Last wintei
I did not think, at another twelve montiis'end, I should
be amusing a stranger to the family with relating them !
Yet who laiows how long you'll be a stranger ? You're
[Jtoo yoimg to rest always contented, living by yourself.
] and I some way fancy no one could see Catherine Lintor
and not love her. You smile ; but why do you look sc
lively and interested when I talk about her ? and wh^
have you asked me to hang her picture over your fire-
place ? and why-

" stop, my good friend ! " I cried. " It may be very
possible that / should love her, but would she love me r
I doubt it too much to venture my tranquillity by run-
ning into temptation. And then my home is not here,
"'m of the busy world, and to its arms I must return.
Go on. . Was Catherine obedient to her father's com-
mands ? "
" She was, " continued the housekeeper. " Her affec-
tion for him was still the chief sentiment in her heart ;
and he spoke without anger — he spoke in the deep tender-
^ ness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils and
foes, where his remembered words would be the only
aid that he could bequeath to guide her. He said tc
me a few days afterwards, —
" * I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call.
Tell me sincerely what you think of him. Is he changed
for the better, or is there a prospect of improvemeni
as he grows a man ?'
" * He's very delicate, sir,'I replied,'and scarcely
likely to reach manhood; but this I can say, he does
not resemble his father. And if Miss Catherine had tbs
misfortune to marry him, he would tio\. \ife \3^^otA\s!
control unless she were extremely and iocX\^!^^ *vcv^
gent However, master, you'll have p\eiv\. " ^ cA ^ilvK^!
fet acquainted with him, and see wYveOciec \Nfc " ^
254 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
suit her. It wants four years and more to his being c
age/
Edgar sighed, and walking to the window, looked ou
towards Giramerton Kirk. It was a misty afternoon
but the February snn shone dimly, and we could jus
disrtingmsh the two fir-trees in the yard, and the sparel;
scattered gravestones.
. " I've prayed often, " he half soliloquized, " for th
approach of what is coming, and now I begin to shrinl
and fear it, I thought the memory of the hour I cam'
down that glen a- bridegroom would be less sweet thai
the anticipation'that I was soon, in a few months, o
possibly weeks, to be carried up and laid in its lond;
hollow. Ellen, IVe been very happy with my littl
Cathy ;= through winter nights arid sununer days sh
was a living hope at my side. But I've been as happ
miising < by mjrself among those stones, under that ol <
church, lying through the long June evenings on th
^een moimd of her mother's grave, and wishing, yean]
mg for the time when I might lie beneath it. Wha
can I do for Cathy ? How must I quit her ? I'd nc
card one moment for Linton being Heathcliff's son, nc
for his taking her from me, if he could console herfc
my loss. I'd not care that Heathcliff gained bis eAdi
and trimnphed in robbing me of my last blessing. Bu
should Linton be unworthy— only a feeble tool to hi
father— I cannot abandon her to ham: And, hard thoug
it be to crush her buoyant spirit, I must persevere i
making her sad while I live, and leaving her solitar
when I die. Darling ! I'd rather resign her to Goc
tod lay her in the -earth before me. "
" Resign her to God as it is, sir, " I answered; " an
if we should lose you — which may He forbid — under H
providdnce I'll stand her friend and counsellor to tt
kst. Miss Catherine is a good girl ; I don't fear thi
she will, go wilfully wrong; and people -who do the
duty ar^ always finally rewarded. "
'Spring advanced, yet my master ^^X\\e\ed xvo ^
trength, though he resumed Yds vraSto Va t\i^ %^a
WUTHERTNG HEIGHTS. 25 1
with his daughter. To her mexperienced notions thia
itself was a sign of convalescence. And then his cheelj
was often flushed, and his eyes were bright ; she feli
sure of his recovery. On her seventeenth birthday W
d not visit the churchyard. It was raining, and ]
ibser^'^ed,— ^ ,'i
'* You'll surely not go out to-night, sir ?'* 1
" e answered, — 1
*'No, I'll defer it this year a little longer/* i
He wrote again to Linton, expressing his great desirt
see him ; and had the invalid been presentable, I'v|
doubt his father would have permitted him to comes
it was, being instructed, he returned an answer, inti^
ting that Mr, HeathdiH objected to his calling a1
Grange ] but his uncle* s kind remembrance delightec
and he ho]?ed to meet him sometimes in bis rami
and personally to petition that his cousin and h|
aght not remain long so utterly divided, {
That part of his letter was simple and probably hi?
Heathclifi knew he could plead eloquently fcfi
therine's company, then, i
I do not ask/'he said, " that she may visit jhere
it am I never to see her because my father forbicE
to go to her home, and you forbid her to come tc
£ ? Do, now and then, ride with her towards th <
ghts, and let us exchange a few words in your prea
:e. We have done nothing to deserve this separation::
and you are not angiy with me^you have no reason tc
dislike me, you allow, yourself. Dear uncle, send m^
a kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywher^
you please, except at Thrushcross Grange. I believe ai
interview would convince you that my father's charactej
ts not mine. He affirms I am more your nephew thai
(lis son ; and though I have faults which render me un
worthy of Catherine, she has excused them, and for hei
sake you should also. You inquire aitei Tn?^'W-?^^. ^
is better; but while I remain cut ofi Itom ^ Vo^,^«
doomed to solitude or the society oi t\iOse ^\:i^t^ ^^^^^
._ J „^._- ^^ iikj & m^, how can 1 be c\i & eTiu\'^^^^
^^^m
25^ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not. conseD
to grant his request, because he could not accomjaa
Catherine. He said in summer perhaps they might meei
Meantime he wished him to continue writing at intervals
and engaged to give him what advice and comfort h
was able by letter, being well aware of his hard positio:
in his family. ; Linton compHed,- and had he been un
restrained, would probably have spoiled all by filling hi
epistles with.. complaints and lamentations; but hi
father kept a- 6harp watch over him, and of course in
sisted on every line that my master sent being showi
So, instead of penning his pecuhar personal suffering
andi distresses, the themes constantly uppermost in hi
thoughts, he harped on the cruel obligation of bein
held asunder from his friend and love, and gently inti
mated that Mr, Linton must allow an interview sooi
on he; should fear he was purposely deceiving him wit
empty promises. - ■ . =
Cathy was a powerful ally at home, and between ther
they at length persuaded my master to acquiesce in thd
having a ride or a walk together about once a weel
under my guardianship, and on the moors nearest th
Grange — for Jime found him still declining. Thou^
he had set aside yearly a portion of his income for ma
young lady's foirtune, he had a natural desire that sb
might retain— or at least return in a short time to- <
the house of her ancestors ; and he considered her onl
prospect of doing that was by a union with his heii
He had no idea that the latter was faiUng almost a
fast as himself, nor had any one, I believe. No doctc
visited the Heights, and no one saw Master Heathclii
to make report of his condition among us. I, for m
|)art, began to fancy my forebodings were false, and tha
he must be actually rallying, when he mentioned ridiii
and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in pui
suing his object. I could not picture a father treating
dying child as tyrannically and wick^^-^ ^s 1 ^iterward
^^^ Heathchfi had treated \nm, to eom^ > (N
WParent eagerness, his efforts redou\ > Ain% > i > cvfe mo\^ -
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 25/
minently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threat-
aied with defeat by death.
CHAPTER XXVI,
Summer was already past its prime when Edgar reluc-
tantly yielded his assent to their entreaties, and Catherine
md I set out on our first ride to join her cousin. It was
I close, sultry day, devoid of sunshine, but with a sky
too dappled and hazy to threaten rain ; and our place
if meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone by thecross-
ibads. On arriving there, however, a little herd-boy,
fepatched as a messenger, told us that —
'■'" Maister Linton wer just o'this side th* Heights, and
b'd be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further. "
'*Then Master Linton has forgot the first injimction
rf his imcle, " I observed. " He bade us keep on the
trange land, and here we are off at once. "
f " Well, we'll turn our horses* heads round when we
pach him, " answered my companion; " our excursion
jhall He towards home. "
> But wheft we reached him, and that was scarcely a
piarter of a mile from his own door,. we foimd he had
to horse, and we were forced to dismount and leave ours
to graze. He lay on the heath awaiting dur approach;
ind did not rise till we came within a few yards. Then
le walked so feebly, and looked so pale,. that I immedif
ttely exclaimed, — l
" Why, Master Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjo}dng
ramble this morning. How ill you do look ! " r
Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishmentt
he changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of
larm, and the congratulation on their long-postponed
leeting to an anxious inquiry whether he were worse
lan usual.
" No; better— better I " he panted, tteK!Jb\si\%,'asv^ ^^
ining her hand as if he needed its SMppoxt., ^N^x^fc^
]ge blue eyes wandered timidly . over Yvex^ 1 > ^ ^^^^
3S8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ness round, them transforming to haggard wildness the
languid expression they once possessed. :.
" But you have been worse/'persisted his cousin—
" worse than when I saw you last. You are thinner,
and "
*'Fm tired/'he interrupted hurriedly. It is too hot
for. .walking; let us rest here. And in the morning I
often feel sick. Papa says I grow so fast/'
Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he. reclined
side her " .
" ijhis is something like your paradise, " said She, ma
ing = an effort at cheerfulness. " You recollect the
days we'agreed to spend in the place and way
thought pleasantest ?, This is nearly yours, only
aare.clouds; -but then they are so soft and mellow, it j
nicer, thanisiiilshine. Next week, if ydu can, we'll rid!
down to the Grange Park and try mine/'
Linton did not, appear to remember what she talk^
of, and he had. evidently great dif & cUlty in sustainiti
any -kind bf.convfersation. His lack of interest in th
subjects she started, and his equal incapacity, to oMjj
tribute to her entertainment, were so obvious that stt
could : not conceal her disappointment. , , An indefini^
kltdration had come over his whole person and manneaj
The pettishness that might be caressed into fondties!
had yielded to a listless apathy ; there, was less of th^
peevish .te^^)er of a child which frets and teases on puc
p6se to be soothed, and more of the self-absorbed niorose
ness of a confirmed invalid, repelling consolation, anc
jceady to regard, the good-hunibured mirth of others ai
an insult ■ . Catherine perceived; as well as I did, that hn
)ield it rather a'punishment than a gratification to endun
bur company, and she made no scruple of proposing
E~ resently, to depart. : That proposal unexpectedly rouse <
inton from his lethargy, and threw him into a Strang
state of agitation. He glanced fearfully towards th^
Heights, begging shfe would temam aj^othet half-hour a
^east
'" Bat I tZunk, " said Cathy, ** you'dXse.iDDt^ «»cD & sa
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 259
able at home than sitting here ; and I cannot amuse
yovL to-day, I see, by my tales, and songs, and chatter.
You have grown wiser than I in these six months ; you
have little taste for my diversions now — or else, if I could
amiise you, I'd wilHngly stay. "
" Stay to rest yourself,*'he replied.'*: And,. Catherine,
don't thank or say that I'm very unwell. It is the heavy
weather and heat that make me dull ; and I walked about,
before you came, a great deal for me. Tell vmcle I'm in
tolerable health, will you ? "
" I'll tell him that you say so, Linton. I couldn't
torm that you are, " observed my young lady, .wonder-
ing at his pertinacious assertion of what was evidently
tn untruth.
" Arid be here again next Thursday, " continued he,
shunning her puzzled gaze. ** Arid give him my thanks
for permitting you to come — my best thanks, Catherine.
And — and if you did meet my father, and he asked you
about me, don't lead him to suppose that I've been
extremely silent and stupid. Dori't look sad and down-
cast, as you are doing ; he'll be angry/'.
[ " I care nothing for his anger, " exclaimed Cathy,
miagining she would be its object.
" But I do, " said her cousin, shuddering.- " Don't pro-
voke him against me, Catherine, for he is.v^ry hard. "
" Is he severe to you. Master Heathcliff ? " I inquired,
" Has he grown weary of indulgence, and passed f roni
passive to active hatred ? " [
Linton looked at me, but did not answer; and after
keeping her seat by his side ariother ten minutes, during
which his head fell drowsily on bis breast, and he uttereq
nothing except suppressed moans of exhaustion or painj
Cathy began to seek solace in looking for bilberries^ and
sharing the produce of her researches with me. She dicj
not offer them to him, for she saw further notice would
Dnly weary and annoy. -^
" Is it half an hour now, Ellen ? " she whispered id
my ear at last. " I can't tell why we sho\ikis\a.^ .'^^S
adeep > and papa, will be wanting us bacV:. "
26b WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Well, we must not leave Mm asleep, " I answerei
" Wait till he wakes, and be patient. You were mighty
eager to set off, but your longing to see poor Litttoi
has soon evaporated.'* •'
" Why did he wish to see me ? *'returned Catherine^
" In his Grossest humours, formerly, I liked him better
than I do in his present curious mood. It's just as if S
were a task he was compelled to perform — this interview
— for fear his fa:ther should scold him. But Fm hardljj
going to come to give Mr. Heathcliff pleasure, whatevd
reason he may have for ordering Linton to imdergo thii
pfenance. Arid though I'm glad he's better in healths
I'm soriy he's so much leiss pleasant, arid so much lea
affectionate to me. "'J
** You think he is better in health, then ? " I said. " ;
'*■ Yes, " she answered, " because he alwaj^s made sud
a great deal of his sufferings, you know. He is
tolerably well, as he told me to tell papa; but
better, very likely. "
** There you diffier with me. Miss Cathy/'I remarke
*'I should conjecture him to be far worse. "
: Linton here started from his slumber in bewildered
terror, and asked if any one had called his name. 4
" No,'• said Catherine, " unless in dreams. I cannd
conceive how you manage to doze out of doors, in th«
momiiig. " -
" I thought I heard my father, " he gasped, glancing
iip to the frowning nab above us. " You are sure no-
body spoke ? "
I ** Quite sure, " replied his cousin. *'Only Ellen and ]
%^ere disputing concerning your health. Are you trul]
^ronger, Linton, than when we separated in winter!
if you be, I'm certain one thing is not stronger — you;
fegard for me. Speak ! Are you ? "
^ The tears gushed from Linton's eyes as he answered
'* Yes, yes, I am ! " And still under the spell of th
imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up and down t(
^etect its owner.
^ Cathy rose. " For to-day we m\is\. \ > ^t\.r ^^'saiN
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 26 1
^d I won't conceal that I have been sadly disap-
intedwith our meeting, . though TU. mention it to no-
dy but you — ^not that I stand in awe of Mr. Heathcliff. "
" Hush! " murmured Linton; ** for God's sake, hush!
;'s coming. " And he dimg to Catherine's arm, striv-
l to detain her ; but at that announcement she hastily
jengaged herself and whistled to Minny, who obeyed
r like a dog.
" I'll be here next Thursday, " she cried, springing to
e saddle. " Good-bye,— Quick, Ellen !. "
And so we left him, scarcely conscious of • our departure^
absorbed was he in anticipating his father's approach.
Before we reached home, Catherine's displeasure soft-?
ed into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret,
•gely blended with vague, uneasy doubts about Linton's
tual circumstances, physical and social, in which I
rtook, though I counselled her not to say much, for
second journey would make us better judges. My
ister requested an account of our ongoings, tm
phew's offering of thanks was duly delivered, Miss
thy gently touching on the rest. I also threw little
ht-on his inquiries, for I hardly knew what to hide an4
lat to reveal.
CHAPTER XXVIL'
:VEN days glided away, every one marking its cours^
'the henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton'^
ite. The havoc that months had previously wrought
IS now emulated by the inroads of hours. Catherini^
; would fain have deluded yet, but her own quid;
irit refused to delude her ; it divined in secret, an^
ooded on the dreadful probability, gradually ripening
to certainty. She had not the heart to mention her
le when Thursday came round. I mentioned it for
r, and obtained permission to order her owl ol ^w > rL%^^
r the library, where her father stopped a ^OT\.\AXOfc ^aSssj
'he brief period he could bear to s\\. w^— - " aiA ^
mber, had become her whole wot\d. S^^ ^cvxQSi^
262 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
each moment that did not find her bending over
pillow or seated by. his side. Her coimtenance g
wan: with watching and sorrow, and my master gla
dismissed her to what he fiattered himself would b
happy change of scene and society, drawing com:
from the hope that she would not now be kft entii
klone after his ;death.
He had a fixed idea, I guessed by several observati
h^ let iall, that, as his nie^hew re^mbled hiiii in pen
he would resehible him- in mind, for Linton's let
bore ifew oar > nb > indications of his defective charac
AJnd I^itjaroiighpiarddnahle weakness, refrained fromi
recting ihe di-ror, asking, myself what good there wouk
indisturfebag his. last moments With Information'thai
had ncdthsr powei'.nOr opportunity to turn to aCcoimi
i We deferrediOur excursion till the aftemoon-r-a gol
afternoon: of August, every i breath from the hills so
of life that it seemed^ whoever respired it, .though. dy
might r^viv^. Catherine's face was just like the la
scape-r-shaditws akd sunshine flitting . over it in rj
suocfession ;f but the shadows rested longer, and the j
^ine-'was • mow transient ; and her ^oor little , b
reproached itself for even that passing forgetfulnesi
its cares.
r We discerned Liijiton watching at. the same spot
nad selected beforfe. My yotfng tniktress alighted,
told me ithatj as she was resolved to stay a very, li
While, T had better hold the pony and remain on. ho
back; but I dissented.'I wouldn't risk losing sighi
jthe charge committed to me a minute, so we climbed
Slop^'of heath'together. Master Heathcliff received
with greater animatibti on this occasion — not the anii
fion of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it loo
more like fear. <
: " It is late, " he said, speaking short and with d
f^nhy; " Is not yoiir father very ill ? I thought'
wmjidn't come. "'
^''[ fVAy wcfn't you be candid ?'* crved C^^X^wenxNfc, ^
ow/uff her gre^ting^ *'*• Why.catvtkot ^c > \i sa.^ ^\.
WUTHERING'WEIGHTS.
don't want me ? It is strange, Linton, that for the
second time yon have brought me here on putpose, ap-
parently, to cfistress ns both, and for no reason besides/'
Linton sfiivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating
lalf ashamed ; hot his cousin's patience was not sufi & -
ient to endure this enigmatical behaviour,
" My fatlier is very Ul, " she said; " and why am I
ailed from his bedside ? Why didn't you send to ab-
olve me from my promise when you wished I wouldn't
ceep it ? Come t I desire an explanation ; playing and
lifling are completely banished out of my mind, and I
!an*t dance attendance on your affectations now 1 " i
*'My affectations I'^ he murmured ; " what are they ?
r'or Heaven's sake, Catherine, don't look so angry I
! > espise me as much as you please, I am a wotthless^j
»wardly wretch — ^1 can't be scorned enough; but Vm
U)o mean for your auger, Hate my father, and spare
ne for contempt. "
" Nonsense I " cried Catherine in a passion. *'Foolish,
aUy boy I And there t he trembles, as if I were really
joing to touch himi Yon needn't bespeak contempt,
Linton ; anybody will have it spontaneously at your
service. Get off I I shall return home. It is folly
iraggiug you from the hearthstone, and pretending—r
yhat do we pretend ? Let gd my frock I If I pitied
fon for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
spurn sucb pity.— Ellen, tell him how disgraceful thii
iQuduct is. — Rise, and don't degrade yourself into au
Ibject reptile— £^(?w'i/'^ i
With streaming face and an expression of agony Lintoa*
md thrown his nerveless frame along the ground. H^
seemed convulsed with exquisite terror.'T
" Oh t " he sobl^edt *'I cannot bc^ar it! Catherine^
Catherine, I'm a traitor too, and I dare not tell you !
But leave me, and 1 shall be killed ! Dear Cathiirin^',
ny life is in your hands ; and yon have said you loved
me. and if you did, it wouldn't \iarm ^ou. ^o\i^ ^^
r^ then, kihd, sweet good Cafhetme'^ Kr.^ ^^'ws
an 9mm7J consen t— and he'll let me & \ & Wv\}s\ ^q'O.v " ■

264 WUTHERING^ IfEIGHTS.
My young lady, on witnessing his intense angu
stooped to raise him. The old feeling of indul§
tenderness overcame her vexation, and she grew til
oughly moved and alarmed.
" Consent to what ? " she asked. " To stay ? ,'
me the meaning of this strange talk, and I will.'
contradict your own words and distract me. Be c
and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on 5
heart. You wouldn't injure me, Linton, would yt
You wouldn't let any enemy hurt'me, if you could ;
vent it ? I'll believe you are a coward for yourself,
not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend. "
" But my father threatened nie, " gasped the. 1
clasping his attenuated fingers j " and I dread hiir
dread Mm I T dare not tell ! " -:
. " Oh, well, " said Catherine, with scornful compass
" keep, your secret. Fm no coward. Save your
I'm not afraid. "
. Harmagnanimity provoked his teiars. He wept wil
kissing her supporting hands, and yet could not sunu
courage to speak out. I was cogitating what the mysi
might be, ^d determined Catherine should never st
to benefit him or any one else^ by my good- will, wl
hearing a rustle among the ling, I looked up and
Mr. Heathcliff almost close upon us, descending
Heights. He didn't cast, a glance tbwards my c
paniohs, though they were sufficiently near for Lint
sobs to be audible,. but hailing nie in the almost hej
tone he assumed to none besides, and the sincerity
which I couldn't avoid doubting, he said, —
" It is something to see you so near to my ho
Nelly. How are you at the Grange ? Let us h
Ihe rumour goes, " he added in a lower tone, " that Ec
Linton is on his deathbed ; perhaps they exaggerate
illness.? "
** " No. My master is dying, " I repHed ; " it is 1
esiough. A sad thing it will be for us all, but a bles!
Mr him/'
''Hoiv long will he last, do vou t\mvV > " \ve ^?^?^«^
WUTHERING HEIGHTSi 265
" I don't know/'I said.
" Because, " he continued, looking at the two young
people, who were fixed under his eye— Linton appeared
as if he could not venture to stir or raise his head, and
Catherine could not move on his account — ■ " because
that lad yonder seems determined to beat me, and I'd
thank his uncle to be quick and go before him. Hullo !
has the whelp been playing that game long ? I did give
him some lessons about snivelling. Is he pretty lively
with Miss Linton generally ? "
I " Lively ? No ; he has shown the greatest distress, "
1 answered. " To see him, I should say that, : instead
»f rambling with his sweetheart on the hills, he ought to
be in bed, under the hands of a doctoi:. "
" He shall be in a day or two, " muttered Heathchfl
" But iirst-^ Get up, Linton ! get up ! " he shouted.
;*'Don't grovel on the ground there. Up, this moment ! "
'Linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm
of helpless fear, caused by his father's glance towards
Ikkn, I suppose ; there was nothing else to produce such
^ttiiliation* He made several efforts to obey, but his
little strength was annihilated for the time,'and he fell
ffcack again .with a moan, Mr. Heathclifl advanced, and
lifted him to lean against a ridge of turf.
" Now, " said he, with curbed ferocity, " I'm getting
togry, and if you don't command that paltry spirit ol
yours Damn you ! get up directly ! "
" I will, father, " he panted. " Only let me alone, or
I shall faint, I've done as you wished, I'm sure. Cath^
erine will tell you that I— *that I^ — have been cheerful,
—Ah ! . keep by me, Catherine. Give me your hand. "
" Take mine, " said his father. *'Stand on your feet^
There now; she'll lend you her arm. That's right; look
at her, — You would imagine I was the devil himself. Miss
Linton, to excite such horror. Be so kind as to walk
home with him, will you ? He shudders if I touch him. "
" Linton dear ! " whispered Catherine, " I can't go
to Wuthering Heights ; papa has ioTbiddaiv rae,, " ^A?^^
not harm you. Why axe you so alraid " ? "
266 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" I can never re-enter that house/'he answe
■M'm not, to re-enter it without you. "
'• /* Stop; ! " cried his father, " We'll respect Catheri
filial acruples.--^Ndly, take him in* and I'll iollow ;
advice concerning the doctor without delay. " .
I ?'You'll do well, " reiplied I. " But I must remaiii ^
my. niistress ; to mind your son is not my business. "
:. ** You are very stiff, " said HeathclifE— *'I know t]
but jfou'U force me to pinch the baby and make it sgi
tiefore it moves your charity.-r*Come, then, my, 1
Ar© you willing to return, escorted by me ? " :
He apprdached onceimorci and made as it he..w
seize the fragile being ; but, shrinking back, Linton c
to his cousin, and. implored her to accompany him,
a . irantic limportunity that admitted no denial. I
ev«r . I disapproved, I cDuldn ; t hinder her. Indeed^
could she haiVe refused him herself ? What was fi
him. with dread we! had no means of discerning;
there/hfe wasvipowerless under its gripe, and any addi
seemed ciapable of shocking him into idiocy. )Ver€fa(
the threshold. Catherine walked in, and I stood wai
till she ihad.coridiKDfed the invalid, to a chair, expec
her otat immediately, when Mr. HeathclifE, pushing
forward, exclainted,'— f- ^■
'. ** My hou^e is not stricken with the plague, Nelly,
f havie a mind to he hospitable to-day* Sit down,
^llow me to shut the d6or. "
He shut and locked it also. I started.':'
•'^* You shall havie tea before you go home, " he ad
*'I am by myself.'Hareton is gone with some cj
to the Uees, and Zillah and Joseph are off on a jou:
of pleasure-; and though I'm used to being aloni^,
leather have some interesting company, if I can ge
—Miss- Linton, take your, seat by hint. I give you \
fiihave; -the present is hardly worth accepting, bi
have; nothing else to ofEen ; It is Linton I mean. ]
sJbe does state I . It-s* odd! what a savage feeling I 1
^ Anything, that seems afraid pi mei. " ft.^^ 1 \«i^Tv ■
■^^ere Jaws are Jess'strict and ^asfce^\fe*^ d-amtsjA.^
WUTHERJNG HEIGHTS. 267.
t myself to a slow vivisection of those two as an
ling's amusement. "
[e drew in his breath, struck the table,, and swore
dmself, " By hell, I hate them ! "
I'm not afraid of you ! " exclaimed Catl^rine, wha
id not hear the latter part of his speech. ■ She stepped
e up, her black eyes flashing with passion and resolur-
^ " Give me that key. I will have it ! " she- said,
wouldn't eat or drink here if I were starving. "
[eathdiff had the key in his hand that remained on
table. He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise
ler boldness, or possibly reminded by her voice and
ice of the person from whom she had inherited it.
snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
ing it out of his loosened fingers ; but her action re-
sd him to the presents— he recovered it speedily.
Now, Catherine Linton, " he said, " stand off, or I
r knock you down, and that will make Mrs. Dean
i. " :
Regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand
its contents again. " We wiU go ! " she repeated,!
rting her utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles
elax; and finding that her nails made nx) impressionj
applied her teeth pretty sharply. HeathcHff . glanoe(|
ne a glance that kept me from interfering. a moment,
tierine was too intent on his fingers to notice his face^
opened them suddenly, and resigned the object of
> ute ; but ere she had well secured it, he seized her
1 the liberated hand, and pulling her on his knee,
linistered with the other a shower of terrific slaps on
1 sides of the head, each sufficient to have fuilfille4
threat, had she been able to fall. \
t this diabolical violence I rushed on him furiously^
ou villain ! " I began to cry, " you villain ! " A
:h on the chest silenced me. I am stout, and soon
out of breath ; and what with that and. the rage, ji
gered dizzily back, and felt ready to suffocate or to
5t a blood-vessel. The scene was over in t^wo TKcsoiwe^*^
lerine, released, put her two tiands to \MSt \fe\s\:^^i^^
26^ WUTHERINa HEIGHTS,
and looked just as if she were not sure whether her ea
were off or on. She trembled like a reed, poor thin
and leant against the table, perfectly bewildered.'
" I know how to chastise children, you see,'* said t]
scoundrel grimly, as he stooped to repossess himself
the key, which had dropped to the floor.'* Go to Lint(
now, as I told you, and cry at your ease. I shall be yoi
father to-morrow — all the father you'll have in a fe
days — and you shall have plenty of that. You a
bear plenty.; you're no weakling. You shall have
daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a temper in yoi
eyes ag^n ! "
Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down ai
put her burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. H
cousin had shnmk into a comer of the settle, as quiet
a mouse, congratulating himself, I dare say, that the cc
rection had lighted on another than him. Mr. Heat
difi, perceiving us all ccmfoimded, rose, and expeditious
made the tea himself. The cups and saucers were la
teady. He poured it out, and handed me a cup.
" Wash away your spleen, " he said. " And help yoi
own naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned, thou^
I prepared it. I'm going out to seek your horses. "
Our first thought, on his departure, was to force i
exit somewhere. We tried the kitchen door, but th
was fastened outside. We looked at the windows ; th(
were too narrow for even Cath^s little figure.
" Master Linton, " I cried, seeing we were regular
imprisoned, " you know what your diabohcal father
after, and you shall tell us, or I'll box your ears, as 1
has done your cousin's, "
" Yes, Linton, you must tell, " said Catherine. *'
was for your sake I came, and it will be wickedly u
grateful if you refuse. "
• " Give me some tea — I'm thirsty — and then I'll U
Eou, " he answered. — " Mrs. Dean, go away. 1 dor
ke you standing over me. — Now, Catherine, you a
]ietting your tears fall into my cup. I won't drink thj
Give me another. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 267
at myself to a slow vivisection of those two as an
ining's amusement. "
le drew in his breath, struck the table,, and swore
himself, " By hell, I hate them ! "
* I'm not afraid of you ! " exclaimed Catherine, who
lid not hear the latter part of his speech. She stepped
36 up, her black eyes flashing with passion and resolu-
a.''Give me that key. I will have it! " she said,
wouldn't eat or drink here if I were starving, "
leathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on
: table. He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise
her boldness, or possibly reminded by her voice and
nee of the person from whom she had inherited it.
i snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
ting it out of his loosened fingers ; but her action re-
led him to the presents— he recovered it speedily.
* Now, Catherine Linton, " he said, " stand off, or I
ill knock you down, and that will make Mrs, Dean
d. " : ,
Regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand
i its contents again. *'We wiU go ! " she repeated,^
xting her utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles
relax; and finding that her nails made no impression^
! applied her teeth pretty sharply. HeathcHff glanced
me a glance that kept me from interfering a moment.'
therine was too intent on his fingers to notice his f accf
opened them suddenly, and resigned the object of
pute ; but ere she had well secured it, he seized her
h the hberated hand, and pulling her on his knee,
ninistered with the other a shower of terrific slaps on
h sides of the head, each sufficient to have fufelle4
threat, had she been able to fall. \
^t this diabolical violence I rushed on him furiously,
?'ou villain ! " I began to cry, " you villain I " A
.ch on the chest silenced me. I am stout, and soon
: out of breath ; and what with that and. the rage, I
ggered dizzily back, and felt ready to sxiSocaXa 53^^.
•St a blood-vessel. The scene was ovex m .\7»o =^aq
benne, released, put her two hands W\MaEt. \«
2/0 WUTIIBRING HEIGHTS.
would he think ? He'll be distressed already. I'll cit
break or burn a way out of the house. Be qu
You're in no danger. But if you hinder me — -^ Lm:
I love papa better than you I "
The mortal terror he felt of Mr. Heathcliff *s ai
jestored to the boy his coward's eloquence. Cathe
was near distraught ; still .she persisted that she n
go home, and tried entreaty in her turn, persuading
to subdue his selfish agony. While they were thus O'
pied, our gaoler re'ehtered.
** Your beasts have trotted, off,'^ he said, " and-
Now, Linton ! snivelling again ? What has she I
doing to you? Come, come; have done, and gei
bed. In a month or two, my lad, you'll be able to
her back her present tyrannies with'a. vigorous hj
You're pining for pure love, are you not ? — nothing
in the wotld; and she shall have you ! . There, to t
Zillah won't be here to-night. You must undress y
^eH, Htish ! hold your noise ! Once in your own re
I'll not come near you. You needn't fear. By chj
you've managed tolerably. I'll look to the rest. "
He spoke these words > holding the door open for his
to pass ; and the latter achieved his exit exactly i
spaniel might which suspected the person who atter
on it of designing a spiteful squeeze. The lock
xesecured. • Heathcliff approached the fire, wh^re
piistress and I stood silent. Catherine looked up,
instinctively raised her hand to h6r cheek. His ne
bourhood rievived a painful sensation. Anybody
Would have been incapable of regarding the childish
'jvith sternness, but he scowled on her and muttered^-
.. ** Oh! you are not afraid of me ? Your courag
'well disguised ; you seem damnably afraid \ "
^^ " I am afraid now, " she replied, ** because, if I s
papa will be miserable ; and how can I endure mal
him miserable when he — ^when he Mr. Heath <
^/ me go home ! I promise to marry ^ Lintoik-; p
^onld Hke me to, and I love \ttm. WVcv ^^^^
f^sli to force me to do whiit Til waUtigV/ ^ < ^ ^^ ^^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS 2/1
Let him dare to force you I'* I cried. " Thiere's law
le land — thank God there is! — though we be in an
)f-the-way place. Td inform if he were my own
And it's felony, without benefit of clergy. "
Silence ! " said the ruffian; " To the de'sm with yoiu
our! I don't want you to speak. — Miss Linton, I
enjoy myself remarkably in thinking your father
be miserable; I shall not sleep for satisfaction,
could have hit on no surer way of fixing your resi-
e imder my roof for the next twenty-four hours than
ming me that such an event would follow. As to
promise to. marry Linton, I'll take care you shall
it, for you shall not cjuit this place till it is fulfilled. "
Send Ellen, then, to let papa know I'm safe ! "
limed Catherine, weeping bitterly ; " or marry me
Poor papa I— Ellen, he'll think we're lost. What
we do ? "
^Jot he ! He'll think you are tired of waiting on
and run off for a little amusement, " answered
:hcliff. " You cannot deny that you entered my
e of your own accord, in contempt of his injiuictions
le contrary. And it is quite natural that you should
e amusement at your age, and that you would weaiy
iirsing a sick man, and that man only your father,
erine, his happiest days were over when your days
n. He cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the
i (I did, at least), and it would just do if he cursed
as he went out of it. I'd join him. I don't love
How should I ? Weep away. As far as I can see,
ill be your chief diversion hereafter, imless Linton
2 amends for other losses; and your provident
it appears to fancy he may. His letters of advice
consolation entertained me vastly* In his last hfe
nmended my jewel to be careful of hisi and kind to
vhen he got her. Careful and kind — that's paternal.
Linton requires his whole stock of care arid kixsiisiSK^
himseJf. Linton can play tiie \W.Wfc \?gT«c > ^- ^'^.
undertake to torture any tmirvbet oi caXs*, S^^ *^^
be drawn and their claws paced. Xa > i^'^'^ " ^
2/2 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
to tell his uncle fine tales of his kindness when you ge
home again, I assure you. "
" You're right there ! " I said : *'explain your son*
character; show his resemblance to yourself; and then
I hope, Miss Cathy will think twice before she takes th <
cockatrice ! "
** I don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualitie
now,'^ he answered, " because she must either accep
him or remain a prisoner, and you along with her, til
your master dies. I can detain you both, quite concealed
here. If you doubt, encourage her to retract her word
and you'll have an opportunity of judging. "
" I'll not retract my word, " said Catherine. " I'l
marry him within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcros
Grange afterwards. Mr. Heathcliff, you're a cruel man
but you're not a fiend ; and you won't, from mere malice
destroy irrevocably all my happiness. If papa thought
had left'him on purpose, and if he died before I returned
could I bear to live ? I've given over crying, but I'r
going to kneel here at your knee; and I'll not get up
and I'll not tiake my eyes from your face tiU you loo)
back at me! No, don't turn away-^^o look! You']
see nothing to provoke you. I don't hate you. I'li
not angry that you struck me. Have you never love <
anybody m all your life, uncle ? never ? Ah I you mus
look once. I'm so wretched, you can't help being sorr
and pitjdng me. "
" Keep your eft's fingers off, and move, or I'll kicl
you 1 " cried Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.'* !'<
rather be hugged by a snake. How the devil can yoi
dream of fawning on me ? I detest you ! "
: He shrugged his shoulders, shook himself, indeed, a
if his flesh crept with aversion, and thrust back his chaii
while I got up and opened my mouth to commence ;
downright torrent of abuse. But I was rendered dumi
in the middle of the first sentence by a threat that
should be shown into a room by myself the very nex
pliable I uttered. It was growing dark. We heard
sound of voices at the garden gate. Ovii \vQS^.\v\xmfe^cK
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 273
instantly, fl'g had his wits about him ; wehsidiiot. There
was a talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.
" I thought it had been your cousin Hareton, " I ob-
served to Catherine. " I wish he would arrive. Who
knows but he might take our part ? "
" It was three servants sent to seek you from the
Grange, " said Heathcliif, overhearing me. " You should
have opened a lattice and called out ; but I could swear
that chit is glad you didn't. She's glad to be obliged to
stay, I'm certain. "
At learning the chance we had missed we both gave
vent to our grief without control, and he allowed us to
wail on till nine o'clock. Then he bade us go upstairs,
through the kitchen, to Zillah's chamber; and I whis-
pered my companion to obey. Perhaps we might con.
trive to get through the window there, or into a garret,
and out by its skylight. The window, however, was
narrow, Hke those below, and the garret trap was safe
from our attempts, for we were fastened in as before.
We neither of us lay down. Gathering took her station
by the lattice, and watched anxiously for naoming, a
deep sigh being the only answer I could obtain to my
frequent entreaties that she would try to rest. I seated
myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh
judgment on my many derelictions of duty, from which,
it struck me then, all the misfortunes of my employers
sprang. It was not the case in reality, I am aware, but
it was in my imagination that dismal night ; and I
thought Heathcliff himself less guilty than I.
At seven o'clock he came and inquired if Miss Linton-
had risen. She ran to the door immediately, and an-'
swered, " Yes. " *'Here, then, " he said, opening it, and
pulling her out. I rose to follow, but he turned the locki
again. I demanded my release.
" Be patient, " he replied. " I'll send up your breaks
fast in a while. " -
I thumped on the panels and rattled tYv«i\aX.Osv " ax^sg^
wd Catherine asked why I was stiW sYvaxV w^ " ^ ^^^'^
wsaned I mtist try to endure it aT\oti\e;t \\Qvvr \ -a-^^ " ^
274 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
went away. I endured it two or three hours. At lengt
I heard a footstep — not Heathcliff's.
*'Vve brought you something to eat/'said a voio
•'Oppen t'door !''
Complying eagerly,.! beheld Hareton, laden with foo
enough to last me all day.
" Tak it/'he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
" Stay one minute, " I began.
" Nay, " cried he, and retired, regardless of any:praj^j
I could pour forth to detain him.
And there I remained enclosed the whole day, and tt
whole of the next night, ond another, and anothe
Five nights and four days I remained altogether, seein
nobody but Hareton, once every morning ; and he vn
a model of a gaoler — surly and dumb, and deaf to evei
attempt at moving his sense of justice or compassion. ;
CHAPTER XXVm.
On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a difierei
step approached, lighter and shorter, and this time tl
person entered the room. It was Zillah, donned in h^
scarlet shawl, with a black silk bonnet on her head, as
a willow basket swung to her arm,
*'Eh, dear, Mrs. Dean ! " she'exclaimed. " Wei
there is a talk about you at Gimmerton. I never thougl
but you were sunk in the Blackhorse marsh, and miss
with you, till master told me you'd been found, and he'
lodged you here ! What ! and you must have got c
an island, sure. And how long were you in the hole
l)id master save you, Mrs. Dean ? But you're not s
thin — you've riot been so poorly, have you ? "
** Your master is a true scoundrel ! " I replied. " Bi
he shall answer for it. He needn't have raised that tal
It shall all be laid bare. "
''What do you mean ? " asked Zillah. *'It's not h
taJe, They tell that in the viklajge, ^\ > ouV ^o\x\ \ife\!
^ost in the marsh; and I calls to E.«msJaaw, ^\mb!
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2/5
come in, * Eh, they's queer things, Mr. Hareton, happened
since I went off. It's a sad pity of that hkely young
lass, and cant Nelly Dean.'He stared. I thought he
had not heard aught, so I told him the rumour. The
master listened, and he just smiled to himself and said,
*If they have beea in the marsh, they are out now^
Zillah. Nelly Dean is lodged, at this minute, in. your
room. You can tell her to flit when you go up ; here is
the key. The bog- water got into her head, and she
would have run home quite flighty, but I flx^ her fill
she came round to her senses. You can bid her go to
the Grange at once, if she be able, and carry a message
fr6m me that her young lady Avill follow in time to attend
the squire's funeral.'" -
" Mr. Edgar is not dead?* I gasped. " O Zillah,
Zillah! "
" No, no. Sit you down, my good mistress, " she re-
plied; " you^re . right sickly yet. He's not dead.
Dr. Kenneth thinks, he may last another day. I met
him on the road and asked. "
Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things
and hcistened below, for the way was free. On entering
the house I looked about for some one to give information
of Catherine. The place was filled with siinshine, and
the door stood wide open, but nobody seemed at hand.
As I hesitated whether to go off at once or return and
seek my mistress, a slight cough drew my attention to
the hearth. Linton lay on the settle, sole tenant, suck-
ing a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
with apathetic . ^yes. " Where is Miss Catherine ? " 1
demanded sternly, supposing I could frighten hini into
giving intelligence by catching him thus alone. He
sucked on like an innocent.
" Is she gone ? " I said.
" No, " he repUed; " she's upstairs. SVv«5;^ tssA. \si ^
we won't Jet her/'
''You won't let her, little \d\ol\** \ ^ " ^^'^^^
Direct me to her room immediateVv, ot V^^ ^^^^
Jj^ out sharply. "'
2/6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS:
** Papa would make you sing out if you attempted
get there, " he answered. " He says Fm not to be S(
with Catherine. She's my wife, and it's shameful tl:
she should wish to leave me. He says she hates mie a
wants me to diej that she may have my motiey^ B
she shan't have it,, and she shan't go home — she ne^
shall ! She may cry and be sick as much as s
pleases !'* ! r
'.: He'resumed his former occupation, closing his lids
iJ he. meant to drop asleep.
" Master HeathcHff, " I resumed, " have you forgoti
all Catherine's kindness to you last winter, when y
dfl & rmed you loved her; and when she brought you boc
and sang you songs, and came many a time throu
wind and show to see you ?. She wept to miss one eV(
ing, because you would be disappointed; and yOvL i
then that she was a hundred times too good to y(
and now you believe the lies youir father tells, thou
youknow,h^ detests you both. - And you join him ajgai]
her. That's fine gratitude, is it not ? "
Th(B corner of . Linton's mouth fell, and he took 1
sugar-candy from his lips- ;
" Did shie come to Wuthering Heights because: J
hated you ? " I continued. " Think for yourself 1
to your money,, she does not even know that you'v
have any. And you say she's sick, and yet you: les
her alone. up there in a strange house — you who hs
felt what, it is to be so neglected 1 You could pity y(
own sufferings, and she pitied them too, but you wo
pity hers 1 I shed tears. Master Heathcliff, you see
an elderly woman, and a servant merely ; and you, af
pretending such affection, and having reason to worsl
her almost, store every tear you have for yourself, a
lie there quite at eeise. Ah ! you're a heartless, self
boy! "
/ " 7 can't stay with her, " he answered crossly. *'
^ot stay by myselt She cries so 1 caiv'V \ > ^^x \\.. A
^^ won't give over, though I say YW C3X\ to^ i-aJCc & x
^ct call him once, and he threatened to stx^sx^^X
WUTHERINO'HEIGHTS. 2/7
she was not quiet ; but she began again the instant he
left the room, moaning and grieving all night long,
though I screamed for vexation that I couldn't sleep. "
" Is Mr. Heathcliff out ? " I inquired, perceiving that
the wretched creature had no power to sympathize with
his cousin's mental tortures.
" He's in the court, " he replied, " talking to Dr.
Kenneth, who says uncle is d37ing, truly, at last. I'm
glad, tor " I shall be master of the Grange after him.
Catherine always spoke of it as her house. It isn't hers.
It's mine. Papa says everything she has is mine. All
her nice books are mine. She offered to give me them,
and her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I would
get the key of our room and let her out; but I told her
she had nothing to give — they were all, all mine. And
then she cried, and took a little picture from her neck,
^uid said I should have that — two pictures in a gold case,
'on one side her mother, and on the other uncle, when they
were yoimg. That was yesterday. I'said they ^^t
[mine too, and tried to ^et them from her. The spiteful
thing wouldn't let me ; she pushed me off, and hurt me.
\l shrieked out; that frightens her. She heard papa
'coming, and she broke the hinges and divided the case,
iand gave me her mother's portrait.'The other she
[attempted to hide ; but papa asked what was the matter,
and I explained it. He took the one I had away, and
ordered her to resign hers to me. She refused, and he —
he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain, and
crushed it with his foot. "
" And were you pleased to see her struck ? " I asked,^
having my designs in encouraging his talk. i
" I winked, " he answered. " I wink to see my father
strike a dog or a horse ; he does it so hard. Yet I wa4
glad at first. She deserved punishing for pushing me;
But when papa was gone she made me come to the win--
dow, and showed me her cheek cut on the inside, against
her teeth, and her mouth filling with blood ; and then
she gathered up the bits of the pictuie, ^xvd ^^t^ " ^xnj
sat down with her face to the wall, and ^e. \Nas» ^«n
278 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
spoken to me since, and I sometimes think she can't
speak for pain. I don't like to think so ; but she's a
naughty thing for crying continually, and she looks so
pale and wild, I'm afraid of her. "
** And you can get the key if you choose ? " I said. .
" Yes, when I am upstairs, " he answered. " But I
can't walk upstairs now. "
. ** In what apartment is it ? " I asked.
" Oh, " he cried, " I shan't tell you where it is ! It
is our secret. Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, is to
know. There ! you've tired me ; go away, go away
And he turned his face on to his arm, and shut his eye$
again.
I considered it best to depart without seeing, Mr. Heath;
cliff, and bring a rescue for my young lady from thr
Grange. On reaching it, the astonishment of my felloii*^ |
servants to see me, and their joy also, was intense ; anil
when they heard that their little mistress was safe, tm\
or three were about to hurry up and shout the news aa
Mr. Edgar's door ; but I bespoke the announcement tm
it myself. How changed I found him even in those Um
6scys ! He lay an image of sadness and resignatioil
waiting his death. Very young he looked ; though his
actual age was thirty-nine, one would have called him
ten years younger, at least. He thought of Catherine, for
he murmured her name. I touched his hand and spoke.. ](
" Catherine is coming, dear master, " I whispered
" She is alive and well, and will be here, I hope, to-night "
I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence. He
:half rose up, looked eagerly round the apartment, and
ithen sank back in a swoon. As soon as he recovered I
.related our compulsory visit and detention at the Heights.
1 said Heathcliff forced me to go in, which was not quite
true. I uttered as little as possible against Linton, nor
Idid I describe all his father's brutal conduct, my inten-
'tions being to add no bitterness, if I could help it, t.Q his
already overBowing cup.
Ife divined that one of his enenv^'s ^urpcysfta ^^a ti:i
^ure the personal property, as weW as \^ esXaXa, Xs

WUTHERING HEIGHTa 279
3n, or rather himself ; yet why he did not wait till
s decease was a puzzle to my master, because ignorant
yw nearly he and his nephew would quit the world
igether. However, he felt that his will had better be
tered. Instead of leaving Catherine's fortune at her
¥n disposal, he determined to put it in the hands of
ustees for her use during life* and for her children, if
\B had any, after her. By that means it could not fall
I Mr. Heathcliff, should Linton die.
Having received his orders, I dispatched a man to
tch the attorney, and four more, provided with ser-
ceable weapons, to demand my young lady of her gaoler.
Dfth parties were delayed very late. The single Servian t
turned first. He said Mr. Green, the lawyer, was out
ben he arrived at his house, and he had to wait two
mrs for his re-entrance ; and then Mr, Green told him
J had a little business in the village that must be done,
it he would be at Thrushcross Grange before morning,
ae four men came back unaccompanied also. They
ought word that Catherine was ill — too ill to quit her
om — and Heathcliff would not suffer them to see her.
scolded the stupid fellows well for listening to that
le, which 1 would not carry to my master, resolving
take a whole bevy up to the Heights at daylight, and
Drm it literally, unless the prisoner w^ere quietly sur-
ndered to us. Her father shaU see her, I vowed, and
wed again, if that devil be killed on his own door-
Dnes in trying to prevent it t
HappUy I was spared the journey and the trouble,
had gone downstairs at three o* clock to fetch a jug of
iter, and was passing through the hall with it in my
tnd, when a sharp knock at the front door made me
mp. " Oh 1 it is Green,''I said, recollecting myself —
Duly Green;''and I went on, intending to send some-
idy else to open it ; but the knock was repeated, not
nd, and still importunately, I put the fug on the Vi-aKv*
BT and hRstened to admit him itv^?ie\l. TVl^ V^ksm^^
ion shone clear outside. It was i\ot t\itb ^Ve^^%\^ > ?^ " ^
sweet litHe mistress sprang on m^ tv & < l\i,'s.o'^'^^'^'^
28o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Ellen I Ellen ! is papa alive ? "
" Yes!''I cried — " yes, my angel, he is! God 1
thanked, you are safe with us again I'*
She wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs
Mr. Linton's room, but I compelled her. to sit down on
chair, and made her drink, and washed her pale fac
chajftng it intd a faint colour with my apron. Then
said I must go first and tell of her arrival, imploring h
to say she should be happy with'young Heathcliff. S)
stared, but soon comprehending why I counselled ■ h
to utter the falsehood, she assured me she would n
complain*
I couldn't abide to.be present at their meeting. I stbi
outside the chamber door a quarter of an hour, ai
hardly vientured near the bed tiien. All was compose
howeveir. ; Catheririefs despair was as silent as her fathei
joy. She supported him • calmly, in appeariance, and !
fixed on her features his raised eyes, that seemed dila
ing'with ecstasy.
. He. died blissfully, Mr. Lockwood; he. died so. Kh
ing'her cheek, he murmured, —
" I am goiiig to her; and you, darUng child,, sb
come to us, " and never stirred or spoke again, but cd
tinned that rapt, radiant gaze till his pulse imperceptit
stopped and his soul depaxtedl None coxild have notio
the exact mihute of his. death, it was'so entirely witho
a struggle* • >
Whether Catherine had spent her tears, or whetl
the grief were too weighty to let them flow, she sat the
dry-eyed till the sun rose ; she sat till noon, and wot
still have inemained brooding over that deathbed, but
insisted on her coming away and taking some repoi
it was well I succeeded in removing her, for at dinn«
time appeared the lawyer, having called at Wutheri
Heights to get his instructions how to behave. He h
Sold himself to Mr. Heathcliff ; that was the cause
jb/s delay in obeying my master's summons. Fort
hately, no thought oi worldly afiairs cioss^d \ > Qfc \a.\.\s
»/a4 to disturb him, after his daughtex^s ^rm^i.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 28]
Mr; Green took upon himself to order everything anc
everybody about the place. He gave all the servants bui
me notice to quit. He would have carried his delegated
authority to the point of insisting that Edgar Lintor
should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chape
with his family. There was the will, however, to hindei
that, and my loud protestations against any infringe-
ment of its directions. The funersd was hurried over
Catherine, Mrs. Linton Heathcliff now, was suffered tc
stay at the Grange till her father's corpse had quitted it
She told me that her anguish had at last spurrec
linton to incur the risk of liberating her. She heard the
itaen I sent disputing at the door, and she gathered the
I sense of HeathcUff's answer. It drove her desperate.
Linton, who had been conveyed up to the little parloui
k loon after I left, was terrified into fetching the key be-
I fore his father reascended. He had the cunning tc
j unlock and relock the door, without shutting it ; and wher
[he should have gone to bed, he begged to. sleep witl
Ifiareton, and his petition was granted for once. Catherine
[stole out before break of day. She dare hot try the doors,
lest the dogs should raise an alarm. She visited the
empty chambers and examined their windows, and luekilj
lighting on her mother's, she got easily out of its lattice.
and on to the ground by means of the fir-tree close by.
Her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape, not-
withstanding his timid contrivances.
CHAPTER XXIX.
The evening after the funeral, my young lady and 1
were seated in the library, now musing mournfully, one
of us despairingly; on our loss, now venturing conjee^
tures as to the gloomy future. i
We had just agreed the best destiny which could awail
Catherine would be a permission to continue resident a^
the Grange — ^at least during Linton's Me — ■\v!b\)e«\^'a^^'^^
to join her there, and I to remain as Yvows^ee^et.'V'
282 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to b
hoped for, and yet I did hope, and began to cheer ti]
under the prospect of retaining my home and my em
ployment, and, above all, my beloved young mistress
when a servant— one of the discarded ones, not 5 > et dfi
parted — crushed hastily in, and said ** that devil Heath
cliff " was coming through the court ; should he fastei
the door in his face ?
If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding
we had not time. He made no ceremony of knockini
or announcing his name. He was master, and avails
himself of the master's privilege to walk straight u
without saj^ng a word. The soimd of our informant'
voice directed him to the library. He entered, an
motioning him out, shut the door. .
It was the same room into which he had been ushered
as a guest, eighteen years before; The same moori shon
through the window, and the same autumn landscip
lay outside. We had not yet lighted a candlie, but aj
the; apartment was visible, even to the portraits on tB
wall — the splendid head of Mrs. Linton, and the gracefi]
one of her husband. Heathcliff advanced to the heartt
Time had little ialtered his person either. There was th
same man, his dark face rather sallower and more cote
posed^ his frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, ^
no other difference. Catherine had risen, with an in]
pulse to dash out, when she saw him.; ...
" Stop l " he said, arresting her by the arm. " N
more runnings away ! Where would you go ? I'm com
to fetch you home, and I hope you will be a dutifi
daughter, and not encourage my soh to further disc
bedience. I was embarrassed how to punish hiip whe
I discovered his part in the business-r-he's such a col
web, a pinch would annihilate him — b]at you'U see by hi
look that he has received his due. I brought him dow
one evening, the day before yesterday, and just set hii
JJ2 a chair, and never touched him afterwards. I ser
fiareton out, and we had the'room to cwi^Vje^, \tv\n
lours I called Joseph to carry him up a^am; ^xv^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 283
then my presence is as potent on his nervies as a ghost,
and I fancy he sees me often, though I am not near.
Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night by the
hour together, and calls you to protect him from me ;
and whether you like your precious mate or not, you
must come. He's your concern now ; I jdeld all my
interest in him to you. "
" Why not let Catherine continue here, " I pleaded,
" and send Master Linton to her ? As you hate them
both, you'd not miss them. They can only be a daily
plague to your unnatural heart " .
" I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange, " he answered,
I " and I want my children about me, to be sure. Be-
'sides, that lass owes me her services for her bread, I'm
inot going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after
Linton has gone. Make haste and get ready now, and
don't oblige me to compel you. "
.. " I shall, " said Catherine. " Linton is all I have to
Ubve in the world, ahd. though you have done what you
[pould to make him hateful to me, and me to him, you
^cannot make us hate each other. And I defy you to
hurt him when I am by, and I defy you to frighten me/'
" You are a'boastful champion, " replied Heathcliff,
" but I don't like you wdl enough to hurt him ; you shall
get the full benefit of the torment as long as it lasts,
ift is not I who will make him hateful to you ; it is his
own sweet spirit. He's as bitter as gall at your desertion
and it3 consequences. Don't expect thanks for this
noble devotion. I heard him draw a pleasant picture
to Zillah of what he would do if he were as strong as I.
The inclination is there, and his very weakness'will
sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength. "
" I know he has a bad nature, " said Catherme : " he'd
your son. But I'm glad I've a better, to forgive it-^
and I know he loves me, and for that te^aoxi Won^X^ixk
Mr. Heathcliff, you have nobody to \ove -^oxv.-, ^xA\tfs^
?ver miserable you make us, we shsSi ^'t > ^ \»n^
dvenge of thinking that your cruelty axvaes Vtoxsx -
Bsfer misery. You are miserable, ^e ^o\x xtf
284 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
lonely, like the devil, and envious like him ? Nobody
loves you — nobody will cry for you when yoii die. I
wouldn't be you/'.
Catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph. She
seemed to have made up her mind to enter into the spirit
of her futuire family, and draw pleasure from the griefs
of her enemies.
" You shall be sorry to be yourself presently, " said
her father-in-law, " if you stand there another minute.
Begone, witch, and get your. things I'•
She scornfully withdrew. In her absence I began to
be^ for Zillah's place at the Heights, offering to resign
mine to her ; but he would suffer it on no account. He
bade me be silent ; and then, for the first time, allowed
himself a glance round the room and a look at the pic-
tures. Having studied Mrs. Linton's, he said, —
" I shall have that home — not because I need it,
but^ " He turned abruptly to the fire, and continued,
with what, for lack of a better word, I must call a smite
—'* 1*11 tell you what I did yesterday. I got the sexton^
who was digging Linton's grave, to remove the earth
off her coffin-lid, and I opened iti I thought, once, I
would have stayed there. When I saw her face again —
it is hers yet — he had hard work to stir me; but he
said it would change if the air blew on it, and so I struck
one side of the coffin loose, and covered it up — not
Linton's side, damn him ! I wish he'd been soldered in
lead. And I bribed the sexton to pull it away when I'm
laid there, and sHde mine out too. I'll have it made so.
And then, by the time Linton gets to us he'll not laiow
which is which. "
" You are very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff ! " I exclaimed.
" Were you not ashamed to disturb the dead ? "
" I disturbed nobody, Nelly, " he replied, " and I gave
some ease to myself. I shall be a great deal more com-
fortable now, and you'll have a better chance of keeping
" ne underground when I get theie. T)\s.\Mx\i^^ \ifirl
^of She has disturbed me, mgVvt aiv^ ^^.^^^^movm^
rhteen years, incessantly, Temotse\es & V/,\3\^ < isV^^\^
KwuTHERiNt?'¥rifteHra 285
ternight I was tranquil, I dreamt I was sleeping
:be last sleep by that sleeper, with my heart stopped
Old my cheek frozen against hers. "
*'And if she had l:)€eii dissolved into earth, or w^orse,
Afhat would you have dreamt of then ?''I said;
** Of dissolving with her, and being more happy still/'
le answered. " Do you suppose I dread any change o{
[hat sort ? I expected such a transformation on raising
:lie lid, but Vm better pleased that it should not com-
iience till I share it. Besides, unless I had received a
listinct impression of her passionless features, that
strange feeling would hardly have been removed. It
^egan oddly* You know I was wild after slie'diedj and
iternally, from dawn to dawii, praying her to return to
(ne her spirit, I have a strong faith in ghosts ; I have
I cbtiviction that they can and do exist among us,
rhe day she was buried th^re came a fall of snow. In
rhe evening I went to the churchyard. It blew bleak as
winter; all rouBd was solitary. I didn't f^ar that her
fool of a husband would wander up the den so late, and
10 one else had business to bring them there. Being
ilone, and conscious, two yards of loose earth wa;i the sole
sarrier between us, I said to myself, * 111 have her in my
utns again 1 !f she be cold, Til think it is thi & north
rind that chills m & ; and if she be motionless, it is sleep,'
got a spade from the toolhouse, and began to delve with
ill my might. It scraped the coffin. I fell to work with
ny hands. The wood commenced cracking about the
trews, I was on the point of attaining my object,
i^hen it seemed that I heard a sigh from some one above,
:Iofee at the edge of the grave, and bending down,'If
can only get this off,'1 muttered,'I wish they may
hovel in the earth over us both !'anil I wrenched at it
nore desperately still. There was another sigh close at
ny ear, 1 appeared to fee! the warm breath of it dis-
ilacing the s!eet-laden wind, I knew no 1lvit\^ tl\\TV|, \^
mh and hlood was by ; but as cettaml^ a^ ^wi'^x^€n > <
ke approach to some substantial \K > d^ \iv " 0^*^ ^^
ou^h it cannot be edisoernfed. aa ofetiBATAN " V V^V^ ^
286 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Cathy was there — not under me, but on the €arth. ^
sudden sense of relief flowed from my heart througl
every limb* I relinquished my labour of agony, an(
turned consoled at once, unspeakably consoled^ He
presence was with me j. it remained while I refilled tb
gr & ve, and led me home. -You may laugh if you will
but I was sure I should see her there. I was sure, sb
was with me, and I could not help talking to her* Hayioj
reached the Heights, I rushed eagerly to the door, I
was fastened, and, I remember, that accursed Eamsha^
and my wife opposed my entrance. I remember stop
ping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurryini
upstairs- to my room and hers, I looked round impa
tientjy ; I felt her by me; I could cUmosi see hex, an
yet I coM not I I ought to have sweat blopcj then
from the anguish oi my yearning, from the fervour o
my supplications to have but one glimpse. I had no
one. She showed herselfi as she often was in life,, i
devil to me ! And since then, sometimes more aB(
sometimes less, Fve been the sport of that intolerahl
torture— infernal I keeping my nerves at such a stretcl
that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would loni
ago have relaxed, to the feebleness of Linton's* Whei
I sat in ttie house with. Hareton it seemed that on goiO)
out I should meet her ; when I walked on the moors
should meet her coming in j when I went from home
hastened to return* She must be somewhere at th
Heights, I was certain. . And when I slept in her cham
ber, I was beaten out of that* I couldn't lie there, fo
the moment I closed my eyes she was either outsid
the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering th
rooip, or even resting her darling head on the sam
pillow as she did'when a child, and I must open m;
lids to see. And so I opened and closed them a hundre
times a night, to be always disappointed. It racked hm
I've often groaned aloud, till tiiat old rascal Joseph n
doubt believed that my conscience was playing th
^e^d inside oi me. Now, ^nce \W^ ^^ecL \\ss:^ \\
pacWed—a, little. It was a sttanse w^ > j ol Y^!^mv^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 287
by inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths — to beguile
tne with the spectre of a hope through eighteen years ! *'
Mt, Heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead. His
liair clung to it, wet with perspiration ; his eyes were
& xed on the red embers of the fire, the brows not con-
tracted, but raised next the temples, diminishing the
grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting a peculiar
look of trouble and a painful appearance of mental
tension towards one absorbing subject He only half
addressed me, and I maintained silence, I didn't like
to hear him talk. After a short period he resumed his
meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it
against the sofa to contemplate it at better advantage;
and while so occupied Catherine entered, announcing
that she was ready, when her pony should be saddled,
** Send that over to-morrow, " said Heathcliff to me ;
dien turning to her, he added, " You may do without
your pony. It is a fine evening, and you'll need no
ponies at Wuthering Heights, for what journeys you
take your own feet will serve you. Come along. "
" Good-bye, EHen ! " whispered my dear Uttle mis^
tress. As she kissed me, her lips felt like ice, ** Come
and see me, Ellen ; don't forget. "
*'Take care you do no such thing, Mrs. Diean.l'^ said
her new father. *'When I wish to speak to you I'll come
here. I want none of your prying at my house. "
He signed her to precede him, and casting back a look
thatxut my heart, she obeyed I watched them from
the window walk down the garden. Heathcliff fixed
Catherine's arm under his, though she disputed the act
at firet evidently, and with rapid strides he hurried her
into the alley, whose trees concealed them.
CHAPTER XXX,
I HAVE paid a visit to the Heights, bvvl \ V-aN^ xvp\ ^'^kc
her since she left Joseph held tYie doox m \30S» ^^^
vhcn- J called to ask after her, aDd:vfo\3\d3it\«i^'K«.'^'^
288 WUTHERTNG HEIGHTS.
He said Mrs. Linton was *'tbrang, " and the mastei
not in. Zillah has told me something of the way
go on, otherwise I should h^dly know who was deai
who living.. She thinks Catherme haughty, anxlrd6€
like her, I canjguess.by het talk > : My young Uidy j
some'aid of her when she first came^ but A & , Heia4
told her to follow her own buskaeiss, and let his dau§
in-law look after herseH ;■ and; :?;iliah willingly acquie
being a narrow-minded, selfish woman. Catherine ev
a child's. annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with
tempt, and thus eiilisted my infonfiant. among her
mies as. securely a^ if she had done her some great w
I .had a Jong talk with Zillah . about six weeks a
little, before you came, one: day > ^hen we forgatherc
the'modr ;^ arid this is what she.told me. :
; *'The first thing Mrs. Linton did, " she said,'*.o]
arrival'at the Heights, Wafe torun upstairs, without
wishing, good-evening toi me and Joseph ; she ^hut
self into Linton's room, *and'remained till moi
Then, while the master: and Eamihaw were at breal
she entered'the housfe and asked all Sn* a qui-ter i
doctor might be setit-foq^ het cousfe was very ill.
*'* We know that,'answered Heathcliff ;'but hi
isnot^orth a fairtWg* and! won't'spend a farthii
him. " :^ ■•'-. ---r .'. ■'■■'i .^'.- ■, ■
**'But I calnnot tell how to do/ she said; *a
nobody will help md, he'll die;1
:•*'* Walk out of the room,'cried the master, * and 1
liever hear a word more about him. None here
what becomes of him. If you do, act the nurse ; i
do.: not, lock him upland leave him J*
**Then she. began- to bother me, and I said I'd
enough plague wifh the tiresome thing. We each
our tasks, and hers was to wait on Linton ; Mr, H
cHfi bade me leave that labour to her^ *
*'How they managed together t can't tell. I :
lie /retted a greAt deal j arid moaned hisseln nighl
dsy; amd she had precious \itt\e lest, ot\ft c.w3\dL
p Aer wbit & face and heavy eyes. Stoa ^TX!ifi? & n\e
WUTHERING. HEIGHTS. 289
into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she
would fain beg assistance. But I was not going to dis-
obey the master — I never dare disobey him, Mrs; Deto ;
and though I thought it wrong that Kenneth should not
be sent for, it was no concern of mine either to a^yise or
complain;, and I always refused to meddle. Once or
liwice,'after we had gone to bed, I've happened to open
ay door again and seen her sitting crying on the stars'
'top ; and then I've shut myself t in ^ick, for fear of
being moved to interfere. I ddd pity her then, I*m sure ;
sfill I didn't wish to lose my place, you know.
" At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber,
and frightened me out of my wits by saying, —
" Tell Mr. Heathcliff that his- spn is djdrig. - Tm
kire he is, this time. Get up instantly, and teU
Mm.'
" Having uttered this speech, she vanished . again. I
ky a quarter of an hour hstening and trembling. . Noth-
ing stirred — the house wias quiet.'.
" She's mistaken, I said to myself. He's got over it.
jl needn't disturb them; And I began to doze.: But my
Ueep was marred a second time by a sharp ringing of the
hell—- the only bell we have, put up on. purpose for lin-
ton ; and the master called tb me to see what was the
matter, and inform'them that: he wouldn't have that
noise repeated.
I delivered Catherine's message. He cursed to him-
^ adf , and in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle,
g and proceeded to their room. I followed. Mrs. Heath-
j dffi was seated by the bedside with her hands folded
I on her knees. Her father-in-law went tip, hdd tlie Ught
to Linton's face, looked at him, and touched him. After-
wards he turned to her.'•
"'Now, Catherine,'he said, * how do- you feel ? *
" She was dumb.
"'How do you feel, Catherine ? * he repeated.
"'He's safe, and I'm free,'she answ«:eidL.'\ ^csvSs.^
feel well, but/ she continued, ^tti ^ \i\\.\.eTt\es &'^
qoukbi't conceal,'you have left mfe ^\oxv^ ^^ %\.\n^.^
r
(390 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
againist death alone that I feel and see only death. ;.
feiel like death.*
" And she looked like it too. I gave her a little wini
Hareton and Joseph, who had been wakened by :tli
ringing and the sound of feet, and heard our talk froi
outside, now entered* Joseph was fain, I believe, of, th
lad'S removal; Hareton seemed a thought botherec
though he was more taken, up with staring at Catherwi
than thinking of Linton. But the master bade him get o
to bed again ; we didn't want his help; He afterwar < i
made Joseph remove the body to his chamber, and tdl
me to retiun to mine, and Mrs. HeatbclLfi remained b
herself*
'^ In. the morning he sent me to tell her she mtist com
down to breakfast She had imdressed, and appears
going to sleep, and said she was ill, at which I h^dl
wondered. I informed Mr. Heathcliff^ and he repUed,-
'*'Well, let her be till after the funeral, and go a
now and then to get her what is needful ; and as soo
as she seems better, tell me^* **
Cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to Zilla]
who visited her twice a day, and. would have been, rathe
more friendly, but her attempts at increasing kindries
were proudly and promptly repelled.
Heathcliff went up once to show her Linton's wil
He had bequeathed the whole of his and what had bee
her movable property to his father* The poor creatui
was threatened or coaxed into that act during her week
absence when his uncle died* The lands, being a mino
he could not nleddle with. However, Mr* HeathcB
has claimed and kept them in his wife's right and h
also — I suppose legally. At any rate, Catherine, dest
tute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.
" Nobody,*'said Zillali, " ever approached, her doo
except that once, but I ; and nobody a$ked anythir
about her* The fir^t occasion of her coming down ini
the house was on a Sunday afternoon. She had eric
out, when I carded up her d^nt^et, ftval ^^^-^ cqvjX & v'I bes
any longer being in the cold ; ^ud 1 \.o\4.\vfct > iXx^ xoaa
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29I
^as going to Thrushcross Grange, and Eamshaw and I
leedn't hinder her from descending ; so, as soon as she
leard Heathcliff's hors^ trot off, she made her appear-
nee, donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back
)ehind ber ears as plain as a Quaker. She couldn't
omb them out.
** Joseph and I generally go tp chapel on Sundays. "
The kirk, you know, has no minister now, explained
tfrs. Dean, and they call the Methodists'or Baptists'
dace (I can't say which it is) ^t Gimmerton a chapel.
* Joseph has gone, " she continued, *'but I thought proper
\o bide at home.; . Young folks are always the better
[or an elder's overlooking ; and Hareton, with all his
l)ashfulness, isn't a model of nice behaviour, I let him
Imow that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and
she had been always used to see the Sabbath respected,
K) he had as good leave his guns and bits of indoor work
done while she stayed. He coloured up at the news,
and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes. The train-
m1 and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute.
[ saw he meant to give her his company, and I guessed by
ins way he wanted to be presentable ; so, laughing as
[ durst not laugh when the master is by, I offered to
lielp him, if he would, and joked at his confusion. He
jrew sullen, and began to swear.
" Now, Mrs. Dean, " Zillah went on, seeing me not
pleased by her manner, " you happen think your young
ady too fine for Mr. Hareton, and happen you're right,
Imt I own I should love well to bring her pride a peg
lower. And what will all her learning and her dainti^
ness do for her now ? She's as poor as you or I— poorer,
I'll be bound. You're saving, and I'm doing miy little
ill that road. "
Hareton allowed Zillah to give him her aid, and she
Battered him into a good humour. So, when Catherine
irame, half forgetting her former insults, he tried to make
liimself agreeable, by the housekeeper's ^jccovmx,
** Missis walked in/'she said, *^ 5ca ctaSi ^^ ^xv \cnkSs
ad as high as a princess. I got up and oftftx^^'^^'^ " ^
292 WUtHERING HEIGHTS.
seat in the armchair. No, she turned up her nos
my civiUty. Earnshaw rose too and bade her coni
the settle, and sit close by the fire ; he was sure she
starved. ■
** * Fve been starved a month and more/ she answ <
resting on the word as scornful as she could.
**^And she got a chair for herself, and placed it
distance from both of us. Haviiig sat till she was w
she began to look round, and discovered a numbe
books in the dresser. She'was instantly upon her
again^ stretching to reach them ; but they were^ too
up. Her cousin, after watching her endeiavours a w
at last summoned courage to help her. She held
frock, and he -filled it with'the first * that came
hand.'
'**That was a great advance- for the lad. She di
thank him, still he felt gratified that she had acce
his assistance,: atid ventured'to stand behind- as she
aihined them, and bven tof aitoop and point out 1
struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they,
tainedv Nor was he daunted by the saucy style in w
she- jerked the.pag^ from his finger. He contented ]
self with going a bit farther back, and looking at
instead of the book.., She continued. reading, or see
for something to read. His attention became, by
grees, quite centred in the Study of her thicks s
curls. Her face he couldn't See, and she couldn't
him; And j perhaps not quite awake to what he-
but attracted like a child to a candle, at last he
ceeded from staring, to touching.; He put out his 1:
and stroked one curl, as gently as if it were a bird,
might have stuck a* knife into her neck, she started re
in such a taking.
*'* Get away this moment ! How dare you touch
Why are you stopping there ?'she cried in a ton
disgust. * I can't endure jrou ! I'U go upstairs a
If you come near me.'
''Mr. Hareton recoiled, looking as ioo\\^ ^ \ifc «:
fct He sat do\m in the settle vex:sf qyvv & \.» asA^^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 293
i turning over her volumes another half -hour,
ly Earnshaw crossed over and whispered to me, —
Will you ask her to read to us, Zillah ? I'm. stalled
ling naught ; and I do like — I could Hke to heiar
Dimnot say I wanted it, but ask of yourseln.'
Mr. Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma* am,'
i immediately.'He'd take it very kind — he'd be
L obliged.*
.he frowned, and looking up, answered, —
Mr. Hareton and the whole set of you will be
enough to imderstand that I rciject any pretence at
less yoU have the hypocrisy to off er 1 I despise
and will have nothing to say to any of you ! When
old have given my life for one kind word, even to
ne of your faces, you all kept off. But I won't
lain to you;'I'm driven down here by the cold,
ither to amuse j^u or enjoy your society^*
What could I ha'done ?'.began Earnshaw.'How
to blame ?'
Oh, you are an exception,* answered Mrs. Heath-
'I never missed such a concern as you.*
But I offered more than once, and asked,* he said,
ing up at her pertness—'I asked Mr. Heathcliff to
e wake for you *'
Be silent I 1*11 g6 out of doors, or anywhere, rather
have your disagreeable voice in my ear/ said niy
lareton muttered she might go to hell, for him,
unsHnging his giin, restrained himself from his
ay occupations no longer. He talked now freely
jh, and she presently saw .fit to retreat to her soli-
; but the frost had set in, and, in spite of heir pride,
ras forced to condescend to our company more and
However, I took care thiere should be no further
ing at my good nature. Ever since I've been as
IS herself, and she has,- no lover or Uker'amotii^ tas. %
;he does not deserve one, ioi, \et \Xi < en\ ^-^ ^Oa & X^-as^
to her, and she'il curl back Y?\\bo\3it t^'sj^'cN. c^ " ksss
She'll snap at the master hitr\se\i, SltA. ^ %P^
294 WUTHERING HEIGHT &
dares him to thrash her;: and the more hurt shdgets,
the more venomous she grows.'* ■ -. ]
At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I detferi
mined to leave my situation, take a cottage, ^dget
Catherine to come and live ^vith me ;'but Mr* HetsLthdifJ
would as soon permit that as he would set up Haretou
in an independent hause^ and I can see no remedy ai
present, unless she could marry again, and that schenM
it does not come within .my province to arrange.'■• r
Thus ended Mrs. Dean's story. Notwithstanding thfl
doctor's prophecy, I am irapidly recovering strength ; and
thoiigh it be only the second week in January, I propoe^
getting out on horseback in a day or two, and riding
over to Wuthering Heights to inform my landlord thai
I shall spend the next six months in London; and, if ini
likes, he may look out for another tenant to take thi
place after October.: I would not pass ianother winta
here for much.
CHAPTER XXXI.
YesterdaV was bright, calm, and frosty. I went to thi
Heights as I proposed. My housekeeper entreated: na
to bear a little note from her to her young lady, and ]
did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not conscioui
of anything odd in her request* The front door stobc
open, but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my las
visit. I knocked, and invoked Eamshaw from amon(
the garden beds* Hfc'unchained it, and I entered, Tb
fellow is as handsome a rustic ds need be seen* I tool
particular notice of him this time; but then he. doe
his best, apparently, to make the least of his advantages
I asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home. He answered
No, but he would be in at dinner-time. It was devei
o*clock, and I announced my intention of going in an(
waiting for bim, at which he immediatelY flun^ doswn hi
^oals and accompanied me, in the offvcfe oV Mi^*tOcA^'^

WITHERING HEIGHTS.
fe entered together. Catherine was there, making
telf useful in preparing some vegetables for the
proaching meal. She looked more sulky and less
idted than when I had seen her first. She hardly
sed her eyes to notice me, and continued her employ-
nt with the same disregard to common forms of
iteness as before, never returning my bow and good-
miing by the slightest acknowledgment,
'She does not seem so amiable/'I thought, " as Mrs^
an would persuade me to believe. She's a beauty,
s true, but not an angel/^ ^
Eamshaw surlily bade her remove her things to the
chen, " Remove them yourself/* she said, pushing
sm from her a£ soon as she had done, and retiring to
tool by the wndow, where she began to earve figures
birds and beasts out of the turnip parings in her lap*
ipproached her, pretending to deiire a view of the
rden, and, as I fancied, adroitly dropped Mrs. Dean^s
be on to her knee, unnoticed by Hareton ; but she
:ed aloud, " What is that ? " and chucked it off,
'A letter from your old acquaintance^ the housekeeper
the Grange, " I answered, annoyed at her exposing
^ kind deed, and fearful lest it should be imagined a
isive of my own. She would gladly have gathered it
at this information, but Hareton beat her. He seized
i put it in his w^aistcoat, sa3nng Mr, Heathcliff should
k at it first. Thereat Catherine silently tmrned her
e^f rom us, and very stealthily drew out her pocket-
idkerchief and applied it to her eyes ; and her cousin,
er struggling a while to keep down his softer feelings^
led out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her,
tm^jaciously as he could Catherine caught and per*
id it eagerly ; then she put a few questions to me
iceming the inmates, rational and irrational^ of her
mer home, and gazing towards the hills^ murmured
soliloquy,— .:
* I should like- io be riding Mmn.^ dowa ^^^\ ^
uld like to be cifmbing up there I 0\v\ ^tcv. fe^^-^
sM^, Hareton 1 " And ahe ^i^tit ^ " et yieVV^ " ^^
296 WUTHERING MBIGMTS.
back against the sill^ with half a yiawnand half a. sigh
and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness, neithei
caring nor knowing whether we remarked her.
** Mrs. HeathcUff, " I said, after sitting. some time mute
** you are not aware that I am an acquaintance of yours-
80 intimate that I think it strange you won't come anc
speak to me* My housekeeper never wearies of talkini
about and praising you,: and she'll be greatly disappointed
if I return with no neWs of or from you, except that yot
received her letter and said nothing; "
She appeared to wonder at thi^ ■speech, and asked,—
** Does Ellen; like you? " ; : .
** Yes, very well, " J replied hesitatingly,
•'* You must tell her, " , she continued, ** that I wouK
answer her letter, but I have no materials for writings
not even a book from which I might tear, a leaf . "
-i** No books I " I exclaimed, ** How do you contrive
to live here without them? if I may take the libert]
to iilquire.: Though provided. with a large library, I'n
frequently^ very dull at the Grange. Take my. book
away, and Ishould'be desperate. "'
** I was. always; reading when I had them, " said Cath
erine.; •/* and Mr. Heathcliif never reads, so he took i
into his head to destroy my books. . I have hot had 1
glimpse of one for weeks. Only once: I searched through
Joseph's store of theology, to his great. irritation,-T-Ai«
once, Hareton, I came upon a secret stock in your roor
— some Latin and Greek, and some tales and poetry, al
old friends. I brought the last here, and you gatherer
them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mer
lovfe of stealing— ithey are of no use to you ; or else 3^1
concealed them in the bad spirit that as you canno
enjoy them nobody else shall. Perhaps your envy coun
selled Mr. Heathcliff to rob me of my treasures ? Bu
I've most of them written On my brain and printed i
my heart, and you cannot deprive me of those. "
Eamshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made thi
revelation of his private Uterary acc^vitv\3X'a. > asixv^, ^a:
^tninf^red nn indienf^nt denial of " hex ^ccw'& ^lWots..

4
14
WUTHERING HElGffTE I9?
I Haretoii is desirous of increasing his amount of'
dge/'I said, coming to tiis rescue.'* He is not
r but emulous of your attainments* He'll be a
scholar in a few years/'
.d he wants me to sink into a dunce meantime/'
fed Catherine.'* Yes, 1 hear him trying to spell
ad to himscll, and pretty blunders he makes.— I ^
bu would repeat'Chevy Chase'as you did yester*
Lt was extremely funny. I heard you, and I heard
tming over the dictionary'to seek out the hard
-and then cursing because you couldn't read their
ations.*'._
I young man evidently thought it too bad that
Sftild be laughed at for his ignorance, and then
d at for trpng to remove it. I had a similar no-
^and remembering Mrs. Dean*s anecdote of his
Itempt at enlightening the darkness in which he
ten reared, 1 obsei-ved, — -
It, Mrs. Heathcliff, we have each had a commence ^^
and each stumbled and tottered on the threshold,
ir teachers scorned instead of aiding us^ we should
e and totter yet. "
^i " she replied,''I don't wish to limit his acquire*'
'Still, he has no right to appropriate what'id
md make it ridiculous to me with his vile mistakes
ispronunciations. Those books, both prose and
lare consecrated to me by otber associations, and
rto have them debased and profaned in his month-
ly of all, he has selected my favourite pieces that J
the most to repeat, as if out of deliberate malice. " -
tton's chest heaved in silence a minute. He la-
'Under a severe sense of mortification and wrath,
ft was no easy task to suppress^ I rose, and, fromj
emanly idea of relieving his embarrassment, took
station in the doorway, surveying the external
It as I stood. He followed my example, and left
m^ but presently reappeared, b^a.T\Tv^ V^\ ^ iai;^^^
9 in his hands, wiiich he thte'w \vk^ C^* < ^
falniing,— . ,
'4
1
I

29« WUTHERING liEIGHTS.
" Take them ! I never want to hear, or read, or thin]
of theni again !'* ;,
*'I won't have them now, " she answered. " I shi
connect them with you, and hate them/'
She. opened one that had obviously been often turtle
over, ajad read a portion in the drawUiig tone of a. Ix
ginner, then laughed and thriew it from her* " An
Usten,*\ahe continued provokingly, commencing a vers
of an old ballad in the same fasMpn.
But his self-love, would endure no further torment^
heard, and not altogether disapprovingly, a n;ianui
check given to her saucy tongue. The little wretch: ha
done her utmost to hurt her cousin's sensitive; thoug
uncultivated feelings, arid a physical argument was. tl
only mode he had of balancing the aceoimt and repa]
ing its effects on the inflictor* He afterwards gathere
the books and hurled them on the fire* . I read in h
countenance what anguish it was to offer that sacri & c
to spleen* I'fancied that as they consumed he recalle
the pleasure they had already impairted and the triump
tctid ever-increasing pleasure he had anticipated feoi
them, and I fancied I guessed the incitement to h
secret .studies also* He had been content with dail
labour and rough animal enjoyments till Catherii
crossed his path. Shame, at her scorn, and hope of h(
approval, were his first prompters to higher pursuits
tod, instead of guarding him from, one and winning hi
to the other, his endeavours to raise himself had produce
Just the contrary result*
** Yes, that's all the good that such a brute a^ you cfl
get from them ! " cried Catherine, sucking her damage
lip, and watching the conflagration with indignant eyes.
*'You'd better hold* your tongue now, " he answere
fiercely*
And his agitation precluded further speech. He ac
vanced hastily to the entrance, where I made way fc
Aim to pass. But ere he had crossed the door-stone
Mr, HeathcUS, coming up the caosevfo^, ^tvccwmXet^
A^. and laying hold of his shoulder, as^e^,—
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 299
" What's to do now, my lad ? "
" Naught, naught/'he said, and broke away to enjoy
lis grief and anger in soUtude.
Heathdifi gazed after him and sighed.
** It will be odd if I thwart myself, " he muttered, un-
:onscious that I was behind him. " But when I look
or his father in his face, I find her every day more.
low the devil is he $0 like ? I cism hardly bear to see
dm. "
He bent his eyes to the ground and walked moodily
n. There was a restless, anxious expression in his
:ountenance I had never remarked there before, • and'he
coked sparer in person. His daughter-in-law, on per-
»iving him through the window, immediately escaped
10 the kitchen, so that I remained alone.
*■ Fm glad to see you out of doors again, Mr, Lock*
i^ood, " he said, in reply to my greeting, ** from selfish
Daotives partly. I dont think I could readily supply
four loss in this desolation. I've wondered more than
Mice what brought you here. "
'* An idle whim, I fear, sir, " was my answer, ** or else
m idle whim is going to spirit me away. I shall set
)ut for London next week, and I must give you warning
that I feel no disposition to retain Thrushcross Grange
)eyond the twelve months I agreed to rent it. I believe
I shall not live there any more. "
'* Oh, indeed ; you're tired of being banished from the
Wjrld, are you ? " he said. ** But if you be coming to
)lead off paying for a place you won't occupy, your
oumey is useless. I never relent in exacting my due
rom any one. "
** Fm coming to plead off nothing about it, " I ex*
claimed, considerably irritated. < ** Should you wish it,
!'ll settle with you now. " And I drew my notebook
rom my pocket.
** No, no, " he replied coolly j ** you'll leave sufi & cient
)ehind to cover your debts if yon iail to t^Vxsctv, \\svw^\,
u 6uch a hurry. Sit down and taV.e ^cmx ^ts^sx h^
5. A guest thsit is safe from tepeafec\%» \ciS nSsi^- cj
300 WUTHERING. HEIGHTS.
generally be made welcome* — Catherine, bring th^ .tiWugs
in. Where are you ? " j
Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives aiSid forks,
** You may get your dinner with Joseph,'.'muttered
Heathcliff aside, ** and remain in the kitchen ^. he is
^one.*'
.. She obeyed his directions v^ry punctually; perhaps
she had no . temptation to transgress. Living. anxMig
clowns and misanthropists, she probably cannot appred-
•ate. a better, class of .people when she meets them.
With Mr, Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one
hand, .a.nd Hareton, -absolutely dumb, on the other, I
made a somewhat cheerless, meal, £uid bade adieu eariy.,
I would have'departed by the back way, to get a last
ghmpse of Catherine and annoy old Joseph ;• but Hareton
received orders to lead up my horse, and my hbst himself
escorted me to the door, so I could not fulfil my wish. , r
. f * How dreary life gets over in. that house ! " I reflectedi
while riding down the. road. *■ What a realization- of
something more romantic than a fairy tale it would bam
been for Mrs; Linton Heathcliff had she and I struck up
an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrtitea
together into the stirring atmosphere of the town I " -
CHAPTER XXXn.
1802,— This September I was invited to devastate the
moors of a friend in the north, and on my journey to his
abode; I unexpectedly came within fifteen miles of Gim-
merton. The ostler at a roadside public-house was hold-
ing a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a cart of
very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he re-
marked, —
'* Yon's frough Ginmierton, nah ! They're alias three
wick after other folk wi'ther harvest.''
''GJmmerton r'I repeated. My residence in that
locality had already grown dim and dce^.m^.''^^V 1
^oiv. How far is it from this ?'*
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, 3OI
Happen fourteen mile o'er th'hills, and a rough
i/'he answered,
.sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange,
yas scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as
. pass the night under my own roof as in an inn,
ides, I could spare a day easily to arrange matters
I my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of
iding the neighbourhood again. Having rested a
le, I directed my servant to inquire the way to the
ige, and with great fatigue; to our beasts we managed
distance in some three homra.
left him there, and proceieded down the valley alone.
gray church looked gjraj^r, and. the lonely church-
i lonelier. I distinguished a moor sheep cropping
short turf on the graves. It was sweet, warm weather
X) warm for travelling ; but the heat did not hinder
from enjo5dng the delightful scenery above and
iw. Had I seen it nearer August I'm sure it wotild
e tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes,
vinter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing iridrc
ne, than those glens shut in by hills, and those blufi,
I sweUs of heath,
reached the Grange before simset, and knocked for
littance ; but the family had retreated into the back
nises, I judged, by one thin, blue wreath curling
1 the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear, I
5 into the court. Under the porch a girl of nine or
sat knitting, and an old woman reclined on the hoiuse-
«, smoking a meditative pipe.
Is Mrs. Dean within ? " I demanded of the dame.
Mistress Dean ? Nay I " she answered, ** shoo
sn't bide here ; shoo's up at th'Heights.*'
Are you the housekeeper, theni? " I continued,
Eea, aw keep th'hause, " she repUed.
Well, I'm Mr. Lockwood, the master. Are there any
ns to lodge me in, I wonder ? I wish to stay all
It. "
T'maister! " she cried iii aston\s\imfcTiV.''^^WS^stV
ver knew yah wur coining ? " ^^Sx svxSl V^ ^'^
302 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
word. They's nowt norther dry nor mensful abail
place, nowt there isn't/'
She threw down her pipe and bustled in; the gir
lowed, and I entered too, Soon perceiving that he
port was true, and, moreover, that I had almost i
her wits by my unwelcome apparition, I bade he
composed I would go out for a walk, and mean
she must try to prepare a comer of a sittihg-roon
me to sup in, and a bedroom to sleep in. No swec
and dusting — only good fire and dry sheets were n
sary. She seemed willing to do her best, though
thrust the hearth-brush into the grates in mists3c(
the poker, and malappropriated several other articl
her craft ; but I retired, confiding in her energy i
resting-place against my return, Wuthering Heights
the goal of my proposed'excursion. An aftertho
brought me back when I had quitted the court,
. " All well at the Heights ? " I inquired of the won
'* Eea, fr owt ee kriaw, " she answered, skurrying s
with a pan of hot cinders,
I would have asked why Mrs. Dean had deserted
Grange, but it was impossible to delay her at su <
crisis, so I turned away and made my exit, rami
leisurely along with the glow of a sinking sun bel
and the mild glory of a rising moon in front — one fa
and the other brightening — as I quitted the park
climbed the stony by-road branching off to Mr, H€
cliff's dwelhng. Before I arrived in sight of it, all
remained of day was a b^mless amber light along
west; but I could see eVery pebble on the path,
every blade of grass > by that splendid moon. I
neither to climb the gate nor to knock : it yielded tc
hand. That is an improvement, I thought. An
noticed another by the aid of my nostrils — a fragr
of stocks and wallflowers wafted on the air from amc
the homely fruit-trees.
Both doors and lattices were open; and yet, t
usually the case in a coal distrk^t, a toe,tedLte^'m\\xrM
^e chimney i The comf6tt whic\i tine ^ > j^^«rw^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3C
it renders the extra heat endurable. But the house (
Wuthering Heights is so large that the inmates ha\
plenty of space for withdrawing out of its infiueno
and accordingly what inmates there were had stationc
themselves not far from one of the windows. I coul
both see them and hear them talk before I entered, an
looked and listened in consequence, being moved therel
by a mingled sense of curiosity and envy that grew as
lingered*
** Con-trary ! " said a voice as sweet as a silver bel
" That for the third time, you dunce ! I'm not goir
to tell you again. Recollect, or Til pull yom: hair. "
1.''Contrary, then,*'answered another, in deep hi
. softened tones. " And now, kiss me for minding s
i well. "
" : " No ; read it over first correctly, without a sing
mistake/'
D The male speaker began to read. He was a your
z. man, respectably dressed and seated at a table,, havir
. a book before him* His handsome features glowed wii
ii pleasure, and his eyes kept impatiently wandering fro:
J the page to a small white hand over his shoulder, whic
r.d recalled him by a smart slap on the cheek whenever i
id owner detected such signs of inattention. Its own <
Ei stood behind, her Hght, shining ringlets blending at ii
p.: tervals with his brown locks, as she bent to superintec
h his studies ; and her face — ^it was lucky he could n <
a- see her face, or he would never have been so steady.
ii: could, and I bit my lip in spite at having thrown awa
:: the chance I might have had of doing something besid <
i: staring at its smiting beauty.
The task was done — not free from further blunders
\ but the pupil claimed a reward, and received at lea
. five kisses, which, however, he generously returnee
j Then they came to the door, and from, their conversatic
'I judged they were about to issue out and have a wal
'on the moors. I supposed I should \ifc cjcycA < KTOa\^
»• Hareton Eamshaw's heart, if no\ \rj \k% tw3Wl^, ^5^
lowest pit in the infernal regions \i \ ^cw^A ts\s
304 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
fortunate person in his neighbourhood then ; and fe <
very mean and malignant, I skulked round to seek re
in the kitchen. There was unobstructed admittanc
that side also, and at the door sat my old friend I
Dean, sewing and singing a song, which was often ii
nipted from within by harsh words of scorn and int
ance, uttered in far from musical accents.
'" I'd rayther, by th'haulf, hev'em swearing i*
lugs froh mom to neeght nor hearken ye hahsivc
said the tenant of the latchen, in answer to an unh
speech of Nelly's. " It's a blazing shame that I ca
oppen. t* blessed Book but 5^h set up them glorie
Saftan, and all t* flaj^some wickednesses that iver
bom into th'warld t Oh I ye're a raight nowt,
shoo's another, and that poor lad'll be lost atweer
Poor lad ! " he added, with a groan ;'* he's witched,
sartin on't ! O Lord, judge *em, for there's norther
nor justice among wer rullers ! **
" No,, or we should be sitting in flaming fagol
suppose, " retorted the singer. " But wisht, old i
and read your Bible like a Oiristian, and never mind
This is'Fairy Annie's Wedding'— a bonny tunc
goes to a dance/'•
Mrs. Dean was about to recommence when I advan
and recognizing me directly, she jmnped to her
cr3dhg, —
" Why, bless you, Mr. Lockwood ! How could
think of returning in this way ? All's shut up at Thi
cross Grange. You should have given us notice. "
**il've arranged to be accommodated there fo
long as I shall stay, " I answered.'* I depatt agaii
morrow. And how are you transplanted here.
Dean ? Tell me that. "
'* Zillah left, and Mr. Heathclifi wished me to o
soon after you went to London, and stay till yoi
turned. But step in, pray. Have you walk^ j
Gj'izunerton this evening ? "
" " From the Grange, " 1 replied.''Kxvd niVSwb
make me lodging room there, 1 v/ant lo tea^ m^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 305
ness with your master, because I don't think of having
another opportunity in a hurry. "
** What business, sir ? " said Nelly, conducting me into
the! house, ** He's gone out at present, and won't re-
turn soon. "
" Abbut the rent, " I answered,
** Oh ! then it is with Mrs. Heathcliff you must settle, "
she observed, ** or rather with me. She has not learned
to manage her affairs yet, and I act ior her ; there's no*
body else. "
I looked surprised.
" Ah! you have not heard of Heathdiff's death, I
see, " she continued, ■
•'Heathcliff dead ! " I exclaimed, astonished. " How
long ago ? "
" Three months since. But sit down, and let me take
your hat, and I'll tell you all about it. Stop ; you have
. had nothing to eat, have you ? "
^ " I want nothing; I have ordered supper at home.
I You sit down too. I never dreamt of his dying. Let
me hear how it came to pass; You say you don't ex-
pect them back for some time — the young people ? *■'■:
" No. I have to scold them every evening f or theit
'late rambles, but they don't care for me. At least have
■ a drink of our old ale ; it will do you good ; you seem
, weary. "
'She hastened to fetch it before I could refuse, and I
'heard Joseph asking whether " it wam't a crying scandal
that she should have followers at her time of fife. And
■ then, to get them jocks out o't'maister's cellar ! He fair
shaamed to ^bide still and see it. "
She did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a
minute, bearing a reaming silver pint, whose contents I
lauded with becoming earnestness. And afterwards she
furnished me with the sequel of HeathcUfi's history. He
had a " queer " end, as she expressed it,
I was summoned to Wuthering Hei^\s m^Owsv -^ Vs^
tiigbt of your leaving us, she said, audi otie^^^N^''iM^^
^or Catherine's sake. My first inteivitew vn^ " ^^ " ^ ^5^!
30$ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and shocked me — she had altered so much since our sep
ration, Mr. Heathchff did not explain his reasons f
taking a new mind about my coming here ; he onlj/ tb
me he wanted me, and he was tired of seeing Cath^rii)
I must make the little parlour my sitting-room, and kei
her with me. It was ehoxigh if. he were obHged to s
her'once or twice a day. •: Shef seemed pleased at* tl
arrangement ; and by degrees I smuggled over a.-gre
number of books and other articles that had! formed li
amusement at the Grange, and flattered myself we shou
get on in tolerable comfort. The delusion did not h
long.': Cathteiine; contented at.fitst, in a brief space'gr <
irritable and restless- For one thing, she was foarbidd
to'move. out of the garden, and it fretted her sadly
be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ; d
another, in following the house I was forced to quit li
frequently, and she complained of loneliness; She pi
ferred quarrelling with Joseph in the kitchen to sittiu
at peace in her solitude. I did not tnind their sk
mishes ; but Hareton wasioften obliged to seek the kitch
also when the master wanted to'have the house to hi
self; and though in thfe beginning she either leift: it .
his approach, or quietly; joined in my occilpations^ ai
shimned remarking or addressing him, and though i
was always as sullen and silent as possible, after a wh
she changed her behaviour and became incapiable
letting him alone, talking at'him, commenting on'1
stupidity and idleness, expressing her wonder how
coxid endure the life he lived, liow he could sit a wh <
evening staring into the fire and dozing.
** He's just like a dog, is he not, Ellen ? " she on
observed, ** or a cart-horse ? He does his work, eats 1
food, and sleeps eternally. What a blank, dreary mil
he must have ! — ^Do you ever dream, Hareton ? A]
if you do, what is it about? But you can't speak
me ! "
Then she looked at him, but be Nsrould neither op
/'^f^ mouth nor look again, -
'^^ffe's perhaps dreaming now " sYie ccjnotmxsfi^. **
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 307
twitched his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him,
EUen/'
*'Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you tip-
stairs, if you don't behave/M said. He had not only
twitched his shoulder but clenched his fist, as if tempted
to use it.
" I know why Hareton never speaks when I ajn in
the kitchen, " she exclaimed on another occasion.'* He
is afraid I shall laugh at him, Ellen, what do you think ?
He began to teach himself to read once, and because I
laughed he burned his books and dropped .it. Was hei
not a fool ? "
" Were not you naughty ? " I said. " Answer me that. "
" Perhaps I was, " she went on, " but I did not expect
him to be so silly. — Hareton, if I gave you a book, would
you take it now ? Til try. "
She placed one she had been perusing on his hand
He flung it off, and muttered, if she did not give over be
woiild break her neck.
" Well, I shall put it here, " she said— " in the table
drawer ; and Tm going to bed. "
Then she whispered me to'watch whether he touched
it, and departed. But he would not come near it ; and
so I informed her in the mbming, to her great disappoint-
ment* I saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness
and indolence. Her conscience reproved her for fright-
ening him off improving himself. She had done it
effectually* But her ingenuity was at work to remedy
the injury. While I ironed or pursued other such
stationary employments aB I could not well do in the
parlour, she would bring some pleasant volume and read
It aJoud to me. When Hareton was there she generally
paused in an interesting part and left the book lying
about — that she did repeatedly ; but he was as obstinate
as a mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet
weather he took to smoking with Joseph { and the^ «a.1
like automatons, one on each side oi \.\v^ fe^, ^^ ^^^
happily too deaf to tinderstan,d Viet vAcV^e^L Tvcstjsfc^^-*^
\e would have called it, the younget domg > ^^^ ^^^^
308 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
seem to disregard it. On fine evenings the latter fol-
lowed his shooting expeditions, and Catherine yawned
and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran ofl
into the court or garden the moment I began, and ais a
last resource cried aiid said she was tired of living— ha
life was useless.
Mn Heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined tc
society, had ;dmost banished Earnshaw from his apart-
ment. Owing to an accident at the commencement oi
March, he became for isome days a fixture in the kitchen
His gun burst *while but on th^ hills by himself j a splintei
cut his arm, and he lost a good deal of blood before hn
could reach, home. The consequence was that, perforce
he was condenmdd tb the fireside and tranquility -till
he made it up again* It suited Catherine to have hin
there. At any rate, it made her: hate her room ujpstairs
more than ever; and she would compel me to find oful
business below, that she might accompany me.
On Easter Monday Joseph went to Gimmerton fail
mih some cattle, and in the afternoon I was busy gettini
up linen in the kitchen. E^rhdiaw sat,- morose as usual
at the chimney-comer, and my little mistress was be-
guiling an idle hour witli drawing pictures on the windows
panes, var5Hing her aniusement by smothered bursts ol
songs, and whispered ejaculations, and quick glances oi
annoyance and impatience in the direction of her cousitf
who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the grate. A1
a'notice that I cotdd do with her no longer interceptinj
my light, she removed to the hearthstone. I bestowe(
little attention on her proceedings, but presently I heart
her begin, —
*** I've found out, Hareton, ttiat I want — ^that I'm glac
— that I should like you to be my cousin now, if yoi
had not grown so cross to me and so rough.*'
Hareton returned no answer.
" Hareton, Hareton, Hareton ! do you hear ? *'sh <
continued,
" • Get off wi* ve ! ** he growled, vM5a. xmiciCitcsL^ciTMi^
ru^ness.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 309
'* Let me take that pipe, " she said, cautiously advan-
iig her hand and abstracting it from his mouth,
Before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken
id behind the fire. He swore at her and seized another.
" Stop, " she cried; ** you must listen to me first ; and
can't speak while those clouds are floating in my
tee. "
** Will you go tp the devil ! " he exclaimed ferociously,
and let me be ! "
" No, " she persisted, " I won't. I can't tell what to
to make you talk to me, and you are'determined not
> understand. When I call you stupid, I don't mean
tijrthing. I don't mean that I desjMse you. Come,
ou shall take notice of me, Hareton. Yoii are my
ousin, and you shall own me. "
** I shall have naught to do wi'you and your mucky
ride, and your damiled mocking tricks ! " .he answerea,
I'll go to hell, body and soul, before I look sideways
Iter you again. Side out 0'f gate now, this minute! "
Catherine frowned and retreated ta-the window-seat
hewing her lip, and endeavouring, by humming an
ccentric tune, to conceal a growing tendency to sob.
" You should be friends with your cousin, Mr, Hareton, "
interrupted,''since she repents of her sauciness. It
rould do you a great deal of good ; it would make yoU
Aother man to have her for a companion. "
** A companion ! " he cried, ** when she hates me, and
loes not think me fit to wipe her shooh'!'Nay! if it
aade me a king, I'd not be scorned for seeking her good-
rill any more. "
" It is not I who hate you ; it is you who hate
oe ! " wept Cathy, no longer disguising her trouble.
'You hate me as much as Mr. Heathcliff does, and
Qore. "
" You're a damned liar, " began Eamshaw, ** Why
lave I made him. angry by taking your part, then, a
lundred times, and that when you siieeiedi ^V ^tA ^^«
pised me, and'Go on plaguing me, ^xA^'V'^ ^*vfc^
yonder and say you worried me out oi tYvfc Vv\.c > Ev«s\r
3IO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
*^ I didn't know you took my part/* she answered
drying her eves, " and I was miserable and hitter a
everybody ; but now I thank you, and beg you to foi
give me. What can I do besides ? *'
She returned to the hearth, and frankly extended he
hand. He blackened and scowled like a thundercloud
and kept his fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze'fixe(
on the ground. Catherine, by instinct, must have divinec
it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that promptec
this dogged conduct, for, after remaining an instant un
decided, she stooped and impressed on his cheek a gentli
kiss. The Uttle rogue thought I had not seen her, anc
drawing backj she took her former station by the win
dow, quite demurely. I shook my head reprovingly
and then she blushed and whispered, —
*'Well, what should I have done, Ellen ? He wouldn't
shake hands, and he wouldn't look ; I must show bin
some way that I like him— that I want to be friends. "
Whether the kiss convinced Hareton I cannot tell
He was very careful, for some minutes, that his fac«
should not be seen; and when he did raise it, he w»
sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.
Catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsomi
book neatly in white paper, and having tied it with 1
bit of ribbon, and addressed it to " Mr. Hareton Eara
shaw, " she desired me to be her ambassadress, and con'
vey the present to its destined recipient.
" And tell him if he'll take it Til come and teach hifl
to read it right/'she said ; ** and if he refuse it I'll ff
upstairs and never tease him again. "
I carried it, and repeated the message, anxiously
watched by my employer. Hareton would not open hii
fingers, so I laid it on his knee. He did not strike it of
either. I returned to my work. Catherine leaned hci
head and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle
of the covering being removed ; then she stole away and
quietly seated herself beside her cousin. He trembled
^nd his fa.ce fiiowed ; all his ludeiiess ^.ii^ ^J\\»a ^wri^
^arsiiness had deserted him. He coxjXd xio\. ^ssnaM!
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 31 1
x > urage at first to utter a syllable in reply to her ques-
iomng look and her murmured'petition, —
" Say you forgive me, Hareton, do- You can make
ne so happy by speaking that little word/'
He muttered something inaudible*
" And you'll be my friend ?'* added Catherine mter-
?Qgativdy.
" Nay, you'll be ashamed of me every day of your Ufe, "
be answered, " and the, more ashamed the more you
Imow m^ ; and I cannot bide it.'!
" So you won't be my friend ? " she said, srriiling 33
Bweet as honey, and creeping close up. ■
I. overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, oh
looking tound again, I perceived two such radiant
countenances beiltover the page of the accepted book
that I did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on
both sides, and the enemies were thenceforth sworn allies.
The work they studied was full of costly pictures, and
those and their position had charm enough to keep them
nnmoved till Joseph came home. H^,. poor .many wte
perfectly aghast at the spectacle of Catherine seated on
the same bench with Hareton Eamshaw, leaning her hand
on his shoulder, and confounded at. his favourite's en-
durance of her pfbxirriity ; it iaffected him too deeply
to allow an observation on* the subject that night., His
emotion was only revealed by the immense'sighs'he drew
^ he solemnly spread his large Bible on the table, and
overlaid it with dirty bank-notes from his pocket^booki
the produce of the day's transactions. At length he
Summoned Hareton from his seat*: .
'*Tak* these in to t* niaister, lad,*'he said, " -and bide
'h & ce, I's gang up to my own rahm^ This hoile's
leither mensful nor seemly for us ; we mim side out and
eearch another. "
" Come, Catherine, " I said, " we must'side out'too.
*ve done my ironing. Are you ready to go ? "
" It is not eight o'clock, " she answetei., fss«s% > 2is5^-
nUin^iy. —''Hareton, I'll leave this book M^oti \}ofc Ocbss
^y-piece, and FU bring some more to-m < srcovj ?'
3 1 2 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Ony books that yah leave I shall tak* into th'heSihse, "
said Joseph, " and it'll be mitch if yah find -em agean,
Soa yah may plase yerseln. "
Cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers,
and smiling as she passed Hareton, went ^nging ip-
stairs, lighter of heart, I venture to say, than ever she
had been under that roof before, except, perhaps, during
lier earliest visits to Linton. , • . .
The intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly, though it
encountered temporary interruptions. Eamshaw was
not to be civilized with a wish, and my young lady was
no philosopher and no paragon of patience ; but both
their minds tending to the same pomt — one loving and
desiring to esteem, and the other loving and desiring to
be esteemed — they contrived in the end to reach it.
You see, Mr. Lockwood, it was easy enough to witt
Mrs. Heathcliff's heart. Btit now I'm glad you did not
try. The crown of all my wishes will be the union of
those two. I shall envy no one on their weddingrday.
There won't be a happier woman than myself in England.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
On the riiorrow of that Monday, Earnshaw being still
unable to follow his ordinary employments, and there-
fore remaining about the hoiise, I speedily found it would
be impracticable to retain my charge beside me as here-
tofore.. She got downstairs before me, and out into the
garden, where she had. seen her cousin perfortning some
easy work ; and when I went to bid them come to breaJc-
fast, I saw she had persuaded him to clear a large spac6
of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and they
were busy planning together an importation of planta
from the Grange.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accom-
plished in a brief half-hour. The black currant trees
^ere the apple oi Joseph's eye, aiidsYie\v^.^\\\ & \.^xxsdLte
holce of a flower-hed in the midst oi \3afim.
WUTHERTKG HETGIITS, jl
" * There! That will be al] shown to the master/^ I
exclaimedp " the minute it is discovered. And what ex*
cuse have you to offer for taking such liberties with the
prden ? We shall have a fine explosion on the head of
It — see if we don't*— Mr. Hareton, I wonder you should
have no more wit than to go and make that mess at her
bidding 1 "
'* I'd forgotten they were Joseph's, " aiiswered Earn-
shaw, rather puzzled,'* but Til tell him I did it/'
We always ate our meals with Mr, Heathcliff^ I held
tlie mistress's post in making tea and carving, so I was
indispensable at table. Catherine usually sat by me^
but to-day she stole nearer to Hareton, and I presently
saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship
than she had in her hostihty,
*'Now, mind you don't talk with and notice your
cousin too much/* were my whispered instructions as
we entered the room,'* It will certainly annoy Mta
Heathcliff, and he^U be mad at you both/'
" Fm not going to/'she answered
The minute after^ she had sidled to him, and was
sticking primroses in his plate of porridge.
He dared not speak to her there — he dared hardly
look ; and yet she went on teasing till he was twice on
the point of being provoked to laugh. I frowned, and
then she glanced toward the master, whose mind was
occupied on other subjects than his company, as his
Countenance evinced ; and she grew serious for an in
stant, scrutinizing him with deep gravity; Aftenv^ards
she turned and recommenced her nonsense. At last
Hareton littered a smothered laugh. Mr, Heathcliff
Started ; his eye rapidly surveyed our faces, Catherine
met it with her accustomed look of nervousness and yet
defiance, which he abhorred,
•'It is well you are out of ray reach/'he exclaimed*
^* What fiend possesses you to stare back at ma cqw-
tmually with those infernal eyes ?'Dov?^ > NVOtv. H^nk.^:^
Ind don't remind me of your existence a^Bm. \ ^^^
Mad cured you of JaugJiing/'
314 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
''It was mkj'muttered Haretoii,
''Wbat do you say ? " demanded the master.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeal
confession. Mr. HeathcUff looked at him a Ut,
thcH'SilentW resumed his breakfast and his interna
musing. We had nearly finished, and the two y
people prudently shifted wider asunder, so I anticij
no further disturbance during that sitting, when Jc
app > eared at the door,; revealing by his quivering lip
furious eyes that thie outrage committed on his pre <
shrubs was detected. He must have seen Cathy aiK
cousin abOfut the spot before he examined it, for ^
his jaws Worked like thdseof a cow chewing its cud^
texidered his speech difficult'to imderstand, he bega
" I mun hev my wage, and I mun goa. I hed a:
to dee wheare I'd sarved fur sixty year, and I thow
lug my books up into f'garret, and all my bits o'i
•and thdy sud hev t'kitchen to theirseln, foir t'sal
quietness. It wur hard to gie up my awn hearthj
but I thowt I co%M do that But nah; shoo's taai
garden'fro'me, and by'th'heart, maister, I cannot s
it Yah may'bend to th'3^ak, and ye; will; I :
tised toH, and an old man doesn't sooin get used- to
barthens. Td raytheram my bite an'my sup \
hammer in th'road. "
'* Now, now, idiot, " intetrupted HeathcUff,'* ci
short I What's your grievance ? I'll interfere ir
quarrels between you and Nelly. She may thrust
into the coal-hole for anythiidg I care. " . i
** It's noan Nelly,''* ansWered Joseph, •■*! I Budn't
fdr Nelly, nasty ill. nowt as shoo is. . Thank God !
cannot stale t^ sowi o'nob'-dy! Shoo wer niver
handsome but what a body mud look at her'bout v
ing. It's yon fla57Some, graceless quean that's wit
6ur lad wi'her bold een and'her forrard ways, tfll
Nay, it fair brusts my heart I He's forgotten aU
done for him, and mlade on Yiim; atvd ^cklh and rivei
^ whole row o* t''grandest cutranl tce^s *^ ^^ t^^
^nd here he lamented outriftlitv ^raioaioL^^T ^
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, 315
)f his bitter injuries and Earnshaw's ingratitude and
langerous condition*
" Is the fool drunk ? " asked Mr. HeathcUff.— " Hare-
ion, is it you he's finding fault with ? "
" I've pulled up two or three bushes, " replied the young
man,''but Tm going to set'em again. "
" And why have you pulled them up ? " said the
Qiasiter.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
" We wanted to plant some flowers there, " she cried.
" I'm the only person to blame, for I wished him to
do it. "
" And who the devil gave you leave to touch a Stick
about the place ? " demanded her father-in-kw, . much
surprised, —''And who ordered you to obey her? " he
added, turning to Hareton.
The latter was speechless* His cousin repHed, —
" You shouldn't grudge a few yards of earth for me
to ornament, when you have taken all my land ! "
" Your land, insolent slut I You never had any,'*
said Heathcliff.
" And my money, " she continued, returning his angry
jjare, and meantime biting a piece of crust, the rem-
nant of her breakfast*
" Silence I " he exclaimed. " Get done, and begone ! "
" And Hareton's land, and his money, " pursued the
reckless thing. " Hareton and I axe friends now, arid
I shall tell him aU about you. "
The master seemed confounded a moment. He grew
pale and rose up, eyeing her all the- while with an ex-
pression of mortal hate.
" If you strike me, Hareton will strike you, " she said,
'SO you may as well sit down. "
" If Hareton does not turn you out of the room I'll
trike him to hell, " thundered HeathclifE. " Damnable
idtch I dare you pretend to rouse him against roa.^.
--Off with her 1 Do you hear > • " F\m?, \vet mVci * < ^ < ?
itcben I—rU kill her, Ellen Deati» \i > ^o\i \e\. > wet oya
\to my sight again ! "
3l6 WUTHKRING HEIGHTS.
Hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to gi
*'Drag her away !'* he cried savagely. " Are yc
staying to talk ?''And he approachoi to execute h
own command.
" He'll not obey you, wicked man, any more/'sai
Catherine, " and he'll soon detest you as much as I da
" Wisht ! Svisht ! " muttered the young man reproad
fully. " I will not hear you speak so to him* • Ha?
done. "
" But you won't let him strike me? " she cried,
" Come, then,'* he whisp-ered earnestly.
It was too late. Heathcliff had caught hold of het.
*^'Now, you got " he said to Eamshaw. " Acctirse
witch ! this time she has provoked me when I oo«l
not bear it, and I'll make her repent it for ever I "
He had his hand in her hair* Hareton attempted t
release her lockft,'entreating him not to hurt her tha
once, Heathcliff's black eyes flashed — ^he seemed read
to tear Catherine in pieces; and I was just worked u
< o risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his finga
relaxed ; he shifted his grasp from her head to her am
and gazed intently in her face. Then he drew his han
over her eyes, stood a moment to collect himself appai
ently, and turning anew to Catherine, said with assume
calmness, " You mtist learn to avoid putting me in
paissibn, or I shall really murder you some time I G
with Mrs. Dean, and keep with'her, and confine yoc
insolence to her ears. As to Hareton EamshaW, if
see him listen to you I'll send him seeking his brea
where he can get it. Your love will make him an oul
cast and a beggar. — Nelly, take her *, and leave me, a
of you ! — ^leave me ! "
I led my young lady out* She was too glad of he
escape to resist. The other followed, and Mr. Heatihtdi
had the room to himself till dinner. I had counselle
Catherine to dine upstairs, but as s»ootv a & \ve perceive
Aer vacant seat he sent me to caW \vei. lAfe ^poVa Vi t^s
pf as, ate very Jittle, and went out diT^tVg ^Vl^tiw!
ntimating that he should not return \ > eiot€^ eNCTxa%,
WUTHERTNG HEIGHTS. 517
The two new friends established themselves in the
house during his absence, when I heard Hareton sternly
check his cousin on her offering a revelation of her father-
in-law's conduct to his father. He said he wouldn't
suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement. If he
i^ere the devil, it didn't signify — he wmuld stand by him;
and he*d rather she would abuse himself, as she used to,
than begin on Mr. Heathcliff, Catherine was waxing
cross at this, but he found means to make her hold
hef tongue by asking how she would like him to speak
111 of her father. Then she comprehended that Earn-
shaw took the master's reputation home to himself, and
ivas attached by ties stronger than reason could break —
chains forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt
to loosen. She showed a good heart, thenceforth, in
ivoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy
concerning Heathcliff, and confessed to me her sorrow
that she had endeavoured to raise a bad spirit between
him and Hareton, Indeed, I don't believe she has
ever breathed a syllable, in the latter's hearing, against
lier oppressor since.
When this slight disagreement was over, they were
friends again^ and as busy as possible in their several
accupalions of pupil and teacher. I came in to sit with
ihem after I had done my work, and 1 felt so soothed
md comforted to watch them that I did not notice how
ime got on. You know they both appeared in a meas-
ire my children* I had long been proud of one, and now
was sure the other would be a source of equal satis-
iction. His honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook
Bf rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in
hich it had been bred, and Catherine's sincere com*
lendations acted as a spur to his industry. HJs bright-
ling mind brightened his features, and added spirit and
ability to their aspect. I could hardly fancy it the
Line individual I had beheld on the day I dvs^cssiex^^
ly little lady at Wuthering Heights, ^Itftt Yl^ & t ^-x.^^^
on to the Crag^. While I admired and Vue'Y l^ai!^'^^^^
drew on^ and with it returned tb.^ Ttyas^^^^'^-
I
II
3l8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
catne upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the iron
way, and had a full view of the whole three ere we coulc
raise our heads to glance at him. Well, I reflected
there was never a pleasanter or more harmless sight, an <
it will be a burning shame to scold them. The red fixe
light glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealet
-their faces animated with the eager interest of children
for though he was twenty- three and she eighteen, eacl
had so much of novelty to feel and learn that neithe
experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober > dis
enchanted maturity.
They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Mr. Heath
cliff.'Perhaps you have never remarked that their eya
are precisely similar, and they are those of Catherin
Eajmishaw. The present Catherine has no other like
ness to her, except a breadth of forehead and a certai
arch of the nostril that makes her appear rather haugbtj
whethei- she will or not. With HaretoH the resemblanc
is carried fiulher* It is singular at all times ; then i
was iMurticularly striking, because his senses were alerl
and his mental faculties wakened to. unwonted activitj
I suppose this resemblance disarmed Mr. Heathcliff. H
walked to the hearth in evident agitation, but it quickl;
subsided as he looked at the young man — or, I shouli
say, altered. its character, for it was there yet. He too]
the book from his hand and glanced at the open page
then retiuned it without any observation, merely signing
Catherine away. Her companion lingered very littii <
behind her ; and I was about to depart also, but he bad(
me sit still.
" It is a poor conclusion, is it not ?'* he observed
having brooded a while on the scene he had just wit
neissed — ** an absurd termination to my violent exertions i
I get levers and mattocks to demolish the two houses, anc
train myself to be capable of working hke Hercules, anc
when everything is ready and in my power I find thi
wzZ/ to Jilt a slate of either roof has vanished ! My ok
enemies have not beaten me. ¥lbw v/oxAdX^. ^iJcvt ^«iai
'ime to revenge myself on their Tepiesexi^^^vN^^, \ < :««
tWUTlTERTI^G HEIGHXa 319
t, and none could binder me. But where is the use ?
I don't care for striking • I can't take the trouble to
raise ,my hand. That sounds as if I had been labouring
the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity.
It is far from being the case, I have lost the faculty of
enjoying their destruction, and I am too idle to destroy
tor nothing.
'* Nelly, there is a strange change approaching ; Tm
in its shadow at present, I take so litde interest in my
daily life that I hardly remember to cat and drink.
Those two who have left the room are the only objects
which retain a disdnct material appearance to me, and
that appearance causes me pain, amounting to agony-
About her I won't speak, and I don't desire to tl\ink,
hot I earnestly wish she were invisible. Her presence
Invokes only maddening sensations, He moves me
diSerently; and yet if I could do it without seeming
iasane, Td never see him again. You'll perhaps think
me rather inclined to become so, " he added, making an
effort to smile, " if I try to describe the thousand forms
of past associations and ideas he awakens or embodies.
But youll not talk of what I tell you % and my mind is
so eternally secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to
turn it out to another,
" Five minutes ago Hareton seemed a personification
& f my youth, not a human being, I felt to him in such
L variety of ways that it would have been impossible
tO have accosted him rationally. In the first place, his
itarthng likeness to Catherine connected him fearfully
vith her. That, however, which you may suppose the
aost potent to arrest my imagination, is actually < iie least;
or what is not connected %vith her to me ? and what
oes not recall her ? I cannot look down to this floor
mt her features are shaped in the flags. In every cloud,
^ every tree — filling the air at night, and caught by
:limpses in every object by day— I am surrouud^e,4. ^wNfOa.
ler image. The most ordinary iaces oi nxeiu 2^xv^ n^^^css^
^my own /eatures— mock me witb a icseTrfcX^tvv:-^- " ^
^^ world is a dreadful collectioti oi memot^tv^^ "
320 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
she did fexist, and that I have lost her. Well, Haretbn'i
aspect was the ghost of my immortal love, of my wile
endeavours to hold my right, my degradation, my pride
my happiness, and my anguish
" But it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you ;
only it will let you know why, with a reluctance to b(
always alone, his society is no benefit, rather an aggrava-
tion of the constant torment I suffer ; and it partly con-
tributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin gc
ori together. I can give them no attention any more. "
** But what do you mean by a change, Mr. Heathcliff ? "
. 1 said, alarmed at his manner, though he was neither is
danger of losing his senses nor d5dng, according to mj
Elgment. He was quite strong and healthy ; and as to
reason, from childhood he had a delight in dwelling or
dark things and entertaining odd fancies. He might have
had a monomania on the subject of his departed idol,
but on every other point his wits were as sound as mine.
" I shall not know that till it comes, " he said, " Vw
only half conscious of it now. "
" You have no feeling of illness, have you ? " I asked.
" No, Nelly, I have not, " he answered.
" Then you are not afraid of death ? " I pursued.
" Afraid ? No ! " he replied. " I have neither a fear,
nor a presentiment, nor a hope of death. Why shotdd
I ? With my hard constitution, and temperate mode oi
living, and unperilous occupations, I ought to, and prob-
ably shall, remain above ground till there is scarcely 2
black hair on fay head. And yet I cannot continue ir
this condition, I have to remind myself to breathe,
almost to remind my heart to beat. And it is like bend-
ing back a stiff spring ; it is by compulsion that I do the
slightest act not prompted by one thought, and by com-
pulsion that I notice anything ahve or dead which is nol
associated with one universal idea. I have a single wish,
j^nd my whole being and faculties are yearning to attaib
Jt They have yearned towards it so lotv^ and so^un-
v & veringly that I'm convinced it mil \5e t^^sSWB^r^
^^^^ — because it has devoured my eidsteivce. \%sa.^

JTHERING HEIGHTS.
nd tip in the anticipation of its fulfilment. My con-
fessions have not relieved me, but they may account for
ome otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which I
how,*-^ God I it is a long fight, I wish it were over ! "
He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things
o himself J till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph
lid, that conscience had turned his heart to an earthly
lelL I wondered greatly how it would end. Though he
eldom before had revealed his state of mind, eyen by
ooks, it was his habitual mood, I had no doubt. He
isserted it himself ; but not a soul, from his general
rearing, would have conjectured the ifact. You did not
vhen you saw him, Mr. Lockwood ; and at the period of
irhich I speak he was just the same as then, only fonder
it continued sohtudej and perhaps still more laconic in
x > mpany.
B CHAPTER XXXIV.
For some days alter that evening Mr- Heathclifi shunned
meeting us at meals, yet he would not consent formally
.0 exclude Hareton and Cathy. He had an aversion
to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing rather
b absent himself ; and eating once in twenty- four hours
li & med sufficient sustenance for him.
One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him
;o downstairs and out at the front door, I did not hear
lim re-enter, and in the morning I found he was still
iway. We were in April then. The weather was sweet
ad warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could
nake it, and the two dwarf apple-trees near the southern
?aD in full bloom. After breakfast Catherine insisted
n my bringing a chair and sitting with my work under
he fix-trees at the end of the house ; and she beguiled
lareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident,
D dig and arrange her little garden, which was shifted
that comer by the influence oi ^osepV^ cQTM^30c^\i^
wBS comfortably n=*v " tbe ^piVu^'ix^^'^t^s
322 WUTHERING HEIGHT &
young lady, who had nin down near the gate to procur
some primrose roots for a border, returned only hal
laden, and informed us that Mr. Heathcliff was oonainj
in. " And he spoke to me, " she added, with a peipkxel^
countenance. i j,
" What, did: he say ? " asked Hareton.
; " He told. me to begone as fast as I could, " she. an
swered. " But he looked so different from his usua
look: that I stopped a moment to stare at him* " ;;
•: " How ? " he inquired.
" Why, almost bright and cheerful. No,.alfnost noth
ing-ntwry much excited, and wild and glad I " she replied
• ^ " . Night-\Valking Junuses him, then, " I remarked
Meeting a careless manner — ^in reality as siqrprised a
she was, and anxious to ascertain the truth of h^r state
ment, for to see the master looking glad would not b
an every-day spectacle. I framed an excuse to go in
Heathchff stood at the open door. He was pale, an(
he trembled, yet certainly he had a strange, joyful glitte
in, bis eyes that altered the aspect of his whole face.
'" .Will you have some breakfast?; " I said. " Yd
must be hungry rambling about all night. " I wante(
to discover, where he had been, but I did not like U
ask directlyi
" No, I'm not hungry, " he answered, averting his beac
and speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed 1
was trying to divine the occasion of his goodrhumour*
I felt perplexed. I didn't know whether it were nd
a proper opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
" I don't think it right to wander out of doors, " 1
observed, " instead of being in bed. It is not wise,,al
any rate, this moist season, I dare say you'll catch i
bad cold < m: a fever. You have something the mattei
with you now. "
" Nothing but what I can bear, " he replied, " and witl
the greatest pleasure, provided you'll leave me alone
Cret in, and don't annoy me. "
/ obeyed, and in passing 1 iiolicei \i < ei \K%aJCaRiiL ^
^«^ ^ a cat .
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3^3
Yes, " I reflected to myself, " we shall have a fit of
ss. I cannot conceive what he has been doing. " «
hat noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received
iapedrup plate from my hands, as if he intended to
:e amends for previous fasting.
Fve neither cold nor fever, Nelly, " he remarked, in
abn to my morning's speech, ** and I'm ready to dO
ice to the food you give me. "
;e took his knife and fork^ and was going to commence
ng, when the inchnation appeared to become suddenly
net. He laid them on the table, looked eSigerlyi to-
ds the window, then rose and went out. We saw him
dng to and fro in the garden while we concluded our
1, and Eamshaw said he'd go and ask why he would
dine ; he thought we had grieved him some way. ^
Well, is he coming? " cried Catherine, when iier
sin returned. i
Nay, " he answered ; ** but he's not angry. . He seemed
ly pleased indeed ; only I made him impatient ;by
iking to him twice, and then he bade me be off .to
He wondered how I could want the company of
body else. "',
set his plate to keep warm on the fender, and " aft^r
lour or two he re-entered, when the room was clear»
lo degree calmer — ^the same unnatural (it was un-
iral) appearance of joy under his black brows ; the
e bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and theft,
I kind of smile; his frame shivering — not as one
ers with chill or weakness, but as a tight-stretched
I vibrates — a strong thrilling rather than trembling,
will ask what is the matter, I thought; or who
lid ? And I exclaimed, —
Have you heard any good news, Mr. Heathcliff ?
I look uncommonly animated. "
Where should good news come from to me ? " he
.''I'm animated with hunger, and seemingly I
\t not eat. "
Your dinner is here, " I returned; *'vjYvn ^^ot^V H^
324 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" I don't want it now, " he muttered hastily. " Tl
wait till supper. And, Nelly, once for all, let me be§
you to warn Hareton and the other away from me. 1
widi to be troubled by nobody. I wish to have tlrfj
place to myself. "
** Is there some new reason for this banishment ?'* ]
inquired. ^* Tell me why you are so queer, Mr. Heath-
cHff. Where were you last night ? Tm not putting
the question through idle curiosity, but- "
" You are- putting the question through very idle
curiosity, " he interrupted, with a laugh. *'Yes, H
ansHver it. Last night I was on the tlu-eshold of hdl
To-day I am within sight of my heaven. I have my eyes
oh it-^hardly three feet to sever me. And now you'c
better go. You'll neither see nor hear anything tc
frighten you if you refrain from prying. "
Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I de-
parted, more perplexed than ever.
He did not quit the house again that . afternoon, and
no one intruded on his solitude, till, at eight o ■clock
I deemed it proper, though unsummoned, to carry 8
candle and his supper to him. He was leaning againsi
thei ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out ; hiJ
face was turned to the interior gloom. The fire hac
smouldered to ashes ; the room was filled with the damp
mild air of the cloudy evening, and so still that not only
the murmur of the beck down Ginmierton was distin-
guishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles,
or through the large stones which it could not cover. 1
uttered an ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal
grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one after
another, till I came to his.
" Must I close this ? " I asked, in order to rousd him,
for he would not stir.
The Hght flashed on his features as I spoke. O Mr
Locfcwood, I cannot express what a terrible start I gol
I^j^ the momentsiry view — ^those deep black eyes, sthal
simle and ghastly paleness \ It appe^te.^ \o Tcia xjirI
fr. Heathclifl, but a goblin ; and'm nxv tettox W^^

WUTHERING HEIGHTS* 325
He bend towards the waH and it left me in dark-
Yes, close it, " he replied, in his familiar voice.
There, that is pure awkwardness ! Why did you
j\d the candle horizontally ? Be quick, and bring
lother/'
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to
Dseph, —'
** The master wishes you to take him a light and
jkindle the fire/* For I dare not go in myself again
Bt then.
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went;
it he brought it back immediately, with the supper-
ay in his other hand, explaining that Mr, Heathdiff
as going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till
ioming* We heard him mount the stairs directly. He
id not proceed to his ordinary chamber, but turned
1 to that with the panelled bed. Its viindow, as I men*
oned before, is wide enough for anybody to get through ;
id it struck me that he plotted another midnight ex-
Msion, of which he had rather we had no suspicion,
" Is lie a ghoul or a vampire ? " 1 mused. I had read
: such hideous incarnate demons. And then I set my-
flf to reflect how I had tended him in infancy, and
atched him grow to youth, and followed him almost
irough his whole course, and what absurd nonsense it
as to yield to that sense of horror.''But where did
2 come from, the little dark thing, harboured by a
3€»d man to his bane ? *'muttered Superstition, as I
Dzed into unconsciousness* And I began, half dream*
kg, to weary myself with imagining some fit parentage
\ > t him ; and repeating my waking meditations, I tracked
IS existence over again, with grim variations, at last
icturing his death and funeral, of which al! I can re-
lember is being exceedingly vexed at having the task
fi dictating an inscription for his monunvewt, -a.^^. t^-tv-
dtJD^ the sexton about it ; and as \\e \v^i ^^ *mx^^£s^^
tf we cotiJd not tell his age, \^e weve o\:iV\^^^ J;^^ ^
aLpui
urselves with the single word, **lAe^t\vcMi'
326 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
came true : we were. If you enter the kirkyard you'll
read on his headstone only that, and the date of his
death.
'Dawn restored me to common-sense. I rose and went
into the garden as soon as I could see, to/asccortain if
there were any footmarks under his window. There were
none. " He has stayed at honie/'I thought, *-.and he'll
be all right to-day. " I prepared breakfast for thfe
household, as was my usual custom, but told Hai'eton
and Catherine to get theirs ere the master came down, for
he lay late. They preferred taking it out of doors, under
the trees, and I set a little table to accommodate them.
On my re-entrance I found Mr. Heathcliff below. He
and Joseph were conversing about some farming busi*
ness. He gavie dear, minute directions concerning the
matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his
head continually aside, and had the same eaccited ex*
pressibn, even more exaggerated. When Joseph quitted
the room he took hi^ seat in the place he generally chose,
and I put a basin of coffee before him. He drew it
nearer, and then rested his arms on the table and looked
at the opposite wall, as I supposed, surveying one par-
ticular portion, up and down, with glittering, restless
eyes, and with such eager interest • that he stopped
breathing during half a minute together.
" Come now, " I exclaimed, pushing someT)read against
his hand, " eat and drink that while it is hot ; it has
been waiting near an hour. "
He didn't notice me, and yet he sniiled. Td rather
have seeh him gnafeh his teeth than smile so.'
" Mr. Heathclif! ! master ! " I cried, " don't^ for God's
sake, staJre as if you saw an unearthly vision. " ,
'•Don't, for God's sake, shout so loud, " he replied.
** Turn round and tell me — ^are we by ourselves ? " ^
" Of Course, " was my answer — " of course we are- "
StD) J iii voluntarily obeyed him, as if I was inot quite
Rona With a sweep of his hand \i^ cteax^d ^^ vacant
^e /i2 front among the breakiast Iten^, ^aa^L^^aa!*
^^ardiogaze mote at his ease.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 32/
Now I perceive^ he was not looking at the wall, for
hen I regarded him alone it seemed exactly that he
ized at something within two yards* distance. And
hatever it was, it commtmicated apparently both pleas-
re and pain in exquisite extremes — at least the anguished
tt raptured expression of his countenance suggested that
lea. The fancied object was not fixed either ; his eyes
iirsued it with vmwearied diligence, and, even in speak-
\g to me, weire never weaned away. I vainly reminded
im of his protracted abstinence from food. If he stirred
> touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if
3 stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread, his
agers clenched before they reached it, and remained
1 the table, forgetful of their aim. .
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his ab-
> rbed attention from its engrossing speculation, till he
:ew irritable, and got up, asking why I would not allow
m to have his own time in tsddng his meals, and say^
g that on the next occasion I needn't wait^-I might
:t the things down and go. Having uttered these words
i left the house, slowly sauntered down the garden
ith, and disappeared through the gate.
The hours crept anxiously by ; another evening came,
did not retire to rest till late, and when I did I could
Dt sleep. . He returned after midnight, and instead
; going to bed, shut himself into the room beneath.
Ustened and tossed about, and finally dressed and
jscended. It was too irksome to lie there harassing
ly brain with a hundred idle misgivings.
I distinguished Mr. Heathcliff's step restlessly measur-
ig the floor, and he frequently broke the silence by a
2ep inspiration resembling a groan. He muttered de-
Lched words also. The only one I could catch was the
ame of Catherine, coupled with some wild term of en-
^arment or suffering, and spoken as one would speak
> a person present — ^low and earnest, and wruu^ iraxax
le depth of his soul. I had not coxiiag^ \.o N^?!S^'5J«.'«^^g?is-
to the apartment, but I desired to < £^exl^3tex Vtcpas-^a;
-eiie, and therefore fell foul ot tVie \alc\i«5v fe«i > ^ " ^^^et
328 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
it, and began to scrape the cinders. It drew him forth
sooner than I expected. He opened the door immedi-
ately, and said, —
" Nelly, come here. Is it morning ? Come in with
your light. "
*'It is striking four, " I answered. " You want a candle
to take upstairs. You might have lit one at this fire. "
" No, I don't wish to go upstairs, " he said. " Come
in and kindle me a fire, and do anything there is to do
about the room. "
" I- must blow the coals red first before I can carry
any, " I replied, getting a chair and the bellows.
He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approach-
ing distraction, his heavy sighs succeeding each other
so thick as to leave no space for common breathing
between.
** When day breaks Til send for Green, " he said. ** I
wish to make some legal inquiries of him while I can
bestow a thought on those matters, and while I can act
calmly. I have not written my will 3^t, and how to
leave my property I cannot determine. I wish I could
annihilate it from the face of the earth. "
" I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff, " I interposed.
" Let your will be a while ; you'll be spared to repent of
your many injustices yet. I never expected that your
nerves would be disordered. They are at present mar-
vellously so, however, and almost entirely through your
own fault. The way you've passed these three last days
might knock up a Titan. Do take some food and some
repose. You need only look at yourself in a glass to
see how you require both. Your cheeks are hollow, and
your eyes bloodshot, like a person starving with hunger
and going blind with loss of sleep. "
" It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest, " he
replied. " I assure you it is through no settled designs.
ni do both as soon as I possibly can. But you might
s well bid a man struggling m tYve'w^Vet x^V ^ > CeM\
ni's length of the shore I 1 mvisl le^Ocv *\\. ^^V, ^sv!
» ril rest. Well, never mind ^x. Otwc\. K%
WUTHERING HEIGHTS SZ9
repenting of my injustiees, Fve done no injustice, and
I repent of nothing. I'm too happy; and yet I'm not
happy enough. My soul's bliss kills my body, but does
not satisfy itself. "
" Happy, master ? " I cried.''Strange happiness !
If you would hear me without beiilg angry, I might offer
some advice that would make you happier. "
" What is that ? " he asked.'* Give it. "
'* You are aware, Mr. Heathcliff, " I said, " that from
the time you were thirteen years old you have lived a
selfish, unchristian life, and probably hardly had a Bible
in your hands during all that period. You must have
forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have
space to search it now. Could it be hurtful to send for
some one (some minister of any denomination — ^it d6es
not matter which) to explain it, and show you how very
far you have erred from its precepts, and how unfit you
will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place before
570U die ? " .
" I'm rather obliged than angry, Nelly, " he said,'* for
you remind me of the manner in which I desire to be
buried. It is to be carried to the churchyard in the
evening. You and Hareton may, if you please, accom-
pany me ; and mind particularly to notice that the sex-
ton obeys my directions concerning the two coffins.
No minister need come, nor need anjrthing be said over
me. I tell you I have nearly attained my heaven, and
that of others is altogether imvalued and uncoveted
by me. "
" And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast,
and died by that means, and they refused to bury you
in the precincts of the kirk ? " I said, shocked at his
godless indifference. " How would you like it ?'*■
" They won't do that, " he replied.''If they did, you
must have me removed secretly ; and if you we.^^^^ > i\
you shall prove, practically, that the de^tA. 2lx^ t^sA. " ^ssss
hilated/'
As soon as he heard the other meinbets o\ > i^^ ^ " ^ja
irringhe retired to his den, and 1 \ > tea\\xed i^^«t *
339 WUTHERING HEIGHTSi
in the afternoon, while Joseph and Hareton w^e a
their work, he came into the kitchen agaio, and with
wild look bade me come and sit in the bouse ; he want©
somebody with him. I declined, telling him plainly tha
his strange talk and manner frightened me, and I ha(
neither the nerve nor the will to be his companion alone
** I believe you think me a fiend, " he said, with hi
dismal laugh— " something too horrible to hve under j
decent roof. " Then turning to Catherine, who was tiiere
and who drew behind me at his approach, he added > hal
sneeifingly, " Will you come, chuck ? Til not hurt you
No I To you I've made myself- worse than tiie devil
Well, there is one who won't shrink from my.oompany
By God, she's relentless ! Oh, damn it ! It's unutter
ably too much for flesh and blood to bear — even mine/'
He solicited the society of no one more. At dusk h
went into his chamber. Through the whole night, aiu
far into the morning, we heard him groaning and mur
muring to himself. Hareton was anxious to enter, bu
i bide him fetch Mr. Kenneth^ and he should go in an <
see him. When he came, and I requested admittano
and tried to. open the door, I found it locked, and Heath
clifE bade us be damned. He was better, and would b
left alone ; so the doctor went away.
. The following evening was very wet — indeed it poure <
down till day-dawn; and as I took my morning wall
round the house I observed the master's window swing
ing open, and the rain driving straight in. He canno
be in bed, I thought ; those showers would drench bin
through. He must either be up or out* But I'll mak(
no more ado ; I'll go boldly and look. "
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with anothe
key, I ran to unclose the panek, for the chamber wa
vacant. Quickly pushing them aside, I peeped in. Mi
Heathcliff was there, laid on his back. His eyes me
imne so keen and'fierce, I started ; and then he seemec
fo smile, I could not think him dead *, but his face an(
thrpat were washed with fain, the beddo\!tvfe^ to:^^^
«cr he viras peiiectiy istill* The lattice, ^a-pym^i, ^a «

T^X^THERING HE IICHT5. 33f!J
had ^azed one hand that rested oti the sill, Nt
blood trickled from the broketi skin, and wlien I put ni}/!
fingers to it I could doubt no more-^hc was da^ anq
stark 1 I
I hasped the window ; I combed his black long ha
trom his forehead \ I tried to close his eyes — to extinguislil
if possible, that frightful, hfe-like gaze of exultatiofi
before any one else beheld it. They would not shut-^
they seemed to sneer at my attempts ; and his parte <
Hps and sharp white teeth sneered too, Taken witl
snother fit of cowardice, I cried out for Joseph. Josepl]
shuffled up ajid made a noise, but resolutely refused ti
meddle mth him,
" Th'divil's harried ofi his soul/^ he cried,'* and hj <
may hev his carcass into t'bargain for aught I care
Ech ! what a wicked un he looks girning at death !''anc
the old sinner grinned in nnockery. 1 thought he in^
tended to cut a caper round the bed ; but suddenly com^
posing himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his handai
^d returned thanks that the lawful master and thi
ancient stock were restored to their rights.
I felt stunned by the awful event, and my memor]
imavoidably recurred to former times with a sort o
oppressive sadness. But poor Hareton , the most ^STonged
Was the only one who really suffered much. He sat b]
the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. He pres & e*
its hand, and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that everj
one else shrank from contemplating, and bemoaned bin
with that strong grief which springs naturally from i
generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel. •
Mr. Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what dis
order the master died. I concealed the fact of his havm|
swallowed nothing for four daj^, fearing it might lea <
to trouble ; and then I am persuaded he did not abstaii!
oij purpose — it was the consequence of his strange illtiess
not the cause.
We burled hjm, to the scandal ot t\ie ^V'c?^^ TL^\^^to^
hood, -as he wished. Eamshaw ai\d 1^ fe & ^-xX^^. ^
mjL men to c^rry the coffin, compte\ieu^^^ " ^^ ^
B i
332 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
attendance. The six men departed when they had 1(
it down into the grave. We stayed to see it coveret
Haretoni with a streaming face, dug green sods and lai
them over the brown mould himself. At present it :
9A imootii and verdant as its companion mounds, an
I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. But the countr
ftdk^, if you ask them, would swear on the Bible tha
he walks. There are those who speak to having met hii
near the church, and on the moor, and even within thi
house. Idle tales, you'll say, and so say I. Yet tha
old man by the kitchen fire affirms he has seen two o
'eni, looking out of his chamber window, on every rain
night since his death. And an odd thing happened t
me about a month ago. I was going to the Grange on
evening — a dark evening, threatening thunder ; and jus
at the turn of the Heights I encountered a little bo
with a sheep and two lambs before him. He was cryin
terribly, and I supposed the lambs were skittish am
would not be guided.
" What is the matter, my little man ? " I asked.
" There's HeathcUfE and a woman yonder, under 1
nab, " he blubbered, " un I damut pass'em. "
I saw nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would g
on, so I bade him take the road lower down. He prot
ably raised the phantoms from thinking, as he traversal
the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard hi
parents and companions repeat. Yet, still I don't lik
being out in the dark now, and I don't like being lef
by myself in this grim house. I cannot help it. I sha]
be glad when they leave it and shift to the Grange.
" They are going to the Grange, then ? " I said.
" Yes, " answered Mrs. Dean, " as soon as they ar
married, and that will be on New Year's day. "
" And who will live here then ? "
" Why, Joseph will take care of the house, and perhap
5 Jad to keep him company. TYve.^'wll live in th
kitchen, and the rest will be shut up?'
''For the use of such gbosts as cYvoosfc \o \sicfific5\\.\J
observed.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 333
" No, Mr. Lockwood, " said Nelly, shaking her head.
" I believe the dead are at peace, but it is not right to
speak of them with levity. "
At that moment the garden gate swung to ; the
ramblers were returning.
" They are afraid of nothing, " I grumbled, watching
their approach through the window. " Together they
would brave Satan and all his legions. "
As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to
take a last look at the moon— or, more correctly, at each
other by her light — I felt irresistibly impelled to escape
them again ; and pressing a remembrance into the hand
of Mrs. Dean, and disregarding her expostidations at my
rudeness, I vanished through the kitchen as they opened
the house-door, and so should have confirmed Joseph
m his opinion of his fellow-servant's gay indiscretions,
had he not fortunately recognized me for a respectable
character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet.
My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the
direction of the kirk. When beneath its walls I perceived
decay had made progress, even in seven months. Many
a window showed black gaps deprived of glass, and slates
jutted off here and there beyond the right Une of the
roof, to be gradually worked off in coming autunm
storms.
I sought and soon discovered the three headstones on
the slope next the moor — the middle one gray, and half
buried in heath ; Edgar Linton's only harmonized by
the turf and moss creeping up its foot ; HeathcUff's still
bare.
I lingered round them under that benign sky, watched
the moths fluttering among the heath and harebells,
listened to the soft wind breathing through the grass,
and wondered how any one could ever imagine imquiet
slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
THE END.
Agnes Grey
By
Anne Bronte
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London, Edinburgh, and New York
^903
AGNES GREY
■^Zi
/- ::'.'ij J
II
'n-

CHAPTER I.
THE PARSONAGE.
? true histories contain instruction, though in some
^he treasure may be hard to find, and when foui^tJ
vial in quantity that the dry, shrivelled kemeV "
iy compensates for the trouble of cracking the
fWhether this be the case with my history or not,
^ardly competent to judge. I sometimes think it
f prove useful to some, and entertaining to others ;
le world may judge for itself. Shielded by my own
Fity, and by the lapse of years, and a few fictitious
I, 1 do not fear to venture, and will candidly lay
r the public what I would not disclose to the most
Ite friend.
; father was a clergyman of the north of England,
?as deservedly respected by all who knew him, and
(younger days lived pretty comfortably on the joint
ft of a small incumbency and a snug little property
'Own. My mother, who married him against the
if of her friends, was a squire's daughter and a
Q of spirit. In vain it was represented to her
I she became the poor parson's wife, she must re-
Ih her carris^e and her lady's-maid, and all the
es and elegances of affluence, which to her were
ess than the necessaries of liie, A. cL^Tra% < b ^^^
f-m/ild were great conveniences, \ > Mt, l\vari\jLlA.c.^a:N'fc^.
I feet to carry her and hand^ to mvivv-^^^^ ^.^^ffl
2 AGNES GREY.
own necessities. An elegant house and spacious grounds
were not to be despised, but she would rather live in a
cottage with Richard Grey than in a palace with any
other man in the world.
Finding arguments of no avail, her father at length
told the lovers they might marry if they pleased, but
in so doing his daughter, would forfeit every fraction of
her fortune. He expected this would cool the ardour of
both, but he was mistaken. My father knew too well my
mother's superior worth not to be sensible that she was
a valuable fortime in herself, and if she would but con-
sent to embellish his humble hearth, he should be happy
to take her on any terms ; while she, on her part, woula
rather labour with her own hands tlian be divided from
the man she loved, whose happiness it would be her jqy
to make, and who was already one with her in heart afad
sbuL So her fortune went to swell the purse of a wiser
sisiber, who had married a rich nabob; and she,. to the
wonder^ and compassionate regret of all who knt,w ber^
went to bury herself in the homely village parsonagQ
among the hills of . And yet, in spite of all tl^
and in spite of my mother's high spirit and my fath«r:8
whims, I believe you might search all England through^
and fail to find a happier couple.
'Of six children, my sister Mary ajid myself were the
only two that survived the perils of infancy and eariy
childhood. I, being the younger by five or six years,
was always i^arded as the child, and the pet of the
family. Father, mother, and sister all combined to spoil
me — not by foolish indulgence to render me fractious and
ungovernable, but by ceaseless kindness to make jne too
helpless and dependent, too unfit for buffeting with the
cares and turmoils of life.
- Mary and I were brought up in the strictest seclusion
My mother, being at once highly accomplished, well in^
formed, and fond of employment, took the whoje chai^
of our education on herself, with the exception of Latij^
fvh/cli my father undertook to ^ck w & — w ft^aX-^^iMsws.
ven went to school ; and as thete vr^fii tio ^^icvfet^ m'^
AGNES GREY. 3
neighbourhood, our only intercourse with the world con-
sisted in a stately tea-party, now and then, with the
principal farmers and tradespeople of the vicinity (just
to avoid being stigmatized as too proud to consort with
our neighbours), and an annual visit to our paternal
grandfather's, where himself, our kind grandmamma, a
maiden aunt, and two or three elderly ladies and gentle-
men, were the only persons we ever saw. Sometimes our
mother would amuse us with stories and anecdotes of
her younger days, which, while they entertained us amaz-
ingly, frequently awoke — ^in nw, at least — a secret wish
to see a Httle more of the world.
I thought she must have been very happy, but- she
never seemed to regret past times. My father, however,
whose temper was neither tranquil nor cheerful by
nature, often unduly vexed himself with thinking of the
sacrifices his dear wife had made for him, and troubled
his head with revolving endless schemes for the aug-
mentation of his little fortime for her sake and ours.
In vain my riiother assured him she was quite satisfied,
and if he would but lay by a Httle for the children, we
should all have plenty, both for time present and to
come ; but saving was not my father's forte. He would
not run in debt (at least, my mother took good care
he should not), but while he had money he must spend
it He liked to see his house comfortable, and his
wife and daughters well clothed and well attended ; and
besides, he was charitably disposed, arid liked to give
to the poor according to his means, or, as some might
think, be3rand them.
At length, however, a kind friend suggested to him a
means of doubling his private property at one stroke,
and further increasing it hereafter to an untold amount.
This friend was a merchant, a man of enterprizing spirit
and undoubted talent, who was somewhat straitened in
his mercantile pursuits for want of capital, but generoiisly
[ > roposed to give my father a fair share of his profits ii
lie swmld only entrust him with yftv^ \ve co > a5A ^-asfc
lod he thought he mi^ht safely ptotfAse AJaaX- -^rft^XJe^
4 AGNES GREY.
sum the latter chose to put into his hands, it should bring
him in cent, per cent. The small patrimony was speedily
sold, and the whole of its price was deposited in the hanffi
of the friendly merchant, who as promptly proceeded to
ship his cargo and prepare for his voyage.
My father was delighted, so were we all, with am
brightening prospects. For the present, it is true, we
were reduced to the narrow income of the curacy ; but
my father seemed to think there was no necessity " for
scrupulously restricting our expenditure to that ; so, witi
a standing bill at Mr. Jackson's, another at Smith's, anij
a third at Hobson's, we got along even more comfort*'
ably than before, though my mother aflrmed we had
better keep within bounds, for our prospects of wealth
were but precarious after all, and if my father wodd
only trust everything to her management, he should never
feel himself stinted ; but he, for once, was incorrigible.
What happy hours Mary and I have passed, wMle sit-
.ting at our work by the fire, or wandering on the heatb-
clad hills, or idling under the weeping birch (the on^
considerable tree in the garden), talking of future happi'
ness to ourselves arid our parents, of what we would oi^
and see, and possess, with no firmer foundation for our
goodly superstructure than the riches that were expected
to flow in upon us from the success of the worthy mer-
chant's speculations! Our father was nearly as bad as
ourselves, only that he affected not to be so much in
earnest, expressing his bright hopes and sanguine expec-
tations in jests and playful sallies that always struck me
as being exceedingly witty and pleasant. Our mother
laughed with delight to see him so hopeful and happy;
but still she feared he was setting his heart too nnidi
upon the matter, and once I heard her whisper as die
left the room, " God grant he be not disappointed! I
know not how he would bear it. "
Disappointed he was, and bitterly too. It came like
3 tbtmderclsLp on us all, that the vessel vjhidv contained
oar fortune had been wrecked and gone to \3tifc \«i\X.csfl
^^ all its stores, together with several oi \3Qfc Ocs
I
I
^^ " AGNES GREY.
imtortunate merchant himself, I was grieved
I was grieved for the overthrow of ail our air*
ties ; but with the elasticity of youth I soon re^
the shock,
h riches had charms, poverty had no terrors for
erienced girl Hke me. Indeed, to say the truth,
LS something exhilarating in the idea of being
o straits and thrown upon our own resources,
dshed papa, mamma, and Mary were all of the
nd as myself ; and then, instead of lamenting
imities, we might aU cheerfully set to work to
them, and the greater the difficulties, the harder
ent privations, the greater should be our cheer-
io endure the latter and our vigour to contend
:he former,
did not lament, but she brooded continually over
ortune, and sank into a state of dejection from
effort of mine could rouse her. I could not
bring her to regard the matter on its bright side
; and indeed I was so fearful of being charged
Idish frivolity or stupid insensibility that I care-
Jt most of my bright ideas and cheering notions
U well knowing they could not be appreciated,
other thought only of consoling my father, and
Dur debts and retrenching our expenditure by
;^aOable means j but my father was completely
[med by the calamity — health, strength, and
ank beneath the blow, and he never wholly
d them. In vain my mother strove to cheer
apf > ealing to his piety, to his courage, to his
for herself and us. That very affection was his
torment. It was for our sakes he had so ar-
mged to increase his fortune ; it was our interest
i lent such brightness to his hopes, and that
i such bitterness to his present distress. He now
»d himself with remorse at having neglected my
i advice, which would at least V^is^t ^^^^^\v\^sv
additional burden of debt ; he va\iv\^ t^^tq-^k^^,
> r having brought hei ixom tW aa??vvX^.'^
6 AGNES GREY.
ease, the luxury of her former station to toil with him
through the cares and toils of poverty. It wafe gaH and
wormwood to his soul to see that splendid, highly-accom-
plished woman, once so courted and admired, trans-
formed into an active managing housewife, . with hands
and: head continually occupied with household labours
and household economy. The very willingness with
which she performed these duties, the cheerfulness with
which she bore her reverses, and the kindness which
withheld her from imputing the smallest blame to him,
were all perverted by this ingenious self-tormentor into
further aggravations of his sufferings. And thus the
mind preyed upon the body and disordered the system
of the nerves, and they in turn increased: the troubles of
the mind, till by action and reaction his health was
seriously impaired ; and not one of us could convince
him that the aspect of our affairs was not half so gloomy*
so utterly hopeless, as his morbid ima^nation repre-
sented it to be,
■ The useful pony phaeton was sold, together with ithfi
stout, well-fed pony — ^the old favourite that we had fldJy
determined should end its days in peace, and never p^
from our hands ; the little coach-house and stable were
let; the servant boy and the more efficient (being. the
more expensive) of the two maidservants were dismSsed.
Our. clothes were mended, turned, and darned to the
utmost verge of decency; our food, always plain, was
now simpHfied to an unprecedented degree-r-except my
father's favourite dishes ; our coals and candles were
painfully economized-r-the pair of candles reduced to
onie, and that most sparingly used ; the coals carefully
husbanded in the half -empty grate, especially when, my
father was out oh his parish duties, or confined to bed
through illness. Then we sat with our feet on the fender,
scraping the perishing embers together from tinae to
time, and occasionally adding a sHght scattering of the
dust and Iragments of coal, just to keep them aUve, As
for our carpets, they, in time, v/ete v^otxv ^x^iaL^ifejWK,,
^d patched and darned even to a gte^iet eK\enX V^«
AGNES GREY. 7
: garments. To save the expense of a gardener, Mary
i I undertook to keep the garden in order ; and all
J cooking and household work that could not easily
managed by one servant girl was done by my mother
i sister, with a little occasional help from me — only a
le, because, though a woman in .my own estimation,
iras still a child in theirs ; and my mother, like- most
ive, managing women, was not gifted with very active
ighters, for this reason — that being so clever and
.gent herself, she was never tejnpted to trust her aff air^
a deputy, but, on the contrary, was willing to act and
nk for others as well as for number one ;. and what-
jr was the. business in hand, she was apt to think that
one could do it so well as. herself, so that wb^nev^r I
3red to assist her I received such an answer as, *'No;
e, you cannot indeed ; there's nothin| here you can
Go and help your sister, or get her to take a walk
:h you. Tell her she must not sit so much and stay
constantly in the house as she does. She may well
k thin and dejected. "
'Mary, mamma says Tm to help you, or get you to
:e a walk with me. She says you may well look
n and dejected it you sit so constantly in the
ise.**
'Help me you cannot, Agnes ; and I cannot go out
:h you. I have far too much to do. "
* Then let me help you. "
'You cannot, indeed, deaj* child. Go and practise
ir music, or play with the kitten. "
There was always plenty of sewing on hand, but I had
: been taught to cut out a single garment, and except
in hemming and seaming there: was little I could do,
in in that line ; for they both asserted that it was far
ier to do the work themselves than to prepare it for
, and besides, they liked better to see me prosecuting
'studies or amusing myself. It was time eaough for
to sit bending over my work, like Sl ^^n^ TxsateL^w^
an my favourite little pussy was becoTCve^ /a..s\s»w^ ^^
Under such ciccuinstanceSi'allYiavx^ \ ^^^ ^^
8 AGNES GREY.
many degrees more tiseful than the kitten, my idleness
was not entirely without excuse.
Through all our troubles I never but once heard my
mother complain of our want of money. As summer was
coming on, she observed to Mary and me, " What a de-
sirable thing it would be for your papa to spend a few
week» at a watering-place 1 I am convinced the set
air and the change of scene would be of incalculable
service to him. But then, you see, there's no money, "
she added, with a sigh. We both wished exceedingly
that the thing might be done, and lamented greatly that
it could not. " Well, well, " said she, " it's no use cont
plaining. Possibly something might be done to furtiiff
the project after all. Mary, you are a beautiful drawer.
What do you say to doing a few more pictures in yoor
best style, ani getting them framed, with the water-
cdoured drawings you have already done, and trying to
dispose of them to some liberal picture-dealer who has
th6 sense to discern their merits ? "
" Mamma, I should be delighted if you think they
could be sold, and for anything worth while. "
" It's worth while trying, however, my dear. Do yott
procure the drawings, and I'll endeavour to find a pur-
chaser. "
" I wish / could do something, " said I.
" You, Agnes ! Well, who knows ? You draw pretty
well too. If you choose some simple piece for your sub-
ject, I dare say you will be able to produce something
we shall all be proud to exhibit. "
" But I have another scheme in my head, mamma, and
have had long, only I did not like to mention it. "
" Indeed ! Pray tell us what it is. "
" I should like to be a governess. "
My mother uttered an exclamation of surprise, and
laughed. My sister dropped her work in astoniishment,
exclaiming, You a governess, Agnes ! What can you
jbe dreaming ol ? **
''IVeJl I don't see anything so very extoc^ox^xwar^ Vbl
'• I do not pretend to be able to instmet icc^^ ^
AGITES GKET, 9
surely I couJd teach little ones ; and I should like it
much — ^I am so fond of children. Do let me, mamma/*
*'3nt, ray love, you have not learned to take care of
urself yet, and young children require more judgment
d experience to manage than elder ones. "
*'But, mamma, I am above eighteen, and quite able
take care of myself and others too. You do not know
If the wisdom and prudence I possess^ because I have
ver been tried. "
** Only think, " said Mary. *'What would you do in
liouse full of strangers, without me or mamma to speak
d act for you, with a parcel of children besides your-
If to attend to, and no one to look to for advice ? You
iuld not even know what clothes to put on/*
" You think, because 1 always do as rou bid me, I
;ve no judgment of my own. But only try me — that
all I ask — ^and you shall see what I can do, "
At that moment my father entered, and the subject
our discussion was explainr^d to him.
** What, my little Agnes a governess ! *'cried he ; and,
spite of his dejection, he laughed at the idea.
** Yes, papa; don't you say anything against it. I
lould like it so much, and I am sure I could manage
dightfully/'
'* But, my darling, we could not spare you. " And a
ar glistened in his eye as he added, " No, no ; afflicted
i we are^ surely we are not brought to that pass yet. "
'* Oh no ! " said my mother. *'There is no necessity
hatever for such a step ; it is merely a whim of her
vn.— So you must hold your tongue, you naughty girl ; .
r though you are so ready to leave «*s, you know very
ell we cannot part with you.*'
I was silenced for that day and for many succeeding
les, but still I did not wholly relinquish my darling
heme. Mary got her drawing materials, and steadily
t to work. I got mine too, but while I drew I thought
^ Other things. How delightful it wo\i\d \i^ Xo \s^ ^ i^p^ -
^ess^to go out into the world • to ecvtet ^pt^VL ^ ^^
to Mct for myself; to exercise tnv utt\5se6.'l^'^^*^'^
lO AGNES GREY.
to try my unknown powers; to earn my own maintenance,
and something to comfort and help my father, mother,
and sister, besides exonerating them from the provision
of my food and clothing ; to show papa what his little
Agnes could do; to convince manmia and Maiy that I
Was not quite the helpless, thoughtless being they sup-
posed I And then, how charming to be entrusted with
the care and education of children! Whatever others
said, I felt I was fully competent to the task ; the dear
remembrance of my own thoughts in early childhood
would be a surer guide than the instructions of the most
mature adviser. I had but to turn from my little pupils
tp myself at their age, and I should know at once how to
win their confidence and affections, how to waken'the
contrition of the erring, how to embolden the timid and
console the afiiicted, how to make virtue practicable,
instruction desirable, and religion lovely and compre*
hensible.
" Delightful task-
To teach the young idea how to shoot ; "
to train the tender plants, and watch their buds un-
folding day by day !
Influenced by so many inducements, I determined still
to persevere, though the fear o£ displeasing my mother
or distressing my father's feeUngs prevented me from
resuming the subject for several days. At length again
I mentioned it to my mother in private, and with some
dif & culty got her to promise to assist me with her en-
, deavours. My father's reluctant consent was next ob-
tained; and then, though Mary still sighed her di & pproval,
my dear, kind mother began to look out for a situation
for me. She wrote to my father's relations, and con-
sulted the newspaper advertisements. Her own rela-
tions she had long dropped all communication with, A
formal interchange of occasional letters was all she had
ever bad since her marriage, and she'would not at any
time have applied to them in a case oi V\as TNa.\»x^» \S > !oS
? Jon^ and so entire had beeu my paxeao^s'^Osssavc
AGNES GREY, !I
the world that many weeks elapsed before a suit-
Me situation could be procured. At last, to my great
3y, it was decreed that I should take charge of the young
itnily of a certain Mrs. Bloomiield, whoni my kind,
xim Aunt Grey had known in her youth, and asserted
El be a very nice woman. Her husband was a retired
radesman, who had realized a very comfortable f cr-
ime, but could not be prevailed upon to give a greater
dary than twenty-five pounds to the instructress of his
hUdren* I* however, was glad to accept this, rather
haa refuse the situation, which my parents were int
Lined to think the better plan*
But some weeks more were yet to be devoted to
reparation* How long, how tedious those weeks
ppeared to me t Yet they were happy ones in the
lain— full of bright hopes and ardent expectations.
Vith what peculiar pleasure I assisted at the making of
ay new clothes, and, subsequently, the packing of my
ninks 1 But there was a feeling of bitterness mingling
rith the latter occupation too ; and when it was done—
phen all was ready lor my departure on the morrow, and
he last night at home approached — a sudden anguish
eemed to swell my heart. My dear friends looked so
ad and spoke so very kindly that I could scarcely keep
ay eyes from overflowing, but 1 still affected to be gay,
had taken my last ramble with Mary on the moors,
ny last walk in the garden and round the house ; 1 had
edj with her, our pet pigeons for the last time — the
> retty creatures that we had tamed to peck their food
rom our hands i I had given a fareweU stroke to all
heir silky backs as they crowded in my lap ; I had
enderly kissed my own peculiar favourites, the pair of
now-white fantaijs j I had played my last tune on the
lid familiar piano^ and sung my last song to papa — not
he last, I hoped, but the last for what appeared to me a
*ery long time. And, perhaps, when I did these thmi?^
^ain it TV^uld be with different ieelm^s \ e\tc^\TO & ^ "'& :^^^
rJgbt be changed, and this house n\\?;Yit ufeN^x: \^ /£S
t^ed home again. My dear litl\e \r\eix^ " ^^ ^^ " ^
12 AGNES GREY.
would certainly be changed. She was already growii^
a fine cat, and when I . returned, even for a hasty visi
at Christmas, would most likely have forgotten, bot
her playmate and her merry pranks. I had rompe
with her for the last time ; and when I stroked her soi
bright fur, while she lay purring herself to sleep in m;
lap, it was with a feeling of sadness I could not easil;
disguise. Then, at bedtime, when I retired with Mar
to our quiet little chamber, where already my drawer
were cleared Out and my share of the bookcase was emptji
and where, hereafter, she would have to sleep alone, u
dreary solitude, as she expressed it, my heart san]
more than ever. I felt as if I had been selfish and wronj
to persist in leaving her ; and when I knelt once mon
beside our little bed, I prayed for a blessing on her anc
on my parents more fervently than ever I had done be
fore. To conceal my emotion, I buried my face in mj
hands, and they were presently bathed in tears. I per-
ceived, on rising, that she had been crying too ; but neithei
of us spoke, and in silence we betook ourselves to oui
repose, creeping more closely together from the conscious "
ness that we were to part so soon.
But the morning brought a renewal of hope and spirits,
I was to depart early, that the conveyance which tooli
me (a gig, hired from Mr. Smith, the ckaper, grocer, and
tea-dealer of the village) might return the same day. 1
rose, washed, dressed, swallowed a hasty breakfast, re-
ceived the fond embraces of my father, mother, and sister,
kissed the cat, to the great scandal of Sally the maid
shook hands with her, mounted the gig, drew my veB
over my face, and then, but not till then, burst into 2
flood of tears. The gig rolled on. I looked back. Mj
dear mother and sister were still standing at the dooi
looking after me and waving their adieus. I returnee
their salute, and prayed God to bless them from my heart
We descended the hill, and I could see them no more.
^'It's a coldish momin'for you, Miss A.^e6,^ observd
Smith,'* and a darksome un too, b\it Nw^'st^^'^^^ctL ^VAj
^on spot afore there come much taiiv to sv^V^Jr
AGNES GREY. 13
* Yes, I hope so, " replied I, as calmly as I could.
'It's corned a good sup last night too.'*
'Yes. "
'But this cold wind will, happen, keep it off. "
'Perhaps it will. "
lere ended our colloquy. We crossed the valley, and
:an to ascend the opposite hill. As we were toiling up,
)oked back again. There was the village spire, and
old gray parsonage beyond it, basking in a slanting
m of sunshine. It was but a sickly ray, but the vil-
3 and surrounding hills were all in sombre shade, and
lailed the wandering beam as a propitious omen to
home. With clasped hands I fervently implored a
3sing on its inhabitants, and hastily turned away, for
Lw the sunshine was departing, and I carefully avoided
»ther glance, lest I should see it in gloomy shadow,
5 the rest of the landscape.
CHAPTER II.
FIRST LESSONS IN THE ART OF INSTRUCTION.
we drove along my spirits revived again, and I turned
h pleasure to the contemplation of the new life upon
ch I was entering. But though it was not far past
middle of September, the heavy clouds and strong
th-easterly wind combined to render the day ex-
nely cold and dreary ; and the journey seemed a very
y one, for, as Smith observed, the roads were " very
vy/'and certainly his horse was very heavy too. It
med up the hills, and crept down them, and only con-
cended to shake its sides in a trot where the road was
1 dead level or a very gentle slope, which was rarely
case in those rugged regions ; so that it was nearly
o'clock before we reached the place of our desdr^.-
1. Yet after all, when we enteied ^J[\ < b \q»Vc^ \tcs^
?way, when we drove softly up t\\e skvoo^Ccs.^ ^f^
d carnage road, with the green \avm. otv ^^c}cv ^^s
14 AGNES GREY.
studded with young trees, and approached the new but
stately mansion of Wellwood, rising above its mushroom
poplar-groves, my heart failed me, and I wished it were
a mile or two farther off. For the first time in my life
•^^must stand alone; there was no retreating now. I
imist enter that house, and introduce myself among its
strange inhabitants. But how was it to be done?
True, I was near nineteen, but thanks to my retired life
and the protecting care of my mother and sister, I well
knew that many a girl of fifteen or under was gifted
with a more womanly address and greater ease and self-
possession than I was. Yet if Mrs. Bloomfield were a
kind, motherly matron, I might do very well after all;
and the children — of course, I should soon be at ease with
them ; and Mr. Bloomfield, I hoped, I should have but
little to dp with.
" Be calm, be calm, whatever happens, " I sadd within
myself ; and truly I kept this resolution so well, and was
so fully occupied in steadying my nerves and stilling the
rebellious flutter of my heart, that when I was admitted
into the hall, and ushered into the presence of Mrs.
Bloomfield, I almost forgot to answer her polite saluta-
tion ; and it afterwards struck me that the little I did
say was spoken in the tone of one half dead or half asleep.
The lady, too, was somewhat chilly in her manner, as I
discovered when I had time to reflect. She was a tall,
spare, stately woman, with thick black hair, cold gray
eyes, and extremely sallow complexion.
With due politeness, however, she showed me my bed-
room, and left me there to take a Httle refreshment.
I was somewhat dismayed at my appearance on looking
in the glass. The cold wind had swelled and reddened
my hands, uncurled and entangled my hair, and dyed
my face of a pale purple. Add to this my collar was
horridly crumpled, my frock splashed with mud, my
feet clad in stout new boots, and as the trunks were not
brought up there was no remedy ; so having smoothed
72j^ hair as well as I could, and repea^A^^ VsnViOmA. isss
^durate collar. I proceeded to domv ^^^^v > ; > fta V*
AGNES GREY. 15
ights of stairs, philosophizing as I went, and with sonie
iSiculty found my way into the room where Mrs. Bloom-
sld awaited me.
She led me into the dining-room, where, the family
incheon had been laid out. Some beefsteaks and half -
)ld potatoes were set before me ; and while I dined upon
lese she sat opposite, watching me (as I thought) and
ideavouring to sustain something like a conversation,
insisting chiefly of a succession of commonplace re*
axks, expressed with frigid formality ; but this might
I more my fault than hers, for I really could not con-
irse. In fact, my attention was almost wholly ab-»
irbed in my dinner — not from ravenous appetite, but
om distress at the toughness of the beefsteaks and
lie numbness of my hands, almost palsied by, their five
3urs'exposure to the bitter wind. I would gladly have
iten the potatoes and let the meat alone, but halving got
large piece of the latter on to my plate,! could not be
) impolite as to leave it ; so, after many awkward- and
[isuccessful attempts to cut it with the knife, or tear it
ith the fork, or puU it asunder between them, sensible
lat the awful lady was a spectator to the whole trans-
:tion, I at last desperately grasped the knife and'fork
I my fists, Uke a child of two years old, and fell to work
ith all the little strength I possessed. But this needed
> me apology. With a feeble attempt at a laugh, I said^
My hands are so benumbed with the cold that I can
:arcely handle my knife and fork. "
" I dare say you would find it cold, " replied she,
ith a cool, immutable gravity that did not serve to
:assure me.
When the ceremony was concluded, she led me into
le sitting-room again, where she rang and sent for the
lildren.
" You will find them not very far advanced in their
itainments, " said she, " for I have had so little tima
) attend to their education mysdl, and v^^\v^n^ *Cw2 > x:^s^!^-
em too young for a governess t\\\ ivow \'^xiX ^ " ^^^^^^
y are clever children, and very apt to \^axrL, es^^eos^
I6 AGNES GREY,
the little boy. He is, I think, the flower of the flock—
a generous, noble-spirited boy, one to be led but not
driven, and remarkable for always speaking the truth.
He seems to scorn deception " (this was good news).
" His sister Mary Ann will require watching, " continued
she, " but she is a very good girl upon the whole, though
I wish her to be kept out of the nursery as much as pos-
sible, as she is now almost six years old, and might acquire
bad habits from the nurses. I have ordered her crib
to be placed in your room, and if you will be so kind as
to overlook her washing and dressing, and take charge
of her clothes, she need have nothing further to do with
the nurserymaid. "
I replied I was quite willing to do so ; and at that
moment my young pupils entered the apartment, with
their two younger sisters. Master Tom Bloomfield was
a well-grown boy of seven, with a somewhat wiry frame,
flaxen hair, blue eyes, small turned-up nose, and fair
Gpmplexion. Mary Ann was a tall girl too, somewhat
dark Hke her motner, but with a round full face and a
high colour in her cheeks. The second sister was Fanny,
a very pretty little girl. Mrs. Bloomfield assured mc
she was a remarkably gentle child, and required en-
couragement. She had not learned anything yet, but
in a few days she would be four years old, and then she
might take her first lesson in the alphabet, and be pro-
moted to the schoolroom. The remaining one was
Harriet, a little broad, fat, merry, playful thing of
scarcely two, that I coveted more than all the rest;
but with her I had nothing to do.
I talked to my little pupils as well as I could, and tried
to render myself agreeable, but with little success, I
fear, for their mother's presence kept me under an un-
pleasant restraint. They, however, were remarkably
free from shyness. They seemed bold, lively children,
and I hoped I should soon be on friendly terms with
t/iem — the little boy especially, oi vftiota \ Y^aA \ie,^d
^c^ a favourable character from bis maTrcKva.. \tv^^t
7/7 there was a certain affected simpet axv^ ^ cx^n\
AGNES GREY. 1/
notice that I was sorry to observe. But her brother
[med all my attention to himself. He stood bolt up-
it between me and the fire, with his hands belund his
:k, talking away like an orator, occasionally inter-
►ting his discourse with a sharp reproof to his sisters
an they made too much noise.
'O Tom, what a darling you are ! " exclaimed his
ther. ** Come and kiss dear mamma ; and then
I't you show Miss Grey your schoolroom and ybur
3 new books ? **
'I won't kiss you, mamma, but I will show Miss Grey
schoolroom and my new books. "
'And my schoolroom and my new books, Tom, " said
ry Ann. " They're mine too. "
'They're mine** replied he decisively. — " Come along,
s Grey ; I'll escort you. "
Vhen the room and books had been shown, with some
icerings between the brother and sister that I did my
lost to appease or mitigate^ Mary Ann brought me
doll, and began to be very loquacious on the subject
ts fine clothes, its bed, its chest of drawers, and other
)urtenances ; but Tom told her to hold her clamour,
t Miss Grey might see his rocking-horse, which, with
nost important bustle, he dragged forth from its
ner into the middle of the room, loudly calling on me
attend to it. Then, ordering his sister to hold the
IS, he moimted, and made me stand for ten minutes
:ching how manfully he used his whip and spurs,
in time, however, I admired Mary Ann's, pretty doll
I all its possessions, and then told Master Tom he t^as
apital rider, but I hoped he would not use his whip
I spurs so much when he rode a real pony.
Oh yes, I will, " said he, laying on with redoubled
our. " I'll cut into him Uke smoke, Eeh ! iny
•d, but he shall sweat for it. "
'his was very shocking, but I hoped in time to be able.
«rork a reformation. ^.
Now you must put on your \: > oivT\e.\. ^xA'^'as^V
the little hero, " and I'll show you mvj ^^^^^-'
20 AGNES GREY.
of which, to his great joy, contained a dead weasel;
and then into the stable to see, not the fine carriage
horses, but a little rough colt, which he informed me
had been bred on purpose for him, and he was to ride
it as soon as it was properly trained. I tried to amuse
the little fellow, and listened to all his chatter as com-
placently as I could, for I thought if he had any affec-
tions at all I would endeavour to win them, and then, in
time, I might be able to show him the error of his ways ;
1 but I looked in vain for that generous, noble spirit his
mother talked of, though I could see he was not without
a certain degree of quickness and penetration when hfi
chose to exert it.
When we re-entered the house'it was nearly tea-time.
Master Tom told me that, as papa was from home, he
and I and Mary Ann were to have tea with mamma fcM
a treat, for on such occasions she always dined at lun-
cheon time with them instead of at six o'clock. Sood
after tea Mary Ann went to bed, but Tom favoured us
with his company and conversaticin till eight. After he
was gone, Mrs. Broomfield further enlightened me on
the subject of her children's dispositions and acquire-
ments, and on what they were to learn, and how thej
were to be managed, and cautioned me to mention theh
defects to no one but herself. My mother had warned
me before to mention them as little as possible to her^
for people did not like to be told of their children's
faults, and so I concluded I was to keep silence on their
altogether. About half-past nine Mrs. Bloomfield in-
vited me to partake of a frugal supper of cold meat and
bread. I was glad when that was over, and she took hei
bedroom candlestick and retired to rest ; for though ]
wished to be pleased with her, her company was ex-
tremely irksome to me, and I could not help feeling thai
she was cold, grave, and forbidding — the very opposite
oi the kind, warm-hearted matron my hopes had de-
pic ted her to be.
AGNES GREY. 21
CHAPTER III.
A FEW MORE LESSONS.
3SE next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilara-
:, in spite of the disappointments already experi-
5d ; but I found the dressing of Mary Ann was no light
ter, as her abundant hdr was to be smeared with
lade, plaited in three long tails, and tied with bows
ibbon — a task my unacxustomed fingers found great
culty in performing. She told me her nurse could
it in half the time, and, by keeping up a constant
et of impatience, contrived to render me still longer,
en all was done, we went into the schoolroom, where
.et my other pupil, and chatted with the two till it
time to go down to breakfast. That meal being
duded, and a few civil words having been exchanged
1 Mrs. Bloomfield, we repaired to the schoolroom
in, and commenced the business of the day. I foimd
pupils very backward indeed ; but Tom, though
rse to every species of mental exertion, was not
lout abihties. Mary Ann could scarcely read a word,
was so careless and inattentive that I could hardly
on with her at all. However, by dint of great labour
patience, I managed to get something done in^the
rse of the morning, and then accompanied my yOiUng
:ge out into the garden and adjacent grounds for a
e recreation before dinner. There we got along toler-
7 together, except that I found they had no notion
joing with me ; I must go with them, wherever they
> e to lead me. I must run, walk, or stand, exactly
t suited their fancy. This, I thought, was reversing
order of things ; and I found it doubly disagreeable,
m this as well as subsequent occasions they seemed
> refer the dirtiest places and the most dismal occupa-
s. But there was no remedy : either I m.\ist IcXfcs^
n or keep entirely apart from ttvem, ^civ^ \ > a» &'5c^'^$feas.
?ctful of my charge. To-da^f t\\e^ xwaxc & esXsA^
cular attachment to a well at t\ve \ > o\.\.o\cv < »^
22 AGNES GREY.
lawn, where they persisted in dabbling with sticks and
pebbles for above half an hour. I was in constant fear
that their mother would see them from the window,
and blame me for allowing them thus to draggle their
clothes and wet their feet and hands instead of taking
exercise; but no arguments, commands, or entreaties
could draw them away. If she did not see them some
one else did. A gentleman on horseback had entered
the gdte and was proceeding up the road. At the dis-
tance of a few paces from us he paused, and calling to
the children in a waspish, penetrating tone, bade them
" Keep out of that water.'*— " Miss Grey, " said he, " (I
suppose it is Miss Grey), I am surprised that you should
allow them to dirty their clothes in that manner. Don't
you see how Miss Bloomfield has soiled her frock, and
that Master Bloomfield's socks are quite wet, and both
of them without gloves ? Dear, dear t let me reque^
that in future you will keep them decent at least ! " So
saying, he turned away, and continued his ride up to
the house. This was- Mr. Bloomfield. I was svirprised
that he should nominate his children Master and Miss
Bloomfield, and still more so that he should speak so
uncivilly to me, their governess, and a perfect stranger
to himself; Presently the bell rang to summon us in*
I dined with the children at one, while he and his lady took
their luncheon at the same table. His conduct there
did not greatly raise him in my estimation. He was a
man of ordinary stature — rather below than above — and
rather thin than stout, apparently between thirty and
forty years of age. He had a large mouth, pale, dingy
complexion, milky blue eyes, and hair the colour of a
hempen cord. There was a roast leg of mutton before
him. He helped Mrs. Bloomfield, the children, and me,
desiring me to cut up the children's meat ; then, after
twisting about the mutton in various directions, and
eyeing it from different points, he pronounced it not fit
to be eaten, and called for the cold beei.
" What is the matter with tiie mullow, to^j ^l^t-^^'
^ked his mate.
AGNES GREY.
•'It is quite overdone. Don't you taste, Mrs. Bloo
field, that all the goodness is roasted out of it ? A
can't you see that all that nice, red gravy is complet
dried away ? "
::= " WeU, I think the beef will suit you. "
i4 The beef was set before him, and he began to car
i^ but with the most rueful expressions of discontent.
zj " What is the matter with the beef, Mr, Bloomfiel
ir I'noL sure I thought it was very nice. "
" And so it was very nice — a nicer joint could i
be ; but it is quite spoiled, " replied he dolefully.
" How so? "
" How so ! Why, don't you see how it is cut ? De
dear ! it is quite shocking ! "
** They must have cut it wrong in the kitchen, th <
for I'm sure I carved it quite properly here yesterday.
" No doubt they cut it wrong in the kitchen — 1
savages ! Dear, dear ! did ever any onesee spch a fi
piece of beef so completely ruined ? But remember tl
in future, when a decent dish leaves this table, they sh
not touch it in the kitchen. Remember thaty Mrs. Bloo;
field. "
Notwithstanding the ruinous state of the beef, t
gentleman managed to cut himself some delicate slic <
part of which he ate in silence. When he next spol
it was in a less querulous tone, to ask what there y >
for dinner.
" Turkey and grouse, " was the concise reply.
" And what besides ? "
" Fish. "
" What kind of fish ? "
" I don't know. "
'* You don't know ? " cried he, looking solemnly
from his plate, and suspending his knife and fork
astonishment.
" No. I told the cook to get some fish ; I did e
particulari^ what. "
" WeU, that beats everything \ K \dA^ ^xcAess^
keep house, and doesn't even know vA^aV iv^'
^4 AGNES GREY.
dinner! professes to order fish, and doesn't specify
what ! "
" Perhaps, Mr. Bloomfield, you will order dinner your-
self in future.'*
Nothing more was said, and I was very glad to get out
of the room with my pupils, for I never felt so ashamed
and uncomfortable in my life for anything that was not
my owii fault.
In the afternoon we applied to lessons again, then
went out again, then had tea in the schoolroom, theti I
dressed Mary Ann for dessert ; and when she and her
brother had gone down to the dining-room, I took the
opportunity of beginning a letter to my dear friends at
honie, but the children came up before I had half com-
pleted it. At seven I had to put Mary Ann to bed;
then I played with Tom till eight, when he too went;
and I finished my letter and unpacked my clothes, which
I had hitherto found no opportunity for doing, and
finally went to bed myself.
But this is a very favourable specimen of a day's pro-
ceedings.
My task of instruction and surveillance, instead of be-
coming easier as my charges and I got better accustomed
to each other, became more arduous as their characters
unfolded. The name of governess, I soon found, was a
mere mockery as applied to me ; my pupils had no more
notion of obedience than a wild, unbroken colt. The
habitual fear, of their father's peevish temper, and the
dread of the punishments he was wont to inflict when
irritated, kept them generally within bounds in his im-
mediate presence. The girls, too, had some fear of their
mother's anger, and the boy might occasionally be bribed
to do as she bade hini by the hope of reward ; but I had
no rewards to offer. And as for punishments, I was
given to understand, the parents reserved that privilege
to themselves ; ^nd yet they expected me to keep my
pupils in order. Other children might be guided by the
'^sr of anger and the desire of apptob^l\otv,\i\i^x«£sJCfes
«? one nor the other had any effect \ipoTv t\vesfc.
AGNES GREY. 2$
faster Tom, not content with refusing to be ruled,
si needs set up as a ruler, and manifested a determina-
a to keep not only his sisters but his governess in
.er, by violent manual and pedal appUcations ; and
he was a tall, strong boy of his years, this occasioned
trifling inconvenience. A few sound boxes on the
, on such occasions, might have settled the mattetr
ily enough ; but as, in that case, he might make up
ae story to his mother, which she would be sure to
ieve, as she had such unshaken faith in his veracity — ^
•ugh I had already discovered it to be by no means
mpeachable — I determined to refrain from striking
1, even in self-defence ; and in his most violent moods
only resource was to throw him on his back, and hol^
hands and feet till the frenzy was somewhat abated,
the difficulty of preventing him from doing what he
jht not was added that of forcing him to dp what he
!;ht. Often he would positively refuse to learn, or
repeat his lessons, or even to look at his book. Here
in a good birch rod might have been serviceable, but
my powers were so Umited I mugt make the best use
ivhat I had.
Vs there were no settled hours for study and play, I
Dived to give my pupils a certain task which, with
derate attention, they could perform in a short ,time ;
1 till this was done, however weary I was, or however
verse they might be, nothing short of parental inter-
mce should induce me to suffer them to leave the
oolroom, even if I should sit with my chair against
door to keep them in. Patience, firmness, and per-
erance were my only weapons, and these I resolved
use to the utmost. I determined always strictly to
il the threats and promises I made, and to that end
nust be cautious to threaten and promise nothing
.t I could not perform. Then I would carefully re-
in from all useless irritability and indulgence of my
n ill- temper. When they behaved. \.c\^i^J^^ A ^^'^^'^
as kind and obliging as it was m xiv^ ^cr^^st \si r^^
rder to make the widest possftAe distvTLOCvQ^x^^^Q^*^^^
26 AGNES GREY.
good and bad conduct ; I would reason with them, too,
in the simplest and most effective manner* When I
reproved them, or refused to gratify their wishes, after :
a glaring fault, it should be more in sorrow than in anger, i
Their little hynms and prayers I would make plain and !
clear to their understanding. When they said their |
prayers at night, and asked pardon for their offences,*
I would remind them of the sins of the past day, sol-
enmly, but in perfect kindness, to avoid raising a spirit
of opposition ; penitential hymns should be said by the
naughty, cheerful ones by the comparatively good ; and \
every kind of instruction I would convey to them, as
much as possible, by entertaining discourse — apparently
with no other object than their present amusement in
view.
By these means I hoped, in time, both to benefit tbe
children and to gain the approbation of their parents,
and also to convince my friends at home that I was not
so wanting in skill and prudence as they supposed. I
knew the difficulties I had to contend with were great,
but I knew (at least I believed) unremitting patience aid
perseverance could overcome them ; and night and mom-
mg I implored Divine assistance to this end. But either
the children were so incorrigible, the parents so imreason-
able, or myself so mistaken in my views, or so unaUe
to carry them out, that my best intentions and most
strenuous efforts seemed productive of no better result
than sport to the children, dissatisfaction to their parents,
2Lnd torment to myself.
The task of instruction was as arduous for the body
as the mind. I had to run after my pupils to catch them,
to carry or drag them to the table, and often forcibly
to hold them there till the lesson was done, Tom I
frequently put into a comer, seating myself before him
in a. chair, with a book which contained the little task
thai must be said or read, before he was released, in my
Jiand, He was not strong enough to push both me and
t/re chair away, so he would stand twistvii^ \v\% \ > o^^ ^t > ^
^ce into the most grotesque and smgM\ai coTv\.ot\\Qnasr
AGNES GREY. 2/
ighable, lio doubt, to an unconcerned spectator, but
•t to me— and uttering loud yells and doleful outcries,
tended to represent weeping, but wholly without the
companiment of tears. I knew this was done solely
r the purpose of annoying me, and therefore, however
night inwardly tremble with impatience and irritation,
manfully strove to suppress all visible signs of molesta-
»n, and affected to sit with calm indifference waiting
I it should please him to cease this pastime, and pre-
re for a run in the garden, by casting his eye on the
ok and reading or repeating the few words he was
ijuired to say. Sometimes he was determined to do
I writing badly, and I had to hold his hand to prevent
m from purposely blotting or disfiguring the paper,
equently I threatened that, if he did not do better,
should have another line. Then he would stubbornly
fuse to write this line, and I, to save my word, had
tally to resort to the expedient of holding his fingers
on the pen, and forcibly drawing his hand up and
wn, till, in spite of his resistance, the line was in some
rt completed.
Yet Tom was by no means the most unmanageable
my pupils. Sometimes, to my great joy, he would
ve the sense to see that his wisest policy was to finish
5 tasks, and go out and. amuse himself till I and his
ters came to join him, which frequently was not at all,
• Mary Ann seldom followed his example in this par-
ular. She apparently preferred rolling on the floor to
y other amusement. Down she would drop like a
iden weight; and when I, with great difficulty, bad
xeeded in rooting her thence, I had still to hold her
with one arm, while with the other I held the book
»m which she was to read or spell her lesson. As the
ad weight of the big girl of six became too heavy for
e arm to bear, I transferred it to the other ; or, il
th were weary of the burden, I carried her into a
mer, and told her she might come out ^\\fc\N. ^cs, ^^^Si^^
i the use of her feet, and stand \rp •, " ^xxX. ^afc ^ijsoKtf^
'erred lying there like a log tSi dm^fcx ox Xfc*^ *^^
28 AGNES GREY.
when, as I could not deprive her of her meals, she must
be liberated, and would come crawUng out with a grin
of triumph on her round, red face. Often she would
stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word in
her lesson; and now I regret the lost labour I have had
in striving to conquer her obstinacy. If I had passed it
over as a matter of no consequence, it would have been
better for both parties than vainly striving to overcome
it as I did ; but I thought it my absolute duty to crush
this vicious tendency in the bud — and so it was, if I
could have done it. And had my powers been less hmited
I might have enforced obedience ; but as it was, it was
a trial of strength between her and me, in which she
generally came off victorious, and every victory served
to encourage and strengthen her for a future contest.
In vain I argued, coaxed, entreated, threatened, scolded ;
in vain I kept her in from play, or, if obliged to take her
out, refused to play with her, or to speak kindly, or
have anything to do with her ; in vain I tried to set
before her the advantages of doing as she was bid, and
being loved, and kindly treated in consequence, and the
disadvantages of persisting in her absurd perversity.
Sometimes, when she would ask me to do something for
her, I would answer, —
" Yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will only say that word.
Come ! you'd better say it at once, and have no more
trouble about it. "
*'No. "
" Then, of course, I can do nothing for you. "
With me, at her age or under, neglect and disgrace
were the most dreadful of punishments, but on her they
made no impression. Sometimes, exasperated to the
utmost pitch, I would shake her violently by the shoulder,
or pull her long hair, or put her in the comer, for which
she punished me with loud, shrill, piercing screams that
went through my head like a knife. She knew I hated
this, and when she had shrieked Yier Mtnvost would
'oak Into my face with an air ol v\tid\c\xve s^Xi^VaK^Ksyo
^cJadming, " Now, then, thai'% lot you\''^3id ^Qm
AGNfES GREY. ^9
iriek again and again, till I was forced to stop my ears,
ften these dreadful cries would bring Mrs. Bloomfield
3 to inquire what was the matter.
*'Mary Ann is a naughty girl, ma'am. "
*'But what are these shocking screams ? "
** She is screaming in a passion. "
** I never heard such a dreadful noise. You roight be
liing her. Why is she not out with her brother ? "
" I cannot get her to finish her lessons. "
** But Mary Ann must be a good girl, and finish her
ssons. " This was blandly spoken to the child. " And
hope I shall never hear such terrible cries again, "
And fixing her cold, stony eyes upon me with a look
lat could not be mistaken, she would shut the dqor and
alk away. Sometimes I would try to take the little
> stinate creature by surprise, and casually ask her the
ord while she was thinking of something else. Fre-
lently she would begin to say it, and then suddenly
leck herself, with a provoking look that seemed to say,
Ah ! I'm too sharp for you ; you shan't trick it out
: me either. "
On another occasion I pretended to forget the whole
fair, and talked and played with her as usual till
ght, when I put her to bed ; then bending over her,
hile she lay aU smiles and good-humour, jtist before
^parting I said, as cheerfully and kindly as before,-^
*• Now, Mary Ann, just tell me that word before I kiss
DU good-night. You are a good girl now, and of course
)u will say it. "
" No, I won't. "
" Then I can't kiss you. "
" Well, I don't care. "
In vain I expressed my sorrow, in vain I lingered for
►me symptom of contrition ; she really ** didn't care. "
nd I left her alone, and in darkness, wondering most of
1 at this last proof of insensate stubbQirKriK5 & » \xv -wi
uldhood I could not imagine a mot^ ^^eLC^asr^'^''^^^^?^
mt than for my mother to letuae to V\^ " ccsa " ^^^^
veiry idea was terrible, ^oxe lYvaxv ^e V^^ " ^ ^ " ^
30 AGNES GREY.
felt, for, happily, I never committed a fault that was
deemed worthy of such a penalty ; but once, I remember,
for some transgression of my sister's our mother thought
proper to inflict it upon her. What she felt: I cannot tell,
but my sjnnpathetic tears and suffering for her sake I
shall not soon forget.
Another troublesome trait in Mary Ann was her in-
corrigible propensity to keep running into the nursery
to play with her little sisters and the nurse. This was
natural enough, but, as it was against her mother's ex-
press desire, I, of course, forbade her to do so, and did
my utmost to keep her with me ; but that only increased
her relish for the nursery, and the more I strove to keep
her out of it the oftener she went, and the longer she
stayed, to the great dissatisfaction of Mrs. Bloomfield,
who, I well knew, would impute aU the blame of the
matter to me. Another of my trials was the dressing
in the morning. At one time she would not be washed,
at another she would not be dressed unless she might
wear some particular frock that I knew her mother
would not like her to have, at another she would scream
and run away if I attempted to touch her hair. So that,
frequently, when, after much trouble and toil, I had, at
length, succeeded in bringing her down, the breakfast
was nearly half over, and black looks from " mamma, "
and testy observations from ** papa, " spoken at me, if
not to me, were sure to be tny meed, for few things irri-
tated the latter so much as want of punctuality at meal
times. Then, among the minor annoyances was my
inability to satisfy Mrs. Bloomfield with her daughter's
dress, and the child's hair " Was never fit to be seen. "
Sometimes, as a powerful reproach to me, she would
perform the office of tire-woman herself, and then com-
plain bitterly of the trouble it gave her.
When Uttle Fanny came into the schoolroom I hoped
she would be mild and inoffensive, at least ; but a few
dkys, if not a few hours, sufficed to destroy the illusion.
found her a miscbievons, intractaXAe \\l\Xe cxeaicasfc,
*'*^ up to falsehood and deception, v^^^^^ ^ ^^ ^^
AGNES GREY. 31
d alarmingly fond of exercising her two favourite
apons of offence and defence — that of spitting in the
:es of those who incurred her displeasure, and bellow-
; like a bull when her unreasonable desires were not
itified. As she generally was pretty quiet in her
rents'presence, and they were impressed with the
tion of her being a remarkably gentle child, her false-
ods were readily believed, and her loud uproars led
3m to suspect harsh and injudicious treatment on my
rt; and when at length her bad disposition became
mifest even to their prejudiced eyes, I felt that the
lole was attributed to me.
" What a naughty girl Fanny is getting I " Mrs. Bloom-
Id would say to her spouse. " Don't you observe, my
ir, how she is altered since she entered the school-
)m ? She will soon be as bad as the other two ; and,
tm sorry to say, they have quite deteriorated of late. "
'* You may say that, " was the answer. " I've been
nking that same myself. I thought when we got
jm a governess they'd improve, but instead of that
;y get worse and worse. I don't know how it is with
iir learning, but their habits, I know, make no sort
improvement ; they get rougher, and dirtier, and
> re unseemly every day. "
[ knew this was all pointed at me, and these and all
lilar innuendoes affected me far more deeply than any
en accusations would have done, for against the latter
ihould have been roused to speak in my own defence,
►w I judged it my wisest plan to subdue every resentful
pulse, suppress every sensitive shrinking, and go on
rseveringly, doing my best ; for, irksome as my situa-
n was, I earnestly wished to retain it. I thought if
:ould struggle on with unremitting firnmess and in-
^ty the children would in time become more human-
d ; every month would contribute to n^ike thero. ^vccsft.
de wiser, and, consequently, mote inaiv3ki^eaS:\^ > — -Vsv. -^
Id of nine or ten as frantic and MngONetro^^ ^ & *^^^
ix and seven would be a maniajc. . ,
flattered myseii I was bexie & tii > & ms V^^^^^^'
34 AGNES GREY,
my tears ; but I have restrained them, till my little tor-
mentors were gone to dessert, or cleared off to bed (m}
only prospects of deliverance), and then, in all tlw
bliss of solitude, I have given myself up to the luxur]
of an unrestricted burst of weeping. But this wai
a weakness I did not often indulge ; my employment
were too numerous, my leisure moments too precious
to admit of much time being given to fruitless lamenta
tions.
I particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon
soon after my return in January. The children had al
come up from dinner, loudly declaring that they mean
" to be naughty ; " and they had well kept their resolu
tion, though I had talked myself hoarse, and wearie(
every muscle in my throat, in the vain attempt to reasoi
them out of it. I had got Tom pinned up in a comer
whence, I told him, he should not escape till he had dom
his appointed task. Meantime Fanny had possessec
herself of my work-bag, and was rifling its contents
and spitting into it besides. I told her to let it alone
but to no purpose, of course. ** Burn it, Fanny ! " crie(
Tom ; and this command she hastened to obey. 1
sprang to snatch it from the fire, and Tom darted to th(
door. " Mary Ann, throw her desk out of the window!'
cried he ; and my precious desk, containing my letter
and papers, my small amount of cash, and all my valu
ables, was about to be precipitated from the three-stOT]
window. I flew to rescue it. Meanwhile Tom ha <
left the room, and was rushing down the stairs, foUowec
by Fanny. Having secured my desk, I ran to catd
them, and Mary Ann came scampering after. All thre
escaped me, and ran out of the house into the garden
where they plunged about in the snow, shouting an <
screaming in exultant glee.
What must I do ? If I followed them I should prob
ably be imable to capture one, and only drive then
farther away ; if I did not, how was I to get them in
^nd what wouJd their parents tbiiik oi X£v^'\i > i > ae^ ^
^r heard the children noting, lialkss, ^xjMx^^ii^sfe, ^^
AGNES GREY. 35
ind bootless, in the deep, soft snow ? While I
in this perplexity, just without the door, trying,
im looks and angry words, to awe them into sub-
1, I heard a voice behind me, in harshly piercing
exclaiming, —
iss Grey ! is it possible ? What, in the devil's
can you be thinking about ? "
can*t get them in, sir,'* said I, turning roimd, and
ling Mr. Bloomfield, with his hair on end, and his
lue eyes bolting from their sockets,
ut I INSIST upon their being got in ! " cried he,
iching nearer, and looking perfectly ferocious,
ben, sir, you must call them yourself, if you please,
2y won't listen to me, " I replied, stepping back.
)me in with you, you filthy brats, or I'll horsewhip
very one ! " roared he ; and the children instantly
i. — ** There, you see ! They come at the first
n
es, when you speak.'*
tid it's very strange that when you've the care of
'ou've no better control over them than that.
there they are — gone upstairs with their nasty
feet. Do go after'em and see them made decent,
iaven's sake ! "
t gentleman's mother was then staying in the
and as I ascended the stairs and passed the draw-
Dm door I had the satisfaction of hearing the old
eclaiming aloud to her daughter-in-law to this effect
could only distinguish the most emphatic words), —
racious Heavens ! never in all my life get
death as sure as " Do you think, my dear,
L proper person ? Take my word for it "
ard no more ; but that sufficed.
senior Mrs. Bloomfield had been very attentive and
3 me, and till now I had thought her a nice, kind-
d, chatty old body. She would often corae. 1 < 5 \sss^
ilk in a con^dential strain, nod & iv^ ^xA ^oa^Kxcs%
acf, and gesticulating with YiaxiAs ^iv^ e^^^. " ^^'
class of old iadies are wont to do, t\xa\3L?5a^^^ > ^^
36 AGNES GREY.
knew one that carried the peculiarity to so gre^it a
extent. She would even sympathize with me for tl
trouble I had with the children, and express at time
by half sentences, interspersed with nods and knowii
winks, her sense of the injudicious conduct of the
mamma in so restricting my power, and neglecting i
support me with her authority. Such a mode of testif;
ing disapprobation was not much to my taste, and
generally refused to take it in, or understand anythir
more than was openly spoken — at least, I never wei
further than an implied acknowledgment that, if matte
were otherwise* ordered, my task would be a less dif & cu
one, and I should be better able to guide and instru
my charge. But now I must be doubly cautiov
Hitherto, though I saw the old lady had her defects (
which one was a proneness to proclaim her perfections
I had always been wishful to excuse them, and to gi^
her credit for all the virtues she professed, and evi
imagine others yet untold. Kindness, which had be <
the iood of my life through so many years, had late
been so entirely denied me that I welcomed with gratef
joy the slightest semblance of it. No wonder, then, thi
my heart warmed to the old lady, and always gladdeiK
at her approach and regretted her departure.
But now the few words luckily or unluckily heard
passing had wholly revolutionized my ideas respectii
her. Now I looked upon her as hypocritical and i
sincere, a flatterer, and a spy upon my words and deed
Doubtless it would have been my interest still to me
her with the same cheerful smile and tone of respectf
cordiality as before, but I could not if I would ; n
manner altered with my feelings, and became so co
and shy that she could not fail to notice it. She so(
did notice it, and her manner altered too. The familii
nod was changed to a stiff bow, the gracious smile ga^
place to a glare of Gk)rgon ferocity ; her vivacious 1
quacity was entirely transferred iiom m^ to " the da
- < fo^ boys and girls/* whom she ftatteted ^il^ \3cA\^^
»ore absurdly than ever their motYvet'had doxv^.
s
bm
AGNES GKEY.
I confess I was somewhat troubled at this chang^
feared the consequences of her displeasure, and even
some efforts to recover the ground 1 had lost, and wi
better apparent success than I could have anticipate
At one time I. merely in common civility, asked af
her cough. Immediately her long visage relaxed intc
smile, and she favoured me %vith a particular historj
that and her other infirmities, followed by an accouit
her pious resignation, delivered in the usual emph^
declamatory style, which no writing can portray.
" But there's one remedy for all, my dear, and th
resignation " (a toss of the head)—''resignation to-
will of Heaven " {an uplifting of the hands and ej!
" It has always supported me through all my trials, i
always will do " {a succession of nods). " But theH
isn*t everybody that can say that " (a shake of the heac
" but I'm one of the pious ones, Miss Grey'^ (a vc
significant nod and toss).'* And, thank Heavei
b
led
always was ^'(another nod), *'and I glory in it
emphatic clasping of the hands and shaking of the h
^e^ And with several texts of Scri])turej misquoted or
applied, and rehgious exclamations so redolent of
mdicrous in the style of delivery and manner of brin^
hij if not in the expressions themselves, that I decli
repeating them, slie withdrew, tossing her large h«
in high good- humour— with herself at least- — and 1
me hoping that, after all, she was rather weak 1
mcked. I
At her next visit to Wellwood House I went so fgg
to say I was glad to see her looking so welK Tlie e^
of this was magical The words, intended as a mari
dvihty, were received as a flattering comphment, i
countenance brightened up, and from that moment;
became as gracious and benign as heart could wishes
outward semblance at least. From what I now sa\
her, and what I heard from the children, I Vx\.e^ \
in order to gain her cordial friends\i\p, 1 W^'N^xk^. \ss2
a word of Hattery at each convenient oppoTX > m^V^
itMs was against my principles, and iot X-asiV ^ " v
3^ AGNES GREY.
capricious old dame soon deprived me of her favoui
again, and I believe did me much secret injury.
She could not greatly influence her daughter-in-la^
against me, because between that lady and herself then
was a mutual dishke, chiefly shown by her in secret de-
tractions and calunmiations, by the other in an excess
of frigid f ormahty in her demeanour ; and no fawning
flattery of the elder could thaw away the wall of ice whicl
the younger interposed between them. But with ha
son the old lady had better success. He would lista
to all she had to say, provided she could soothe his fretful
temper, and refrain from irritating him by her own asper-
ities ; and I have reason to beUeve that she considerably
strengthened his prejudice against me. She would id
him that I shamefully neglected the children, and evw:
his wife did not attend to them as she ought, and that hf
must look after them himself, or they would all go to nrin
Thus urged, he would frequently give himself the troubh
of watching them from the windows during their play
at times he would follow them through the grounds, aik
too often came suddenly upon them while they wen
dabbling in the forbidden well, talking to the coachmar
in the stables, or revelling in the filth of the farmyaid
and I, meanwhile, wearily standing by, having previousl}
exhausted my energy in vain attempts to get them away
Often, too^ he would unexpectedly pop his head into th
schoolroom while the young people were at meals, aiK
find them spilling their milk over the table and them'
selves, plunging their fingers into their own or eacl
other's mugs, or quarrelling over their victuals like \
set of tiger's cubs. If I were quiet at the moment ]
was conniving at their disorderly conduct, if (as wa
frequently the case) I happened to be exalting my voio
to enforce order, I was using undue violence, and settini
the girls a bad example by such ungentleness of tone anc
hnguage.
I remember one afternoon in spring v^lveiv, owing to th <
r^/7, they could not go out, but by some ^raaiffvii, ^gaw
^rfune they had all finished their \easoTia, «xv^ ^^V ^
AGNES GREY. 39
5d from running down to tease their parents — ^a
that annoyed me greatly, but which, on rainy da5rs,
lorn could prevent their doing, because below they
I novelty and amusement, especially when visitors
in the house ; and their mother, though she bade me
them in the schoolroom, would never chide them
aving it, or trouble herself to send them back. But
[ay they appeared satisfied with their present abode,
what is more wonderful still, seemed disposed to
together without depending on me for amusement,
Adthout quarreiUng with each other. Their occu-
ti was a somewhat puzzling one. They were all
ted together on the floor by the window, over a heap
3ken toys and a quantity of birds'eggs — or rather
ells, for the contents had luckily been abstracted.
; shells they had broken up and were pounding into
fragments, to what end I could not imagine ; but
ig as they were quiet and not in positive mischief,
not care ; and with a feeling of unusual repose I
y the fire, putting the finishing stitches to a frock
iary Ann's doll, intending, when that was done, to
a letter to my mother. Suddenly the door opened,
he dingy head of Mr. Bloomfield looked in.
lU very quiet here ! What are you doing ? " saiid
''No harm to-day, at least, " thought I. But he
)f a different opinion. Advancing to the window,
seeing the children's occupations, he testily ex-
ed, ** What in the world are you about ? "
^e're grinding eggshells, papa ! *'cried Tom.
[ow dare you make such a mess, you little devils ?
: you see what confounded work you're making of
irpet ? " (The carpet was a plain, brown drugget.)
liss Grey, did you know what they were doing ? "
'" es, sir. "
''ou knew it ? "
^es. "
'^ou knew it, and you actually sai ^ < et^ ^3y^ " ^f^-
1 them to go on, without a word oi teipxo^W^
iidn*t think they were doing aoj " haxto.''
4Q AGNES GREY.
" Any harm ! Why, look there ! Just look at that car-
pet, and see. Was there ever anything like it in a Christian
house before ? No wonder your room is not fit for a pig-
sty. No wonder youf pupils are worse than a litter of
pigs. No wonder Oh ! I declare, it puts me quite
past my patience ! " And he departed, shutting the door
after him with a bang that made the children laugh.
" It puts me quite past my patience too, " muttered
I, getting up ; and seizing the poker, I dashed it re-
peatedly into the cinders, and stirred them up with un-
wonted energy, thus easing my irritation imder pretence
of mending the fire.
After this Mr. Bloomfield was continually looking in
to see if the schoolroom was in order ; and as the chil-
dren were continually Uttering the floor with fragments
of toys, sticks, stones, stubble, leaves, and other rub-
bish, which I could not prevent their bringing, or oblige
them to gather up, and which the servants refused to
" clean after them, " I had to spend a considerable por-
tion of my valuable leisure moments on my knees upon
the floor in painfully reducing things to order. Once I
told them that they should not taste their supper tifl
they had picked up everything from the carpet ; Fanny
might have hers when she had taken up a certain quan-
tity, Mary Ann when she had gathered twice as many,
and Tom was to clear away the rest. Wonderful to
state, the girls did their part, but Tom was in such a
fury that he flew upon the table, scattered the bread and
milk about the floor, struck his sisters, kicked the coals
out of the coal-pan, attempted to overthrow the table
and chairs, and seemed inclined to make a Douglas-
larder of the whole contents of the room ; but I seized
upon him, and sending Mary Ann to call her mamma,
held him, in spite of kicks, blows, yells, and execrations,
till Mrs. Bloomfield made her appearance.
*'What is the matter with my boy ?'* said she.
And when the matter was explained to her, all she did
^as to send for the nurserymaid to put tYie iootq. m q»x^«i
^d bring Master Bloomfield his suppex.
AGNES GREY. 41
*'There, now ! " cried Tom triumphantly, looking uf
from his viands with his mouth almost too full for speect
— " there, now. Miss Grey ! You see I have got my suppei
in spite of you, and I haven't picked up a single thing !'"
The only person in the house who had any real sym-
pathy for me was the nurse, for she had suffered likf
afflictions, though in a smaller degree, as she had not the
task of teaching, nor was she so responsible for the con-
dvf^t of her charge.
'* O Miss Grey, " she would say, " you have some trouble
with them childer ! "
" I have, indeed, Betty ; and I dare say you kno^
what it is. "
" Ay, I do so. But I don't vex myself o'er'em as you
do. And then, you see, I hit *em a slap sometimes ; and
them little uns, I gives *em a good whipping now and
then. There's nothing else will do for'em, as what thej
say. Howsoever, I've lost my place for it. "
'* Have you, Betty ? I heard you were going to leave. "
" Eh, bless you, yes ! Missis gave me warning a three
Wik sin'. She told me afore Christmas how it mud be
if I hit'em again ; but I couldn't hold my hand off'era
at nothing. I know not how you do, for Miss Mary Ann's
Worse by the half nor her sisters. "
CHAPTER V.
THE UNCLE.
Besides the old lady, there was another relative of the
iamily whose visits were a great annoyance to me,
This was " Uncle Robson, " Mrs. Bloomfield's brother, a
tall, self-sufficient fellow, with dark hair and sallow com-
plexion like his sister, a nose that seemed lo ^iasAscecs. *C^
earth, and little gray eyes, frequeivWY \vs\i ^qr«;^ > ^
a mixture of real stupidity and aftected coxA^tk^V ^ " s
urrounding objects. He was a t\nc\L-s^^L, ^Xxowgc^-
lan, but he had found some means oi comY^^^s^v
42 AGNES GREY.
waist into a remarkably small compass ; and that, to-
gether with the unnatural stiffness of his form, showed
that the lofty-minded, manly Mr. Robson, the scomer o1
the female sex, was not above the foppery of stays. He
seldom deigned to notice me, and when he did it was
with a certain supercilious insolence of tone and mannei
that convinced me he was no gentleman, though it was
intended to have a contrary eSect. But it was not foi
that I disliked his coming so much as for the harm he did
the children — encouraging all their evil propensities, and
undoing in a few minutes the little good it had: taken
me jtionths of labour to achieve. .
Fanny and little Harriet he seldom condescended to
notice, but Mary Ann was something of a favourite. He
was continually encouraging her tendency to affectation
(which I had done my utmost to crush), talking about
her pretty face, and filling her head with all manner of
conceited notions concerning her personal appearance
(which I had instructed her to regard as dust in the
balance compared with the cultivation of her mind and
manners); and I never saw a child so susceptible of
flattery as she was. Whatever was wrong in either hex
or her brother he would encourage by laughing at, if
not by actually praising. People little know the injury
they do to children by laughing at their faults, and
making a pleasant jest of what their true friends have
endeavoured to teach them to hold in grave abhorrence.
Though not a positive drunkardi Mr. Robson habitually
swallowed great quantities of wine, and took with relish
an occasional glass of brandy and water. He taught his
nephew to imitate him in this to the utmost of his abilitVi
and to believe that the more wine and spirits he could
take, and the better he liked them, the more he mani-
fested his bold and manly spirit, and rose superior tc
his sisters. Mr. Bloomfield had not much to say against
jt, ioT his favourite beverage was gin and water, of whici
Ae took a considerable portion every day, by dint of con-
stant sipping; and to that 1 chiefly attribu\.fe^\as» ^asasg
^^pJexion and waspish temper.
AGNES GREY. 43
Robson likewise encouraged Tom's propensity to
'secute the lower creation, both by precept and ex-
iple. As he frequently came to course or shoot over
brother-in-law's grounds, he would bring his favourite
ffs with him ; and he treated them so brutally that,
3r as I was, I would have given a sovereign any day
see one of them bite him, provided the animal could
'm done it with impunity, Sometiraes, when in a
^ complacent mood, he would go a-birdnesting with
E children — a thing that irritated and annoyed me
:eedinglyi as, by frequent and persevering attempts,
lattered myself I had partly shown them the evil of
5 pastime, and hoped in time to bring them to some
leral sense of justice and humanity ; but ten minutes*
dnesting with Uncle Robson, or even a laugh from
a at some relation of their former barbarities, was
ficient at once to destroy the effect of my whole elab-
tte course of reasoning and persuasion. Happily,
^ver, during that spring they never, but once, got
jrthing but empty nests or eggs, being too impatient to
ve them till the birds were hatched. That once Tom,
had been with his uncle into the neighbouring
ntation, came running in high glee into the garden,
:h a brood of little callow nesthngs in his hands. Mary
n and Fanny, whom I %vas just bringing out, ran to
nire his spoils, and to beg each a bird for themselves,
^o, not one !''cried Tom,'* They* re all mine* Uncle
bson gave them to me — one, two, three, four, five*
u shan't touch one of them — -no, not one, for your
2S I " continued he exultingly, la > nng the nest on the
lund^ and standing over it with his legs wide apart,
hands thrust into his breeches -pockets, his body
it forward, and his face twisted into ail manner of
itprtions in the ecstasy of his delight.
'But you shall see me fettle'em of£ > My word, but I
1 wallop'em I See if I don't tvovj* ^^ ^TtY\ > a^!i^-
:re*s rare sport for me in that nest**
'But^ Tom/'said I, " I shall not aWo^ ^^^^ ^'^'" ^^'^
birds. They must either be kiWed ^1 oiice ^^ ^'^^^
i
44 AGNES GREY.
back to the place you took them from, that the old bif-ds
may continue to feed them. "
** But you don't know where that is, madam. It's
only me and Uncle Robson that knows that. "
** But if you don't tell me I shall kill them myself,
much as I hate it. "
" You daren't. You daren't touch them for your life,
because you know papa, and mamma, and Uncle Robson
would be angry. Ha, ha I I've caught you there, miss ! "
" I shall do what I think right in a case of this sort,
without consulting any one. If your papa and mamma
don't happen to approve of it, I shall be sorry to offend
them, but your Uncle Robson's opinions, of course, ai€
nothing to me. "
So saying, urged by a sense of duty, at the risk of both
making niyself sick and incurring the wrath of my em-
ployers, I got a large flat stone that had been reared up
for a mouse- trap by the gardener ; then, having once
more vainly endeavoured to persuade the Httle tyrant tc
let the birds be carried back, I asked what he intended
to do with them. With fiendish glee he conunenced a
list of torments, and while he was busied in the relation
I dropped the stone upon his intended victims and crushed
them flat beneath it. Loud were the outcries, terrible
the execrations, consequent upon this daring outrage
Uncle Robson had been coming up the walk with his gun
and was just then pausing to kick his dog. Tom fle^
towards him, vowing he would make him kick me in-
stead of Juno. Mr. Robson leant upon his gim anc
laughed excessively at the violence of his nephew*!
passion and the bitter maledictions and opprobriotr
epithets he heaped upon me. ** Well, you are a goo(
un ! " exclaimed he at length, taking up his weapon anc
proceeding towards the house. " Damme, but the la <
has some spunk in him too. Curse me if ever I saw'*
nobler little scoundrel than that. He's beyond petti
coat government already. By God, Yie de^es mother
franny,^ governess, and all \ Ha, Iva, Yi2L\—'tJ^^'^et tcm^^
om; ru get yon another brood to-moitaw?'
AGNES GREY. 45
f you do, Mr. Robson, I shall kill them. too, " said I.
lumph ! " rephed he ; and having honoured me
a broad stare — which, contrary to his expectations,
:ained without flinching — ^he turned away with an air
preme contempt, and stalked into the house. Tom
went to tell his mamma. It was not her way to 3ay
I on any subject, but when she next saw. me her
it and demeanour were doubly dark and chill, Aiter
casual remark about the weather, she observed,-r-
am sorry, Miss Grey, you should think it necessary
terfere with Master Bloomfield's amusements. . He
very much distressed, about your destro5ang the
> >
Vhen Master Bloomfield's amusements consist in
Ing sentient creatures, " I answered, " I think it
.uty to interfere/*
fou seemed to have forgotten, " said she caliiily,
t the creatures were all created for our convenience. "
thought that doctrine admitted some doubt, but
ly replied, —
f they were, we have no right to torment them for
imusement. "
think, " said she, ** a child's amusement is scarcely
: weighed against the welfare of a soulless brute. "
3ut for the child's own sake it ought not to be en-
Lged to have such amusements, " answered I, as
ly as I could, to make up for such unusual per-
ity. /'* Blessed are the m^ciful, for they shall
n mercy.'"
)h, of course ! But that refers to our conduct to-
s each other. "
The merciful man shows mercy to his beast,'" I
ired to add.
'. think you. have not shown much mercy/'replied
with a short, bitter laugh — " kilUng- the poor birds
'^holesale in that shocking manner'and p\ittAs\% -^^^
boj to such misery for a mere vAmrv.''
udged it prudent to say no moie. T > xss ^'as* ^
t approach to a quarrel . I ever \kaA voSN^ ^
46 AGNES GREY.
Bloomfield, as well as the greatest number of words I
ever exchanged with her at one time since the day of
my first arrival.
But Mr. Robson and old Mrs. Bloomfield were not the
only guests whose coming to Wellwood House annoyed
me. Every visitor disturbed me more or less, not so
much because they neglected me (though I did feel their
conduct strange and disagreeable in that respect) as be-
cause I found it impossible to keep my pupils away from
them, as I was repeatedly desired to do. Tom must talk
to them, and Mary Ann must be noticed by them. Neither
the one nor the other knew what it was to feel any de-
gree of shamefacedness, or even common modesty. They
would indecently and clamorously interrupt the con-
versation of their elders, tease them with the most im-
pertinent questions, roughly collar the gentlemen, climb
their knees uninvited, hang about their shoulders or
rifle their pockets, puU the ladies'gowns, disorder their
hair, tumble their collars, and importunately beg for
their trinkets.
Mrs. Bloomfield had the sense to be shocked and
annoyed at all this, but she had not sense to prevent it
She expected me to prevent it. But how could I, when
the guests, with their fine clothes arid new faces, con-
tinually flattered and indulged them, out of complai-
sance to their parents — ^how could /, with my homely
garments, everyday face, and honest words, draw them
away ? I strained every nerve to do so. By striving
to amuse them I endeavoured to attract, them to. my
side ; by the exertion of such authority as I possessed,
and by such severity as I dared to use, I tried to deter
them from tormenting the guests, and by reproaching
their immannerly conduct to make them ashamed to
repieat it But they knew no shame. They scorned
authority which had no terrors to back it; and as for
kindness and affection, either they had no hearts, or
such as they had were so strongly guaidftd, ^xvd so iwell
oncealed, that I, with all my efiorts, Wd laoX. ^\. eo &
vered how to reach them.
AGNES GREY. 47
But soon my trials in this quarter came to a close—
> ooner than I either expected or desired,; for one sweet
evening towards the close of May, as I was rejoicing in
the near approach of the hohdays, and congratulating
nyselt upon having made some progress with my pupik
[as. far as their learning went, at least, for I ha4 instiUed
\ofnething into their heads, and I had at length brought
them to be a little — a very httle — more rational about
retting their lessons done in time to leave some space
for recreation, instead of tormenting themselves and me
all day long to no purpose), Mrs. BJoomfield sent for me,
and calmly told me that after midsummer my services
would be no longer required. She assured me that my
character and general conduct were unexceptionable, but
the children had made so little improvement since my
arrival that Mr. Bloomfield and she felt it their duty to
seek some other mode of instruction. Though superior
to most children of their years in abilities, they were
decidedly behind them in attainments ; their manners
were uncultivated, and th^ir tempers unruly. And this
die attributed to a want of sufficient fimmess, and dili-
gent, persevering care on my part.
Unshaken firmness, devoted diligence, unwearied per-
severance, unceasing care, were the very qualifications
on which I had secretly prided myself, and by which I
had hoped in time to overcome all difficulties, and ob-
tain success at last. I wished to say something in my
own justification, but in attempting to speak I felt my
voice falter, and rather than testify any emotion, or
sufier the tears to overflow that were, already gathering
in my eyes, I chose to keep silence, and bear all like a
self-convicted culprit.
Thus, was I dismissed, and thus I sought my home.
Alas ! what would they think of me — unable^ after all
my boasting, to keep my place, even for a single y^^^^
as governess to three small children, vi\\o^fe Taa'OENs:t ^-^
asserted by my own aunt to be a''vet > ^ mcfe N^wssass?
laving been thus weighed ixi thft )oa\^.-a.cfc «s^^'^
wanting, I need not hope tkey viO > iXd be, ntSj^^ ^
4^ AGNES GREY.
me again. And this was an unwelcome thought ; for,
vexed, harassed, disappointed as I had been, and greatly
as I had learned to love and value my home, I was not
fet weary of adventure, nor willing to relax my efforts,
knew that all parents were not hke Mr. and Mrs, Bloom-
field, and I was certain all children were not Hke theirs.
The next family must be different, and any change must
be for the better, I had been seasoned by adversity,
and tutored by experience, and I longed to redeem my
lost honour in the eyes of those whose opinion was more
than that of all the world to me.
CHAPTER VI.
THE PARSONAGE AGAIN.
For a few months I remained peaceably at home, in the
quiet enjoyment of Uberty, and rest, and genuine friend-
ship, from all of which I had fasted so long, and in the
earnest prosecution of my studies, to recoyep what I had
lost during my stay at Wellwood House, and to lay in
new stores for future use. My father's health was still
very infirm, but not materially worse than when I last
saw him ; and I was glad I had it in my power to che«
him by my return, and to amuse him with singing his
favourite songs.
No one triumphed over my failure, or said I had better
have taken his or her advice and quietly stayed at home.
All were glad to have me back again, and lavished mow
kindness than ever upon me, to make up fof the suffer-
ings I had undergone ; but not one would touch a shil-
ling of what I had so cheerfully earned and so carefully
saved, in the hope of sharing it with them. By dint oj
pinching here and scraping there, our debts were alreadj
nearly paid. Mary had had good success with her draw
I'ngs, but our father had insisted upon her likewise keep
/7^ d/I the produce oi her industry to Yvearei^i. KSl nb
^uJd spare from the supply oi out ^lumW^ ^«3t^«^
AGNES GREY.
and our little casual expenses he directed us to put ii
the savings'bank, saying we knew not how soon
I might be dependent on that alone for support ; for
[ felt he had not long to be with us, and what would 1
, come of our mother and us when he was gone, God oi
: knew.
!. Dear papa ! if he had troubled himself less about 1
1 afflictions that threatened us in case of his death, I j
-^. convinced that dreaded event would not have tal
J place so soon. My mother would never suffer him
I ponder on the subject if she could help it.
" O Richard ! " exclaimed she, on one occasion,'
you would but dismiss such gloomy subjects from yc
mind, you would live as long as any of us — at least y
would Hve to see the girls married, and yourself a hap
grandfather, with a canty old dame for your companioi
My mother laughed, and so did my father ; but
;}f laugh soon perished in a dreary sigh.
'* They married — ^poor penniless things ! " said !
" Who will take them, I wonder ? "
" Why, nobody shall that isn't thankful for the
Wasn't I penniless when you took me ? And you f
tended, at legist, to be vastly pleased with your acqu
tion. But it's no matter whether they get married
not. We can devise a thousand honest ways of maki
a livelihood. And I wonder, Richard, you can think
bothering your head about our poverty in case of yc
death, as if thai would be toything compared with 1
calamity of losing you — an affliction that you wellkn
would swallow up all others, and which you ought to
r your utmost to preserve us from ; and there is nothi
1 Uke a cheerful mind for keeping the body in health. "
** I know, Alice, it is wrong to keep repining as I <
but I cannot help it. You must bear with me. "
..''I won't bear with you, if I can alter you, " repli
■m my mother ; but the harshness of her words wa« & %
r done by the earnest, affection oi Yiet toivfc ^ii^ ^^^
/ swiJe, that made my father smile agaixi > Ye^'s* sa.^
^ Jess traasiently tbm was his wout.
50 AGNES GREY.
" Mamma, " said I, as soon as I could find an oppor-
tunity of speaking with her alone, " my money is but
little, and cannot last long. If I could increase it, it
would lessen papa's anxiety, on one subject at iieast:
I cannot draw Uke Mary, and so the best thing I could
do would be to look out for another situation. "
" And so you would actually try again, Agnes ? "
*'Decidedly, I would. "
>'* Why, my dear, I should have thought you had had
enough of it. "
" I know, " said I, " everybody is not Hke Mr. and Mis.
Bloomfield "
** Some are worse, " interrupted my mother.
" But not many, I think, " replied L " And I'm sure
all children are not like theirs, for I and Mary were not.
We always did as you bade us, didn't we ? "
" Generally. But then I did not spoil you, and you
were not perfect angels after all. Mary had a fund of
quiet obstmacy, and you were somewhat faulty in re-
gard to temper ; but you were very good children bii
the whole. "
" I know I was sulky sometimes, and I should! have
been glad to see these children sulky sometimes too, for
then I could have understood them ; but they never were,
for they coidd not be offended, nor hurt, nor ashamed:
They could not be unhappy in any way, except when
they were in a passion. "
" Well, if they coidd not, it was not their fault. You
cannot expect stone to be as pliable as clay. "
" No, but still it is vefy unpleasant to live with such
unimpressible, incomprehensible creatures. You can-
not love them ; and if y6u could, your love would be
utterly thrown away. They coiild neither return it
nor value nor imderstand it. But, however, even if I
should siumble on such a family again, which is quite
unlikely, I have all this experience to begin with, and
I should manage better another time ; and the end and
^^ ^^ ^^^^ P^amble is — ^let me tty agam**
Well my girl, you are not easily disco\ua%^^A ^««
AGNES GREY. Sf
am glad of that. But let ine tell you you are a good
deal paler and thinner than when you first left home ;,
and we cannot have you undermining your health to
hoard up money, either for yourself or others/'
" Mary tells me I am changed too ; and I don't much
wonder at it, for I was in a constant state of agitation
and anxiety all day long. But next time I am deter-
mined to take things coolly. "
After some further discussion my mother promised onco
more to assist me, provided I would wait and be patient .;
and I left her to broach the matter to my father, whea
and how she deemed it most advisable, never doubting
her ability to obtain his consent. Meantime I searched
with great interest the advertising columns of the news
papers, and wrote answers to every'^ Wanted a Gover-
ness''that appeared at all eligible ; but all my letters^
as well as the replies, when I got any, were dutifully
shown to my mother, and she, to my chagrin, made me
reject the situations one after another. These were low
people, these were too exacting in their demands, and
these too niggardly in their remuneration.
*'Your talents are not such as every poor clergy man't
daughter possesses, Agnes,** she would say^ " and yoa
must not throw them away. Remember you promised
to be patient. There is no need of hurry. You have
plenty of time before you, and may have many chance
yet/'
At length she advised me to put an advertisement
myself in the paper, stating my quahfications, etc.
" Music, singing, drawing, French, Latin, and Get?
man/* said she,'* are no mean assemblage^many will be
glad to have so much in one instructor ; and this time
you shall try your fortune in a somewhat higher family
^n that of some genuine, thorough-bred gentleman ;
for such are far more likely to treat you with proper
respect and consideration than those purse-proud trgjcis^
people and arrogant Uf^starts. \ ^lave V^ct^x^l ^s*-^'?^
mioi:tg the higher ranks who tres-le^ & .^u %^^^^^^
mte as one of the family, thou^b. aom^i, \ ^a^^^i
52 AGNES GREY.
as insolent and exacting as any one else can be, for there
are bad and good in all classes. "
The advertisement was quickly written and dispatched.
Of the two parties who answered it, but one would con-
sent to give me fifty pounds — the sum my mother bade
me name as the salary I should require ; and here I
hesitated about engaging myself, as I feared the children
would be too old, and their parents would require some
one more showy, or more experienced, if not more accom-
pHshed than I. But my mother dissuaded me from de-
clining it on that account. I should do vastly well, she
said, if I would only throw aside my diffidence and acquire
a little more confidence in myself. I was just to give
a plain, true statement oif my acquirements and qualifica-
tions, and name what stipulations I chose to make, and
then await the result. The only stipulation I ventured
to propose was that I might be allowed two months'
holidays during the year to visit my friends— at Mid-
summer and Christmas. The unknown lady, in her re-
ply, made no objection to this, and stated that, as to
my acquirements, she had no doubt I should be able to
give satisfaction ; but in the engagement of governess
she considered those things as but subordinate points,
as, being situated in the neighbourhood of O , she
could get masters to supply any deficiencies in that
respect ; but in her opinion, next to unimpeachable
morality, a mild and cheerful temper and obliging dis-
position were the most essential requisites.
My mother did not relish this at all, and now made
many objections to my accepting the situation, in which
my sister warmly supported her; but unwilling to be
balked again, I overruled them all, and having first ob-
tained the consent of my father (who had, a short time
previously, been apprised of these transactions), I wrote
a most obhging epistle to my unknown correspondent,
and finally the bargain was concluded.
It was decreed that on the last day of January I was
p enter upon my new of & ce as govettvess m \ickfc Vmcw\?3
Mr, Murray of Horton Lodge, neat O , ^fe«v3
AGNES GREY. S3
aty miles from our village — a formidable distance to
as I had never been above twenty miles from home
1 the course of my twenty years'sojourn on earth,
ias, moreover, every individual in that family and
le neighbourhood was utterly unknown to myself
all my acquaintances. But this rendered it only
more piquant to me. I had now in some measure
id of the mauvaise honte that had formerly oppressed
much ; there was a pleasing excitement in the idea
itering these unknown regions and making my way
1 among its strange inhabitants. I now flattered
jlf I was going to see something of the world. Mr.
•ay's residence was near a large town, and not in a
ufacturing district, where the people. had nothing to
ut to maie money. His rank, from -vdiat I could
er, appeared to be higher than that of Mr. Bloom-
, and doubtless he; was one of those genuine thorough-
gentry my mother spoke of, who would treat his
mess with due consideration as a respectable, well-
ated lady, the instructor and guide of his children,
not a mere upper servant. Then, my pupils being
:, would be more rational, more teachable, and less
blesome than the last. They would be less confined
le schoolroom, and not require that constant labour
incessant watching ; and finally, bright visions
jled with my hopes, with which the care of children
the mere duties of a governess had little or nothing
3. Thus the reader will see that I had no claim to
egarded as a martyr to fiUal piety, going forth to
fice peace and liberty for the sole purpose of laying
tores for the comfort and support of my parents,
gh certainly the comfort of my father and the future
ort of my mother had a large share in my calcula-
» ; and fifty pounds appeared to me no ordinary
I must have decent clothes becoming my station ;
ist, it seemed, put out my wash\iv%, ^tA ?i^sft ^-^ ^^'^
four annual journeys betYfeeu ^ot\.ot\. \j^^^ " ^^
; but, with strict attexv^ion to ecoxvoxK^,'^o:^^
y pounds, or little more, V70w\d co > 7« xxtfs^'^
54 AGNES GREY.
penses, and then there would be thirty for the bank, or
little less. What a valuable addition to our stock!
Oh, I must struggle to keep this situation, whatever it
might be, both for my own honour among my friends
and for the soHd services I might render them- by my
continuance there.
CHAPTER VII. ;
HORTON LODGE.
The 31st of January was a wild, tempestuous day. There
was a strong north wind, with a continual storm of snoW
drifting on the ground and whirling through the air.. My
friends would have had me delay my departure, but
fearful of prejudicing my employers against me by such
want of punctuality at the commencement of my under*
taking, I persisted in keeping the appointment.
I's^l not inflict upon my readers an account of my
leaving honie on that dark winter morning — the fond
farewells, the long, long journey to O , the soHtary
waitings in inns for coaches or trains (for there were
some railways then), and finally the meeting at O
with Mr. Murray's servant, who had been sent with the
phaeton to drive me from thence to Horton Lodge. I
will just state that the heavy snow had thrown such
impediments in the way of both horses and steam-
engines that it was dark some hours before I reached my
journey's end, and that a most bewildering storm came
on at last, which made the few miles'space between
0-: and Horton Lodge a long and formidable passage.
I sat resigned, with the cold, sharp snow drifting through
my veil and filling my lap, seeing nothing, and wonder-
ing how the unfortunate horse and driver could make
their way even as well as they did ; and indeed it was
but a toilsome, creeping style of progression, to say the
" ^st of it At length we paused, and ai t\ie c^ oi ths
y'ver some one unlatched and roWed YiacV. wpou \ > b8M!
'^Ain^ hinges what appeared to be \iie pai^ ^^.\s
AGNES GREY. 55
Then we proceeded along a smoother road^ whence
occasionally I perceived some huge hoary mass gleam-
ing through the darkness, which I took to be a portion
of a snow-clad tree. After a considerable time we paused
again, before the stately portico of a large house with
long windows descending to the groimd.
I rose with some difficulty from imder the superin-
< :umbent snowdrift, and alighted from the carriage, ex-
pecting that a kind and hospitable reception woulc
indemnify me for the toils and hardships of the day
A gentlemanly person in black opened the door, anc
admitted me into a spacious hall, lighted by an amber-
coloured lamp suspended from the ceiling. He led mc
through this, along a passage, and opening the door oi
a back room, told me that was the schoolroom, I en-
tered, and found two young ladies and two young gentle-
men — my future pupils, I supposed. After a formal
greeting, the elder girl, who was trifling over a piece oi
canvas and a basket of German wools, asked if I should
like to go upstairs. I replied in the affirmative, of course.
'* Matilda, take a candle and show her her room,'^
said she.
Miss Matilda, a strapping hoiden of about fourteen,
with a short frock and trovisers, shrugged her shoulden
and made a slight grimace, but took a candle and pro-
ceeded before me up the back stairs (a long, steep, double
flight), and through a long, narrow passage to a smal]
but tolerably comfortable room. She then asked me ii
I would take some tea or coffee. I was about to answei
No, but remembering that I had taken nothing, since
seven o'clock that morning, and feeling faint in conse-
quence, I said I would take a cup of tea. Saying she
would tell'* Brown, " the young lady departed ; and by
the time I had divested myself of my heavy, wet cloak,
shawl, bonnet, etc., a mincing damsel came to say the
young ladies desired to know whetYiei 1 > no\:^^ \akfc ^
tea up there or in the schoolroom. \5TiAfit ^^ ^^^
'ati^e, I chose to take it there. S\v.e -m^Ctito^^ •»
fter 4 whih. returned again with a smaSN. \.ea.\x«:^
56 AGNES GREY.
placed it on the chest of drawers which served as a
dressing-table. Having civilly thanked her, I asked at
what time I should be expected to rise in the morning,
** The young ladies and gentlemen breakfast at half-
past eight, ma'am/'said she, ** They rise early. But as
they seldom do any lessons before breakfast, I should
think it will do if you rise soon after seven. "
I desired her to be so kind as to call me at seven, and
promising to do so, she withdrew. Then having broken
my long fast on a cup of tea and a little thin bread and
butter, I sat down beside the small, smouldering fire,
and amused myself with a hearty fit of crying, after
which I said my prayers, and then, feeling considerably
relieved, began to prepare for bed. Finding that none
of my luggage was brought up, I instituted a search for
the bell ; and failing to discover any signs of such a con-
venience in any comer of the room, I took my candle
and ventured through the long passage, and down the
steep stairs, on a voyage of discovery. Meeting a well-
dressed female on the way, I told her what I wanted,
but not without considerable hesitation, as I was not
quite sure whether it was one of the upper servants or
Mrs. Murray herself. It happened, however, to be the
lady's-maid. With the air of one conferring an unusual
favour, she vouchsafed to undertake the sending up of
my things ; and when I had re-entered my room, and
waited and wondered a long time (greatly fearing that
she had forgotten or neglected to perfbtm her promise,
and doubting whether to keep waiting, or go to bed, or
go down again), my hopes at length were revived by the
sound of voices and laughter, accompanied by the tramp
of feet along the passage ; and presently the luggage was
brought in by a rough-looking maid and a man, neither
of them very respectful in their demeanour to me.
Having shut the door upon their retiring footsteps, and
unpacked a few of my things, I betook myself to rest,
fladJy enough, for I was weary in body and mmd.
. It was with a strange feeling oi'des6\a.\\ou, tcMij^fe?
th a strons: sense of the novelty oi tov sWxsi^^^^stv, -ax
AGNES GREY-
4
oi
nil
%
k

a joyless kind of curiosity coacerning what was yet;
known, that I awoke the next morning, feeling like
whirled away by enchantmeut, and suddenly drop J
from the clouds into a remote and unknoi^Ti land, wid
and completely isolated from all he had ever seeoj
known before ; or like a thistle-seed borne on the va
to some strange nook of uncongenial soil, where it mi
he long enough before it can take root and germina
extracting nourishment from what appears so ajieu
its , nature— if s indeed, it ever can. But this give«
proper idea of my ieehngs at all ; and no one thatj
not lived such a retured, stationary hie as mme can
sibly imagine what they wcre^hardly even if he
known what it is to awake some morning and find |
self in Port Nelson in New Zealand, with a worli
waters between himself and all that knew him.
1 shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with w
I raised my blind and looked out upon the unkn^
world- A wide, white wilderness was all that meti
waste of
'* Deserts tossed in snow,
And hea^y-laden groves;*'
marld|
I descended to the schoolroom with no remarl*
eagerness to join my pupils, though not without so:
feeling of curiosity respecting what a further acquai:
ance would revei. One thing among others of m <
obvious importance I determined with myself— ^I mi
begin with calhng them Miss and Master. It seeme
me a cMiling and nnnatiiral piece of punctiho hQt\
the children of a family and their instructor and
companion, especially where the former were in
early cJiildhood, as at WelKvood House ; but even tl
my calling the httle BbomHelds by their simple nar
had been regarded as an offensive liberty, as their pare]
had taken care to show me, by carefully designating t "'
Master and Miss Bloomfield, etc., m ^1^ft1a^OTv.^
I had been very shw to take the \imt, Ver.a.^x'?^ ^ " ^
^air struck me as so very absurd \ " bu^
5 8 AGNES GREY.
mined to be wiser, and begin at once with as much form
and ceremony as any member of the family would be
likely to require; And indeed, the children being so
much older, there would be less difficulty — ^though the
little words Miss and Master seemed to have a surprising
effect in repressing all familiar, open-hearted kindness,
and extinguishing every gleam of cordiality that might
arise between us;
As I cannot, Hke Dogberry, find it in my heart to
bestow fl/Z my tediousness upoii the reader, I will not
go on to bore him with a minute detail of all the dis-
coveries and proceedings of this and the following day.
No doubt he will be amply satisfied with a slight sketdi
of the different members of the family, £ind a general
view of the first year or two of my sojourn among them.
To begin with the head, Mr. Murray was, by all
accounts, a blustering, roistering, country squire, a
devoted fox-hunter, a skilful horse- jockey and farrier,
an active, practical farmer, and a hearty bon vivani.
By all accounts, I say, for, except on Simdays, when he
went to church, I never saw him from month to month
— ^unless in crossing the hall or walking in the grounds
the figure of a tall, stout gentleman, with scarlet cheeks
and crimson nose, happened to come across me; on
which occasions, if he passed near enough to speak, an
unceremonious nod, accompanied by a " Morning, Miss
Grey, " or some such brief salutation, was usually vouch-
safed. Frequently, indeed, his loud laugh reached me
froia afar, and oftener still I heard him swearing and
blaspheming against the footmen, groom, coachman, or
some other hapless dependant.
Mrs; Murray was a handsome^ dashing lady of forty,
who certainly required neither rouge nor padding to
add to her charms, and whose chief enjoyments were^
or seemed to be, in giving or frequenting parties, and in
dressing at the very top of the fashion. I did not see
Aer till eleven o'clock on the mommg after my arrival,
^lien she honoured me with a visit* ^usl a & tk^ Taoitoa
^ht step into the kitchen to see a new secvsxiV^V
AGNES GREY, S9
not so either, for my mother would have seen hejj
immediately after her arrival, and not waited till the
next day ; and, moreover, she would have addressed
her in a more kind and friendly manner, and given her
some words of comfort as well as a plain exposition of
her duties ; but Mrs, Murray did neither the one na»
the other. She just stepped into the schoolroom on
her return from ordering dinner in the housekeeper's
room, bade me good-momingv stood for two minutes
by the fire, said a few words about the weather and th^
*'rather rough "'journey I must have had yesterday i
petted her youngest child — a boy of ten — who had just
been wiping his mouth and hands on her gown, aftei!
indulging in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper's
stores ; told me what a sweet, good boy he was ; and
then sailed out, with a self-complacent smile upon hei*
face, thinking, no doubt, that she had done quite enough
for the present, and had been delightfully condescending
into the bargain^ Her children evidently held the same
opinion, and I alone thought otherwise, *
After this she looked in upon me once or twice, during
the alienee of my pupils, to enlighten me concerning
my duties towards them. For the girls, she seemed
anxions only to render them as superficially attractive
and showily accomplished as they could possibly be made,^
without present trouble or discomfort to themselves ;
and I was to act accordingly— to study and strive to
amuse and obhge, instruct, refine, and polish, with the
least possible exertion on their part, and no exercisi
of authority on mine. With regard to the two boys, it
was much the same, only, instead of accomplishments
I was to get the greatest possible quantity of Latiii
grammar and Valpy's Delectus into their heads, in
order to fit them lor school — the greatest possible
quantity, at least, withQid trouble to themselves. John
might be a " little high-spirited,*'and CVvaxV^ TO^sgpi^^^i
a yttt}e''nervous and tedious. " ^
•''But 5 1 all ev^nts^ Miss Grey /'^a\d s,\v^ >''^ \i^^^
Ikeep your teJiiper, and be mUd a^d p^^v^^tlV ^ia.«
6o AGNES GREY.
out, especially with the dear little Charles — ^he is so
extremely nervous and susceptible,, and so utterly un-
accustomed to anything but the tenderest treatment.
You will excuse my naming these things to you ; for
the fact is, I have hitherto found all the governesses,
even the very best of them, faulty in this particular.
They wanted that meek and quiet spirit which St.
Matthew, or some of them, says is better than the putting
on of apparel. You will know the passage to which I
allude, for you are a clergyman's daughter. But I have
no doubt you will give satisfaction in this respect as well
as the rest. And remember, on all occasions, when any
of the young people do anything improper, if persuasion
and gentle remonstrance will not do, let one of the others
come and tell me, for I can speak to them more plainly
than it would be proper for you to do. And make them
as happy as you can. Miss Grey, and I dare say you will
do very well. "
I observed that while Mrs, Murray was so extremely
solicitous for the comfort and happiness of her children,
and continually talking about it, she never once men-
tioned mine, though they were at home surrounded by
friends, and I an alien among strangers ; and I did not
yet know enough of the world not to be considerably
surprised at this anomaly.
Miss Murray, otherwise RosaUe, was about sixteen
when I came, and decidedly a very pretty girl ; and in
two years longer, as . time more completely developed
her form and added grace to her carriage and deport-
ment, she became positively beautiful, and that in no
common degree. She was tall and slender, yet not thin ;
perfectly formed, exquisitely fair, though not without
a brilliant, healthy bloom ; her hair, which she wore in
a profusion of long ringlets, was of a very light brown
inclining to yellow ; her eyes were pale blue, but so
clear and bright that few would wish thein darker ; the
rest of her features were small, not quite regular, and
7ot remarkably otherwise, but altogetYiei " VOM cw^SA.'ttfi*^
^sitate to pronounce her a very loveVv ^^^ ^ " wv^
AGNES GREY.
could say as much for mind and disposition as I can :
her form and face.
Yet think not I have any dreadful disclosures to mal
She was Hvely, light-hearted, and could be very agri
i able with those who did not cross her will, Towai
£. me, when I first came, she was cold and haughty, tl
3t insolent and overbearing; but on a further acquai:
X ance she gradually laid aside her airs, and in time i
11 came as deeply attached to me as it was possible
Lv^ her to he to one of my character arid position — for i
tS seldom lost sight for above half an hour at a time
jiy the fact of my being a hireling and a poor curat
KS. daughter. And yet, upon the whole, I believe she
ec spected me more than she herself was aware of, becai
m I was the only person in the house who steadily profeK
en good principles, habitually spoke the truth, and gen
vi! ally endeavoured to make inclination bow to duty ; a
thK I say, not, of course, in commendation of myself, I
ely to show the unfortunate state of the family to wh;
eiLi my services were, for the present, devoted. There \
jnl no member of it in whom I regretted this sad want
t«f principle so much as Miss Murray herself, not only ]
lo: cause she had taken a fancy to me, but because th
)iy! was so much of what was pleasant and prepossess]
in herself that, in spite of her faihngs, I really Hked 1
etj —when she did not rouse my indignation or ruffle :
inj temper by too great a display of her faults. These, h <
ed! ever, I would fain persuade myself, were rather'
" t- effect of her education than her disposition. She 1:
10 never been perfectly taught the distinction between rij
i ; and wrong ; she had, like her brothers and sisters, b
It suffered from infancy to tyrannize over nurses, gov
n nesses, and servants ; she had not been taught to m <
erate her desires, to control her temper or bridle her vi
or to sacrifice her own pleasure for the good of oth <
Her temper being naturally good, she was nevet NVi\
or morose, but from constant indulgecLC^ ^xsA\is^^
/ scorn of reason she was often testy and ca.'^rvcvoxxs*.
f mind ha4 never been cultivated- Hex m\jeVifc^^- ^
62 AGNES GREY.
was somewhat shallow. She possessed con
vivacity, some quickness of perception, and soi
for music and the acquisition of languages,
fifteen she had troubled herself to acquire
Then the love of display had roused her facul
induced her to apply herself; but only to the mo
accomplishments. And when I came it was t
Everything was neglected but French^ Germai
singing, dancing, fancy-work, and a Httle d
such drawing as might produce the greatest si
the smallest labour, and the principal parts <
were generally done by me. For music and
besides my occasional instructions she had th(
ance of the best master the country afforded ;
these accomplishments, as well as in dancing, she
attained great proficiency. To music, indeed,
voted too much of her time, as, governess thou^
I frequently told her ; but her mother though
she hked it she coidd not give too much tim
acquisition of so attractive an art Of f anc^
knew nothing but what I gathered from my p
my own observation ; but no sooner was I
than she made me useful in twenty different w;
the tedious parts of her work were shifted o
shoulders, such as stretching the frames, stil
the canvas, sorting the wools and silks, puttir
grounds, counting the stitches, rectifying mista
finishing the pieces she was tired of.
At sixteen Miss Murray was something of a r
not more so than is natural and allowable for
that age; but at seventeen that propensity,
other things, began to give way to the ruling
and soon was swallowed up in the all-absorbing
to attract and dazzle the other sex. But enoug
Now let us turn to her sister.
Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoiden,
y/tt/e need be said. She was about two years a
younger than her sister ; her features vjexe V
^niplexion much darker. She imgYit possW
AGNES CJREY.
ItLdsome woman, but she was far too big-boned and
ward ever to be called a pretty girl, and at present
1 cared little about it* Rosalie knew all her charmSj i
thought them even greater than tliey were, and vah
them more highly than she ought to have done had tl
been three times as great. Matilda thought she
weU enough, but cared little about the matter ; sti'
did she care about the cultivation of her mind, am
acquisition of ornamental accomplishnients. The
ner in which she learned her lessons and practises
music was calculated to drive any governoss to d
gia Short and easy as her tasks were, if done at all they
» slurred over, at any time and in any way, but g( ^
td aUy at the least convenient times, and in the way le
dim beneficial to herself and least satisfactory to me, 1
K short half'hour of practising was horribly strumn
through, she meantime unsparingly abusing me, eit
at for interrupting her with corrections, or for not recti
» tl ing her mistakes before they were made, or someth
equally unreasonable. Once or twice I venturei
remonstrate with her seriously for such irrational f
duct, but on each of those occasions I received such
rehensive expostulations from her mother as convi:
me that, if I wished to keep the situation, I must
let Miss Matilda go on in her own way;
When her lessons were over, however, her ill-huB
was generally over too, While riding her spirited p
or romping with the dogs or her brothers and
but especially with her dear brother John, she wa
happy as a lark. As an animal Matilda was all rig
full of life, vigour, and activity ; as an intelligent t3
she was barbarously ignorant^ indocile, careless,
irrational, and consequently very distressing to one
had the task of cultivating her understanding, refon
her manners, and aiding her to acquire those ornamt
attainments which, unlike her sister, she dst & ^v^'^
much as the rest Her mother was p3.i^\^ ^\n^\^ ^
de^ciencjes. ^nd gave me many a \^c\.M'cfe liS ^.^
V^hoaid try to form her tastes, and ^iide^'^^^^
1
64 AGNES GREY.
and cherish her dormant vanity, and - by insinvu
skilful flattery to win her attention to the desires
jects — ^which I would not do ; and how I should
pare and smooth the path of learning till she could
along it without the least exertion to herself — ^
I could not, for nothing can be taught to any pu
without some Httle exertion on the. part of the learn
As a moral agent Matilda was reckless, headst
violent, and tmamenable to reason. One proof o
deplorable state of her mind was that from her fal
example she had learned to swear like a trooper,
mother was greatly shocked at the " unladyUke ti
and wondered'* how. she had picked it up.*'*'Bul
can soon break her of it. Miss Grey,'* said she. "
only a habit, and if you will just gently remind her (
time she does so, I am sure she will soon lay it as
I not only " gently reminded''her — I tried to im
upon her how wrong it was, and how distressing t <
ears of decent people ; but all in vain. I was onl]
swered by a careless laugh, and, " O Miss Grey/
shocked you are ! I'm so glad 1'* Or, " Well, I
help it. Papa shouldn't have taught me. I learn
all from him, and maybe a bit fromi the coachman.'
Her brother John, alias Master Murray^ was a
eleven when I came — a fine, stout, healthy boy, i
and good-natured in the main, and might have be
decent lad had he been properly educated ; but .no
was as rough as a young bear, boisterous, unruly
principled, untaught, unteachable— at least for a g
ness under his mother's eye. His masters at s <
might be able to manage him better-^for to scho(
was sent, greatly to my relief, in the course of a
in a state, it is true, of scandalous ignorance as to L
as well as the more useful though more neglected th
And this, doubtless, would all be laid to Sie accoii
his education having been entrusted to an ignc
female teacher, who had presumed to take m hand ^
she was wholly incompetent to petioTm: 1 vjas tw
^ivered from his brother till iuU twekve TM > Tl^i^as.
AGNES GREY. 65
a he also was dispatched in the same state of dis-
eful ignorance as the former,
aster Charles was his mother's peculiar darling. He
Httle more than a year younger than John, but much
Her, paler, and less active and robust — a, pettish,
axdly, capricious, selfish little fellow, only active in
g mischief, and only clever in inventing falsehoods,
simply to hide his faults, but, in mere malicious
tonness, to bring odium upon others. In fact,
ter Charles was a very great nuisance to me. It
a trial of patience to live with him peaceably ; to
:h over him was worse ; and to teach him, or pre-
l to teach him, was inconceivable. At ten years Old
ould not read correctly the easiest Hne in the simplest
c ; and as, according to his mother's principle, he
to be told every word before he had time to hesitate
xamine its orthography, and never even to be in-
led, as a stimulant to exertion, thfat other boys were
g forward than he, it is not surprising that he made
little progress during the two years I had charge of
education. His minute portions of Latin grammar,
were to be repeated over to him till he chose to say
mew them, and then he was to be helped to say
I. If he made mistakes in his Httle easy sums in
imetic, they were to be shown him at once, and the
done for him, instead of his being left to exercise
faculties in finding them out himself ; so that, of
se, he took no pains to avoid mistakes, but frequently
iown his figures at random, without any calculation
II. ■ ^
did not invariably confine myself to these rules— it
against my conscience to do so ; but I seldom could
ure to deviate from them in the slightest degree
out incurring the wrath of my little pupil, and sub-
ently of his mamma, to whom he would relate my
sgressions, mahciously exaggerated, ot ^ < ^cyctvsA.N^ > ^^
elJishments of his own ; and oiteti, m ecsTL^^^^^^^^^-*
r on the point of losing or lesigmiv^ xwj sxVxs.^'csRfc
: > r their sakes at home I smot\veTed tw V^^^ ^
66 AGNES GREY.
suppressed my indignation, and managed to struggle c
till my little tormentor was dispatched to school, i
fathqr declaring that home education was " no go i
him, it was plain ; his mother spoiled him outrageousl;
and his governess could make no hand of him at aJL "
A few more observations about Horton Lodge and i
ongoings, and I have done with dry descriptioii for tl
present. The house was a very respectable one, superit
to Mr. Bloomfield's both in age, size, and magnificenc
The garden was not so tastefully laid out ; but instea
of the smooth-shaven lawn, the young trees guarded I
palings, the grove of upstart poplars, and the plant
tion of firs, there was a wide park, stocked with dee
and beautified by fine old trees. The surroundii
country itself was pleasant, as far as fertile fields, flou
ishing trees, quiet green lanes, and smiling hedges wi <
wild flowers scattered along their banks could make i <
but it was depressingly flat to one bom and nurtuw
among the rugged hills of .
: We were situated nearly two miles from the villa|
church, and consequently the family carriage was pi
in requisition every Sunday morning, and sometimi
oftener. Mr. and Mrs. Murray generally thought it su
ficient to show themselves at church once in the coun
of the day, but frequently the children preferred goii
a second time to wandering about the grounds aU tl
day with nothing to do. If some of my pupils chose 1
walk and take me with them, it was well for me ; f(
otherwise my position in the carriage was to be crushc
into the comer farthest from the open window, and wil
my back to the horses — a, position which invariably mac
me sick ; and if I were not actually obliged to lea^
the church in the middle of the service, my devotid
were disturbed with a feeling of languor and sidelines
and the tormenting fear of its becoming worse, and
depressing headache was generally my companio
throughout the day, which woul4 olYi^Tvns^i VcK^re bee
^^f < ^^we7come rest and holy, ca\m eiv!\o^m^ji\.,
^t's very odd. Miss Grey, that ^hft C2xfva%fe €dk
AGNES GREY. 67
Iways make you sick. It never makes mCi'* remarked
[iss Matilda.
'* Nor me either/'said her sister. " But I dare say
I would if I sat where she does. — Such a nasty, horrid
lace, Miss Grey. I wonder how you can bear it. "
I am obKged to bear it, since no choice is left me, I
light have answered ; but in tenderness for their feelr
igs I only repHed, " Oh, it is but a short way, and if I
m not sick in church I don't mind it. "
If I were called upon to give a description of the usual
ivisions and arrangements of the day, I should find it
. very difficult matter. I had all my meals in the school-
oom with my pupils, at such times as suited their fancy,
iometimes they would ring for dinner before it was half
ooked ; sometimes they would keep it waiting on the
able for above an hour, and then be out of humour be*
ause the potatoes were cold and the gravy covered with
akes of soUd fat ; sometimes they would have tea at
bur ; frequently they would storm at the servants be*
ause it was not in precisely at five ; and when these
)rders were obeyed, by way of encouragement to pimctu-
dity, they would keep it on the table till seven or eight.
Their hours of study were managed in much the same
my ; my judgment or convenience was never once con-
wilted. Sometimes Matilda and John would determine
* to get all the plaguy business over before breakfast, "
ind send the maid to call me up at half-past five, with-
mt any scruple or apology ; sometimes I was told to
)e ready precisely at six, and having dressed in a hurry,
ame down to an empty room, and after waiting a long
ime in suspense, discovered that they had changed their
ninds, and were still in bed ; or perhaps, if it were a
ine summer morning, Brown would come to tell me
hat the young ladies and gentlemen had taken a holi-
lay, and were gone out ; and then I was kept wa.\^^
:or breakfast till I was almost ready to iamt, Xive^ \\a^f > s\sj
ortiAed themselves with something " beioi^i > ^«^ ^^ " csX.-
Often they would do their lessoiv^ m \Xx^ o^^ " ^^
Itch I had nothing to say a.gainsti eitcepV. ^^c^a. " ^ ^
68 AGNES GREY.
quently caught cold by sitting on the damp grass,
from exposure to the evening dew, or some insidic
draught, which seemed to have no injurious effect
them. It was quite right that they should be har <
yet surely they might have been taught some conside
tion for others who were less so. But I must not bla
them for what was, perhaps, my own fault ; for I ne^
made any particular objections to sitting where tl
pleased, foolishly choosing to risk the consequen
rather than trouble them for my convenience. Th
indecorous manner of doing their lessons was quite
remarkable as the caprice displayed in their choice
time and place. While receiving my instructions,
repeating what they had learned, they would loui
upon thei sofa, lie on the rug, stretch, yawn, talk ta es
other, or look out of- the window ; whereas I coiild i
so much as stir the fire, or pick up the handkerchie
had dropped, without being rebuked for inattention
one of my pupib, or told that''mamma would not li
me to be so careless. "
The servants, seeing in what Uttle estimation the gov
ness was held by both parents and children, regulal
their behaviour by the same standard. I have f
quently stood up for them, at the risk of some inji
to myself, against the tjnranny and injustice of ih
young masters and mistresses, and I always endeavoui
to give them as little trouble as possible ; but .they i
tirely neglected my comfort, despised my requests, a
slighted my directions. All servants, I am convina
would not have done so ; but domestics in gener
being ignorant and little accustomed to reason a
reflection, are too easily corrupted by the carelessn <
and bad example of those above them ; and these,
think, were not of the best order to begin with.
I sometimes felt myself degraded by the life I 1 <
and ashamed of submitting to so many indignities ; a
sometimes I thought myseli a ioo\ tot, e^fviv^ ^o tkc
^bout them, and feared I must be sadVj ^w^uMt^
Christian humility, or that charity vrtnida. " sv3a«t^ > ^
AGNES GREY. 69
nd is kind, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked,
eareth all things, endureth all things. " But with time
nd patience matters began to be slightly ameliorated —
lowly, it is true, and almost imperceptibly ; but I got
id of my male pupils (that was no trifling advantage),
nd the girls, as I intimated before concerning one of
hem, became a Uttle less insolent, and began to show
ome symptoms of esteem. " Miss Grey was a queer
reature : she never flattered, and did not praise them
lalf enough ; but whenever she did speak favourably of
hem, or anything belonging to them, they could be
luite sure her approbation was sincere. She was very
obliging, quiet, and peaceable in the main, but there
vere some things that put her out of temper. They
lid not much care for that, to be sure, but still it was
jetter to keep her in tune, as when she was in a good
lumour she would talk to them, and be very agreeable
md amusing sometimes^ in her way, which was quite
iifierent to mamma's, but stillvery well for a change.
She had her own opinions oh every subject, and kept
Jteadily to them. Very tiresome opinions they often
were, as she was always thinking of what was right and
«rhat was wrong, and had a strange reverence for mat-
ters connected with religion, and an unaccountable liking
for good people.*'
CHAPTER yiU.
THE " COMING OUT. "'
Kt eighteen Miss Murray was to emerge from the quiet
obscurity of the schoolroom into the full biaze of the
fashionable world — as much of it, at least, as could be
liad out of London ; for her papa could not be persuaded
to leave his rural pleasures and pursuits even for a few
weeks'residence in town. She was to n\akfc Vrx ^^vX.
on the jrd of January, at a magnificexvV > Q^ ^\v\OcvAns
uamma proposed to give tO all ia6b\VLt > j a^^ ^^'^^
mtry of O and its neighbotirliood iox V'^e^^'S " ^
70 AGNES GREY.
round. Of course she looked forward to it with tl
wildest impatience and the most extravagant anticip
tions of delight.
** Miss Grey, " said she one evening, a month befo
the all-important day, as I was perusing a long and e
tremely interesting letter of my sister's, which I had ju
glanced at in the morning to see that it contained i
very bad news, and kept till now, unable before to &
a quiet moment; for reading it — " Miss Grey, do p
away that dull, stupid letter, and hsten to me, I'
sure my talk must be far more amusing than that.*'
3be seated herself on the low stool at my feet, and
suppressing a sigh of vexation, began to fold up tl
epistle.
** You should tell the good people at home not
bore you with such long letters,'* said she ; " and abo^
all, do bid them write on proper note-paper, and n
on tjiose great vulgar sheets. You should see the chart
ing little ladylike. notes mamma writes to her friends. "
" The good people at home,** replied I, " know vei
well that the longer their letters are the better t lil
them. I should be very sorry to receive a charmii
little ladylike note from any of them ; and I thougl
you were too much of a lady yourself, Miss Murray, i
talk about the'vulgarity * of writing on a large she
of paper. "
'Well, I only said it to tease you. But now I wai
to talk about the ball, and to tell you that you positive
must put off your holidays till it is over.*'
" Why so ? I shall not be present at the ball. "
" No, but you will see the rooms decked out before
begins, and hear the music, and, above all, see me ;
my splendid new dress. I shall be so charming, you
be ready to worship me. You really must stay. "
*'I should like to see you very much, but I shall hai
many opportunities of seeing you equally charming «
the occasion of some of the numberless balls and parti
t/iat are to be, and I cannot ^apipomV m^ ifv^^\
postponing my return so loug "
AGNES GREY. 7 1
Oh, never mind your friends I Tell them we won't
you go. "
But, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment
tnyself. I long to see them as much as they to see
—perhaps more. "
Well, but it is such a short time. "
Nearly a fortnight, by my computation ; and besides,
annot bear the thoughts of a Christmas spent from
ae. And, moreover, my sister is going to be married. "
Is she ? — when ?''
Not till next month ; but I want to be there to assist
in making preparations, and to make the best of her
ipany while we have her. "
Why didn't you teU me before ? "
'IVe only got the news in this letter, which you stig-
tize as dull and stupid, and won't let me read. "
'To whom is she to be married ? "
''To Mr. Richardson, the vicar of a neighbouring
ish. "
Is he rich ? "
'No ; only comfortable. "
Is he handsome ? "
No ; only decent. "
Young ? "
No * only middling. "
Oh, mercy I what a wretch ! What sort of a house
t? " ■
'A quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-clad porchj an
-fashioned garden, and "
■ Oh, stop I You'll make me sick. How can she
r it ? "
'I expect she'll not only be able to bear it, but to be
y happy; You did not ask me if Mr. Richardson
•e a good, wise, or amiable nian ^, I could have an-
jred Yes to all these questions — at least, so Mary
aks, and I hope she will not find herselt ittt & \akfeTv^.*
'But — miserable creature I — hoyr caiv ^ < ei ^CmsnSk. o\
idlng her life there, cooped up vnlYi ^aa.*^^ TiasX.^ ^^
, and no hope of change ? "
72 AGNES GREY.
" He is not old ; he's only six or seven and thirty
and she herself is twenty-eight, and as sober as if sb,(
were fifty/*
" Oh ! tbafs better, then — they're well matched. Bu
do they call him the'worthy vicar'? "
" I don't know ; but if they do, I believe he merit
the epithet.**
. " Mercy 1 how shocking ! And will she wear a whiti
apron, and make pies and puddings ? **
" I don't know about the white apron, but I dare sa]
she will make pies and puddings now and then ; bu
that will be no great hardship, as she has done it before.^
" And will she go about in a plain shawl and a largi
straw bonnet, carrying tracts and bone soup to her hos
band's poor parishioners ? "
" I'm not clear about that ; but I dare say she wB
do her best to make them comfortable in body and mind
in accordance with our mother's example. "
CHAPTER IX.
THE BALL.
" Now, Miss Grey, " exclaimed Miss Murray, immediate!]
I entered the schoolroom, after having taken off m;
outdoor garments, upon returning from my four weeks
recreation — " now, shut the doorj and sit down, an <
I'll tell you all about the baU. "
" No, damn it, no ! " shouted Miss Matilda. " Holi
your tongue, can't ye ? and let me tell her about m]
new- mare.— r5wcA a splendour. Miss Grey — ^a fine blooi
mare "
" Do be quiet, Matilda, and let me tell my news first-
" No, no, Rosalie ; you'll be such a damned long ti»
over it. She shall hear me first — I'll be hanged if sb
doesn't/ "
'Tm sorry to hear. Miss Matilda, i\va.\. ^oxiN^ ^
?»^ /2V/ o/ t/zat shocking habit yet "
AGNES GREY. 73
Veil, I can't help it ; but Til never say a wicked
again if you'll only listen to me, and tell Rosalie
Id her confounded tongue, "
salie remonstrated, and I thought I should have
torn in pieces between them ; but Miss Matilda
ig the loudest voice, her sister at length gave in,
uffered her to tell her story first. So I was doomed
ar a long account of her splendid mare, its breeding
pedigree, its paces, its action, its spirit, etc, and
T own amazing skill and courage in riding it, con-
ag with an assertion that she could clear a five-
d gate *'like winking, " that papa said she might
the next time the hounds met, and mamma had
ed a bright scarlet hunting-habit lor her.
) Matilda, what stories you are telling ! " exclaimed
ister.
Veil, " answered she, no whit abashed, ** I know I
clear a five-barred gate if I tried, and papa will
may hunt, and mamma tmll order the habit when
it. "
Veil, now, get along, " replied Miss Murray ; ** and
ear Matilda, try to be a little more ladylike, — Miss
, I wish you would tell her not to use such shocking
s. She will call her horse a mare. It is so incon-
bly shocking ! And then she uses such dreadful ex-
ions in describing it ; she must have learned it from
rooms. It nearly puts me into fits when she begins, "
; learned it from papa, you ass^ and his jolly friends, "
the young lady, vigorously cracking a hunting-
, which she habitually carried in her hand,'* I'm
> od a judge of horseflesh as the best of'em. "
A^ell, now, get along, you shocking girl ! I really
take a fit if you go on in such a way. — And now,
Grey, attend to me ; I'm going to tell you about
)all. You must be dying to hear about it, I know.
such a ball I You never saw, or heard, ot ^e.-a^i^ ^^-^
mt of anything like it in ali yowi \\fe \ T«afc ^^^'^'^-
the entertainment, the STippet, \\ift xowstf::., ^^^
Tibable ! And then the guests \ T\a^^ ^^^ " ^ ^
74 AGNES GREY.
noblemen, three baronets, and five titled ladies, am
other ladies and gentlemen innumerable. The ladies
of course, were of no consequence to me, except to pu
me in a good humour with myself, by showing how ugl;
and awkward most of them were ; and the best, mainm
told me, the most transcendent beauties among then
were nothing to me. As for me, Miss Grey — Vm s
sorry you .didn't see me I I was charming, — Wasn't ]
Matilda?'
.. " Middling. "
** No, but I really was — at least, so mamma said, an
Brown, and Williamson. Brown said she was sure n
gentleman could set eyes on me without falling in loy
that minute:; and so I may be allowed to be a litti
yaio. I know you think me a shocking, conceitec
frivolous girl; but then you know I don't attributed
aU to my personal attractions. I give some praise 1
the hairdresser, and some to my exquisitely lovely dres
— you must see it to-morrow — white ^auze over pin
satin, and so sweetly made, and a necklace and bracd <
of beautiful, large pearls! "
. " I have no doubt you looked very charming ; bl
should that delight you so very mugh ? "
" Oh no I not that alone. But then I was so muc
admired ; and I made so many conquests in that < ^
night, you'd be astonished to hear "
/* But what good will they do you ? "
** What good ! Think of any woman asking that ! "
** Well, I should think one conquest would be enougl
and too much, unless the subjugation were mutual. "
'* Oh, but you know I never agree with you on tba
points. Now, wait a bit, and I'll tell you my princip
admirers — those who made themselves very conspicuot
that night and after (for I've been to two parties since
Unfortunately the two noblemen. Lord G-- — and Loi
F , were married, or I might have condescended 1
be particularly gracious to ihem. As it was, I did no
though Lord F , who hate^ Yds vnie, ^as wA^xjJi
Jnuch struck with me. He asked me lo daxi & e > nv^ >
AGNES GREY,
[■twice; he is a charming dancer, by-the-bye, and so
IL You can't think how well 1 did ; I was astonish
^at myself. My lord was very compliraentai^* toe
rather too much so, in fact — and I thought proper to^
I a little haughty and repellent ; but I had the pleasnr€
seeing his nasty, cross wife ready to perish with sp
and vexation
" O Miss Murray, yon don't mean to say that
thing could really give you pleasure 1 However ^
or''

Well, I know it's very^ wrong ; but never mind
nean to be good some time; only don't preach noM
'- " there's a good creatnre. I haven't told you half ;
^ Let me see. Oh 1 I was going to tell you how mi
^% unmistakable admirers I had. Sir Thomas Ash by'
J^ one. Sir Hugh Meltham and Sir Broadley Wilson
old codgers, only fit companions for papa and maml5
Thomas is young, rich, and gay, but an ugly bd
srertheless. However, mamma saj^ T should not mi
after a few months'acquaintance. Then there w;
ary Meltham, Sir Hugh's younger son— rather gocH
oking, and a pleasant fellow to flirt with \ but bein
Jycjtmger son, that is all he is good for. Then there i
ig Mr, Green — rich enough, but of no family, ^
^« great stupid fellow, a mere country booby ; and tl
I oar good rector, Mr. Hatfield— an humble admireri
ought to consider himself, but I feax he has forgotten
number humilitv among his stock of Christian virtues
" Was Mr, Hatfield at the ball ?''f
Yes, to be sure. Did you tfiinfc he was too gl
I to go ?^'
" I thought he might consider it unclerical/'\
" By fw means* He did not profane his cloth !
. dancing, but it was with difficulty he could refrain, pi
[man. He looked as if he were dying to ask my h^
I just for one set. And oh 1 by-the-bye, hs'% ^\ -a.l
I curate ; that seedy old fellow Mr. B\\g\i ^ " a^s ^oW\'^^
'mhed'for Ihing at last, and is gone,**
'And what is the new one like ? ^ "
^6 AGNES GREY.
" Oh, such a beast I Weston his name is. I can giv
you his description in three words — an insensate, uglj
stupid blockhead. That*s four, but no matter — enoug
of him now. "
Then she returned to the ball, and gave me a furthe
account of her deportment there, and at the sev«:a
parties she had since attended, and further particular
respecting Sir Thomas Ashby and Messrs. Meltham
Green, and Hatj & eld, and the ineffaceable impressioi
she had wrought upon each of them.
" Well, which of the four do you like best ? *'said I
suppressing my third or fourth yawn,
" I detest them all !'* replied she, shaking her brigb
ringlets in vivacious scorn.
'* That meansj I suppose, I like them all ; but whid
most ? "
" No, I really detest them all ; but Harry Melthaii
is th6 handsomest and most amusing, and Mr. HatfieM
the cleverest, Sir Thomas the wickedest, and Mr» Gred
the most stupid. But the one I'm to havle, I suppofit
if I*m doomed to have any of them, is Sir Thomi
Ashby. "
" Surely not, if he's so wicked, and if you dislike him ?'
" Oh, I don't mind his being wicked — ^he's all the bette
for that; and as for disHking him, I shouldn't greatl]
object to being Lady Ashby of Ashby Park, if ImiB
marry. But if I could be always young, I would b
always single. I should like to enjoy myself thorougU]
and coquet with all the world, till I am on the verge c
being called an old maid ; and then, to escape the in
famy of that, after having made ten thousand a*
quests, to break all their hearts save one, by mJatr^i^
some high-born, rich, indulgent husband, whonii'^ V
other hand, fifty ladies were d5nng to have.'* . ■ .:mnliJ
" Well, as long as you entertain these tioli
single by all means, and nevet mairj ^i %Si«iMt
escape the infamy of old-maideuJioodr ^\.vV
. " am
AGNES GREY.
CHAPTER X.
THE CHURCH.
fELi, Miss Grey, what do you think of the new
curate ? *'asked Miss Murray on our return from churdj
the Sunday after the recommencement of our duties. J
" I can scarcely tciif,''was my teply. " I have no!
e\'en heard him preach.^;'. .'.
Well, but you saw him, didn't you ? " ^
f'Yes ; but I cannot pretend to Judge of a man's chaif
er by a single cursory glance at his face. " f
I?* But isn't he ugly ?''^
He did not strike me as being particularly so ; i
donH dishke that cast of countenance. But the onl}^
thing I particularly noticed about him was his style oi
jBatfing, which appeared to me good — infinitely bettei^
at: least, than Mr. Hatfield's- He read the lessons as ii
he were, bent on giving full effect to every passage: II
seemed as if the most careless person could not hav < !l
helped attending, nor the most ignorant have failed td!
understand ; and the prayers he read as if he Were noH
reading at all, but praying earnestly and sincerely itom
his own heart, " ■ ■ > • ■ ►
*'Oh yes, that's all he is good for. He can plod througll
the service well enough, but he has not a single id e^
beyond it. "
" How do you know ? ■'
'* Oh, I know perfectly well, I am an excellent judg€
in such matters. Did you see how he went out of churcfei
—stumping along as if there were nobody there but hims
self, never looking to the right hand or the left, and
evidently thinking of nothing but just getting out of tli^
church, and perhaps home to his dinner ? His great
stupid head could contain no other idea. " {
" I suppose you would have had hina c;ast ^ ^^ixsii
into ih & squire's pew/'said I ^ laug " hm|j at lYi» N^?a^^ca'
of her hostility,
'Indeed, ^

7^ AGNES GREY.
had dared to do such a thing 1 " replied she, haughtilj
tossing her head. Then,, after a moment's reflection, she
added, " Well, well, I suppose he's good enough foi
his place ; but I'm glad I'm not dependent on him foi
amusement*— that's all. Did you see how Mr. Hatfielc
inrrried out to get a bow from me, and be in time to pti^
us into the carriage ?'^'^ /!♦. i.,
• Mf Yes,V inswered I, iptemaiiy aJdding, *^ And I though
it somewhat derogatory to his dignity «ag'A clergyman t(
come flying froni the piilpit in sUch eaget haste to'shaki
hailds with the squire, ataii hknd his wife and daughter!
into their carriage ; and, moriepver, I owe him a " ^dgt
for nearly shutting me out of it?*- For, in fact, thbugl
I was standing before his face, doae* beside the caSrtiag«
steps,'Waiting to get in, he would persist in putti^j
them up and closing. the door, till one of the famiilj
stopped hith by calling otrt that the governess was not
in =yet 5 thfen,! without i word of apology, he'departed]
Hiishing th < 5m. Jgood-mPrmug) and < leatying the footmaa
lo:ini & hvthe business; . -'< .''
^ Noia :bene,*^M.T4 Hatfield'newr spoki^ ■■ to'■ me; neithet
did Sir Hugh or Lady Meltham, not Mr* Harry or Ifiss
Meith^ffi- nor Mr. Green or his sisters, nor any other lady
or gentleman who frequented that church, " nor, in iac^
Any oiie thkt visited at Horton Lodgt. « •'
'.'Miss Murray ordered the carriage again in the after»
noon for herself and her sister. She said it was too cold
for them to enjoy themselves iri the garden', and besides,
sjiie betieved Harry Meltharti would be at church.^ *'F6r, "
said she, smiling slyly at her own fair image in the glassy
" he has been i most exemplary attenddnt at chnrdi
these ladt few Sundays. . You would think he was qnite
a good\ Christian. And you may go with us,'Miss Grey.
I J want you to see himi He is so greatly improved since
he returned from abfoad-^you canH tiiink ! And be-
Mdi*s, then you will have'an opportunity of seeing the
beautiful Mr, Weston again, arid oi heaidTv^ tlitn. prcfach. "
/ did hear him preach, and was dec\Ae & J ^^fiJ^^^^'i^
rje evangehcal truth of his doctrin'e,'as; > Ne\\^ > ^v^^rcv^
AGNES GKET, 79
nplicity of his matmei , . and the clearness and force of
i style. It was truly refreshing to hear such a sermon^
ter being so long accustoriied to the dry, prosy dis-
urses of the former curate, and the still less edify ixig
.rangues of the rector, Mr. Hatfield would comesaij-
^ up the aisie, or rather sweeping along like a whirl-
nd, with bis rich siik gown flying behind him and
stling against the pew doors, mount the pulpit lik^ H
nqi^Tor ascending his tniumphal car ; then, sin hijog
!'the velvet cushion in an'attitude of studied grace,
pnain in silent prostration for Br certain tim < ? j then
[ittbr over a collect^ and gabble through the Lord's
ay or; rise, draw off one bright: lavender glove, fcoigive
e congregation the benefit of his sparkHng .angB^ hgiitly
ss his fingers through his well-curled hair, flourish a
mbric handkerchief ^ recite a. very short passage, or,
rhaps, a mere phrase of Sc rapture, as a headpiece tt >
s diBcoursic, and Anally deb ver a compositioti which,
a comix)sition, might be considered goodj though iar
Studied and too artiticial to be pleasing to me* JThe
epositions were well laid. down, the argiimeats lo^cs-
ly conducted, and yet it was sometimes hard to listeti
uetiy throughout without some shght demonstratioJiS
disapproval or impatience.'• i ,
His favourite subjects were church discipline, r rites
id ceremonies, apostolical succession, the duty of rev-
ence and obedience to^tiie clergy^ the atrocious crim-
aiity of dissent, the absolute necessity of observing
1 the forms of godliness, the reprehensible presumption
L'itidividuals who attempted to think for themselVjes
matters connected with religion, or to be gtiidedby
.eir own interpretations of Scriptuffe;, and occasionally
^ please his wealthy parishioners) the necessity of
fferential obedience from the poor to the rich, sup-
rrting his maxims and exhortatioris throughout'witli
rotations from the; Fatthers, with whom h^ ^v^ " ^^^
be far better acquainted than wftv i\ve k^^^^ & s» ^^^
mjigelists, and whose importance \\e ^sJ & ^Ya^^ V < ^ ^^1
^. a^ least equal to theirs. But ivo^n ^tx^ V^^^J
80 AGNES GREY.
gave us a sermon of a different order — what some tvo
call a very good one, but sunless and severe, represent
the Deity as'a terrible task-master, rather than a ben
olent? father. : Yet, as I listened, I felt inclined to th
the man was sincere in all lie said.'He must have chan^
his views, and become decidedly religious^ gloomy^ 2
xd^tete, yet still devputi. But such illusions wjere u
ally'& ssipated, on coming out- of church; by hearing,
voice in jodund colloquy with some of tlie Melthams
Greens, or perhaps the Murrays themselves, proba
laughing at his own sermon^ and hoping that he had gii
the rascally people something to think about ; percha]
Suiting'in-'the thought that old Betty Holmes wo
now lay aside the sinful indulgence of her. pipe, wh
had been her daily solace for upward* of thirty yea
that George Higgins would be frightened out of his &
bath evening walks, and Thomas Jackson would be sor
troubled in his conscience, and. shaken in his sure a
certain hope of a joyful resuirectibn at the Jast day.
'Thus I cbqld not; but conclude that -Mr.. Hatfield m
one^ of those who''^ bind heavy burdens, and grievous
belDtorrie^ and lay them upon men's shouldersy while tl
themselves will not move them with one of- their finger
and who " make the word of God of none effect by th
traditions, iteiaching for doctrines the commandments
men. " I was well pleased to observe that the new curj
resembled him, as far as ! < could see, in none of th <
particulars.
** Well, Miss Grey, what do you think of him now
said Miss Murray, as we took our places in the Q$Mrri£
after service.
" No harm still, " rephed I.
" No harm ! " repeated she, in amazement. ** Wl
do you meaii ? "
" I mean I think no worse of him than I did before
'" No worse! I should thinkinot indeed — quite t
contrary 1'Is be hot greatly improved ? "
" " Oh j^fi?— vfery much indeed,** Tep\ied \ •, iox \ Y
" f^w discovered that it was Harxy MeWJaam ^^ xa*
AGNES GREY,
Peston. That gentleman had eagerly
forward to speak to the young ladies— a thing he woi
hardly have ventured to do had their mother M
present ; he had likewise politely handed them into1|
carriage. He had not attempted to shut me out, li
Mr. Hatfield, neither, of course, had he offered me ]
assistance (I should not have accepted it if he had}, t
as long as the door remained open he had stood smirU
and chatting with them, and then lifted his hat andl
parted to his own abode ; but I had scarcely notic
him all the time* My companions, however, bad be
more observant, and as we rolled along they discuss
between them not only his looks, words, and act ion s^ t
every feature of his face, and every article of his appd
" You shanH have him all to yourself, Rosalie/'m
Miss Matilda at the close of this discussion. ^* I li
him. I know he'd make a nice, jolly companion for m <
'* Well, you're quite welcome to him, Matilda,''repli
her sister, in a tone of afiected indifference
" And Vm sure, " continued the other, " he admireg
quite as much as he does you. — Doesn't he, Miss Grej?
*'I don't know; I'm not acquainted with his sei
ments/*
*'Welh but he does though. "
" My dear Matilda, nobody w-ill ever admire you:
you get ritlof your rough, awkward manners "
*'Oh, stuff 1 Harry Meltham likes such m;anaers,-^
§o do papa's friends. " . t
M V Well, you fpiay captivate old men and younger
but nobody e^se, I am sure, wUl ever take a fancy to y^
''I don't care, I'm not always grubbing after tuq
like you and mamma. If my husband is able to •
a few good Jigrses and dogs I shall be quite satisfied,
all the rest may go to the devil 1 "
" Well, if you use such shocking expressions I'm
no, real gentleman will ever venture to com^ u^^ax
-Really, Miss .Grey, you should not \et \ve.t ^o ^^^
" I can't possibfy prevent it. Miss lAmTa^ "
•'And you're quite mist^en, Malil^-a^*'^'
\1E^L^|
82 AGNES GREY.
that Hairy Meliham admires you. I assure you he
dbes'nothing of the kind. "
■ MSatilda mtels beginning an angry reply, but hiappily
our jburney Wais now at an end, and the contention tvas
cut " short by the footman opening the carriage door and
letting'doi^'the steps'for our descent.
■'V l'CllAPTER XL
. .,'';_''.':'. V...THE " cottager;^. "'.
As^ I had Aow only one -regular = pupil -^ thou^ she
cbntrived to-give toe as much trouble as three Or four
Ardinary ones, and though hfer sister still took lessons in
G6ttnan and drawing— ^1 had ^considerably more time dt
myirown'disposal thain I had ever been blessed witK
before since I had taken uipon me tlie governess's'voke,
which time I devoted partly to correspondence wltn my
friends; partly to reading, study, and the practice d
musifei singing, etci, partly to wandering in the grottndB
or'Udjacent'fidds, with my pupilis if'they wanted me,
alone if they did not.
Often, when they had not more agteeable occupation
i^j hand,'the Misses Murray would amiise themselves
with visiting the poor cottagers on their father^s estate,
to receivfe theii- flattering " homage, or to hear the old
stories or gossiping news of the gamilous old women,
or perhaps to enjoy th6 purer pleasiire of making'the
poor people happy with their cheering presence and tHdr
occasional gifts; so easily bestowed; so thankfully re-
ceived. Sometimes I was called upon to attcdrnpany
one or both of the sisters in these visits, and sdittethnes
I was desired to go alone, to fulfil some promise whidh
they had been more ready to make than to periform,
to carry some smdll donation, or ^ read to one wIk) was
s/cA^ or seriously disposed. And tYi\i5 Vm^da^'few
< ^qtiaintances among the cottagers, ^iiA ocjt^^o^saSt^ A
'^t to s^e them on rfiy own aoGO\itit.
I
i
AGNES GREY, 83^,
lerajly had more satisfaction in going alone than
ther of the young ladies ; for they, chiefly owing
X defective 1 education, comported themselves to-
their inferiors in a maniier that was highly dis^
]Ie for me to witness, Tl > ey never in thought
ged places with them, and consequently had no
nation for their feelings, regarding tJiem as am
if beings entirely different from themselves. They
watch the poor creatures at their meals, making
remarks about their food and their manner of^
; they would laugh at their simple notions and
:ial expressions, till some'of them scarcely dur & t
to speak ; they would call the grave elderly men
jmitp: old fools and silly old blockheads to theiry
and ail this without mj^tning toofieni. I couldj
ft the people were of tea hurt and annoyed by such
As though, their, iear of the " grand ladies " pre-
tthem from testifyi^ any resentment j but il^y
perceived it» They thought that^^ as these cot-
te^ere poor and untaught, they must be stupid antd
k; and as long aa they^ their superior, conde-
ft. to talk to them, and to give them shillings and
pwns^ ori artides of dothing, they had a right./ .to
themselves, even at their expanse ; and th€ f > ^ple:
Idore them as angels of light, condescendiiag to
if to their nec & s^Uies and : enlighten their, humble
ge many and various^attempta to deliver my pufpils
bese delusive notions without alarmmg their pride
1^ was easily offended Bud not soon appeased:—/
little apparent result; and I kno\y not. which
more reprehensible of the two. Matilda was
[e and boisterous, but from Rosalie's womanly
ladylike exterior better things were, expected ;
was as provokingly careless and. incon & ideiate
dy child of twelve, , : . ,:
bright day in the last NveeA?L o\,^!e?':55:vi'a,^ ^ ^''^^d
f In the park, enjoying the: t\\x^\o\^ ^'^^^3r^
84 AGNES GREY.
had set out on her daily ride, and Miss Murray was gon
in the carriage with her mamma to pay some momin;
calls: But it struck me that I ought to leave thes
selfish pleasures, and the park with its glorious canop
of'bright blue sky — rthe west wind sounchng through ii
yet lea*fless branches, the 6now- wreaths still lingerin
m its hollows, but melting fast beneath the sun, andtb
graceful deer browsihg on its moist herbage, alr & ad
assuming the freshness and verdure of spring— arid g
to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow, whose so
was at work all! da j^ in the fields, arid who was afflicte
with'ari inflammation in the eyes, which had for som
time incapacitated her from reading, to her own grea
g^ef ^ fot she was a woman of a serious, thoughtful tur
of mind. I accordingly went, and found her'alone, a
usual, in her little, close,'dark cottage, redolent of smok
and confined air, but as tidy and clean as she coul <
make it. She was seated beside her little fire (consistinj
of a few red cinders and a bit of stick) busily knitting
Vrfth a smsdr sackcloth ciishion at her feet, placed fq
the'(accommodation of her gentle, iriend the cat, wb
Was seated thereon with her long tail half encircling he
velvet paws, and her half-closed e3^es dreamily gazinj
on the low, crooked fender.
'" Well, Nancy, how are you to-day ? ■'
'" Why, middling, missf,'i'myseln. My eyes is w
better, but Fm a deal easier i'my mind nor I have been,'
replied she, rising to welcome me with a contented
smile, which I wais glad to see, for Nancy had been some
what afflicted with religious melancholy. I congratulate(
her upon the change. She agreed that it was a grea
blessing,'and expiressed herself " right down thahkfu
for it, " Adding, " ti it please God to spare my sight, an <
make me so as I can read my Bible again, I think I shal
be as happy as'a queen. "
''I hope He will, Nancy, " replied I ; " and meantime
-^'/^ came and read to you now adid tviea NNtesi\ V^a^q^ ^
^^'^tM time to spare;** ■
^ItA expressions of grateM plfeaJSMte \ > afe -^oot v^oxi
5
tm:
t t
■^
t2i£f

moved to get m^ a chair, but as I saved her the trod
she busied herself with stirring the iire and adding
few more sticks to the decaying embers, and then, taki
her well -used Bible from the shelf, dusted it carefu
and gave it me. On my asking if there was any
ticular part she should hke me to read, she answerer
'* Well, Miss Grey, if it's all the same to you 1 si
like to hear that chapter in the First Epistle of St
that says,'God is love, and he that dwelleth in
dwelleth in God, and God in him/ "
With a little Searching I found these words in
fourth chapter. When \l came to the seventh versi
interrupted me, and, with needless apologies for si
liberty, desired me to read it very slowly, that she mi
lake it all in, and dwell on every word, hoping I woi
excuse her, as she was but a ^'simple body. "'
" The wisest person,''I replied, *'might think
each, of these verses for an hour, and be all the b€
for it ; and I would rather read them ^owly than nO
Accordingly I finished the chapter as slowly as
be, and at the same time as impressively as I c«
My auditor listened most attentively aU the while,
sbcerely thanked me when I had done, I sat still a
half a minute to give her time to reflect upon it, ^
somewhat to my surprise, she broke the pause by sji
me how I liked Mr. West oh ? ,
'* I don't know/M replied, a little startled by
suddenness of the question, , " I think he preaches
welh " ! ;:'-I • > ■■,, r
" Av, he does so, and talks well too/*
''Does he ?'* ,
" He does. Maybe you haven't seen him^ — -not
talk to him much, yet ? "
" No, 1 never see any one to talk to^except the ydi
ladies of the hall.*'■ ■
'* Ah 1 they're nice, kind young Udi^ ; bat tjv^'^
talk as he does.''
''Then he comes to see you, Nanc^'f
''lie doe$, miss, and I'se thanki\il iov \^ ISk
U6 AGNES GREY.
to see'all us poor bodies a deal of tener nor Maister Blig
or th'rector ever did; air* ifs well he does, for he
always welcome. We can't say as much for th'recto
There is'at says they're fair feared oti him. When 1
comes into a house, they say he's sure to find summa
wrohg, and begin a-calling'em as sooii as he crosses tl
doorstubs > , but maybe he thinks it his duty like to te
'emJ.whaf s wrong. And very oft he comes o'purpose t
reptove folk for not coming to church, or not kneeling ai
standing when other folk does, or going to the Meinod
chapel, or summal o'that sort ; but I can't say'at h
ever fund much fault wi'me. He came to see me odc
or twice (afore Maister Weston come, when I was so i
troubled in my mind; and as I had only very poo
health besidies, I made bold to send for mm; and h
came right enough. I was sore distressed. Miss Grey-
thank God it's owered now — ^but when I took my BiU
I could get no comfort of it at all. That very chapter'a
yotVe just been reading troubled me as-much as aught-
'He that loveth not, knoweth not God:'It •seeme
fefetrsonie to me ;■ for I felt that I loved ndther God no
laan as I should do, cmd fcould not if I tried ever so
And'th* chapter afore, where it says,'He that is bot
of God'cannjot commit sin.'And another place y/het
it siaiys, ^ Love .is the fulfilling of the law.'And manj
many others, miss. I should fail " weary you out if
was to tell them all. But all seemed to condemn mc
and to show me'at I was not in the right way ; and a
I knew not how to get into it, I sent our Bill ta b^
Maister Hatfield to bd as kind as look in on me'som
day, and when he came I telled him all my troubles. "
■ " And what did he say, Nancy ?^''
" Why, miss, he seemed to scorn me. I might b
mista'en, but he Uke gave a sort of a whistle, and t sa\
a bit of a smile on his face ; and he said,'Oh, it*s ai
stuff r Foil Ve been antoivg tlvft Methodists, niy goa
woman.'But I telled him Yd ivevex \««si tsteax " ^
Methodies. And thfen-bfe attM,-^;; ^'• ^ J . V,
AGNES GREY. 8ji
I'll hear ithe Scriptures properly explained, instead of
ing poring over your Bibk at home/ . ,- ,
'But I telled him I always used coming to church
en I had my health, but tlys very cold winteir weathet
lardly durst'venture so far, and me so bad wi'. th:
umatiz and all. : ..r .... ..■
'But he says, * It'll do your rheumatiz good to hobbte
church. There^s nothing like exercise for the rheu-
tiz. : You can walk about the house. well enotlgh-;
y .Can't you walk to ehurch ? The fact, is,'sa5^'he»
Du're getting too fond of your ease. It's always easy
find excuses for shirking one's duty.'■. ^
VBut then, you .know. Miss. Grey, it wasn't so. .■HoW "
jr, i telled him I'd try.'But please, sir,'saj»:il^
I do go to church, what the better shal^ I be^? I
nt to have, ray sins blotted out, and to feel that. they
remembered no more against me, and. that the Idve
God is. shed abroad. fin; my heart; and if I can get
good by reading my Bible an'saying my prayecs at
ne, what good shaJl I get by going to church.? ■ ■ .■ \i
['The church,'. $ays he, * is the place appointed, by
d for His worship. It?.s your , duty, to go therb a$
en as you can. If you want. comfort, you must seek
in the path of duty.'An'a doali njore he said^ bwt
;annot remember all. ihi3 ime words, . However}., it aH
ne to this, that:! was to come tQ church- aS'oft a6
;r I could, and bring my prayer-jbook with mft, ailT
d up all the ;8ponsers after the clerk, an'; stand,'an'
?el,* an'sit,.an; do all as I shoujd^ an,', take the LcJrd'^s
pper at every opportunity, an'^ hearken bisjs^ixioiiSy
i Maister's Bligh's, an'it'ud be all right .If I iwent
doing my duty I should get a bjesging a^t last: ■ . : .« :.
\* But if you get no domfort thftt way,'^ays he, 1 it!s
up.'. -i'. ■ • ; ■ . ]\..,\', ■:.. .. ; •■;■-. .
''Then, sir,'says I,'should you thinkrl'm a reprobate ?';
''Why ,^ says hej be pays, Mf you da your be§t to
: to heaven and can't manage it, yow law & X. \ifer.cr5:vfc.^\
fse that seek to enter; iji at thei & ttait.g^V^ ^^^ ^ " ^
tfe able/ ;..--, • ••■'.-.»■ ■•• ^''■■■■ "
88 AGNES GREV.
" An* then he asked me if Fd seen any of the ladies o'
th'hall about that mortiin'; so I telled him wh^ I
had seen the young missis go on th* Moss Laiie; an'
he. kicked my poor cat right across th'flooir, an* Went
after'erti'as gay as a lark. But I was vefy sad* tfiat
last word o* his fair sunk into my heart, an'lay there
like a lump o'lead, till I was weary to bear it.
- " Howsever, I f oilered his advice.'I thought he meant
it all for th'best, though he had a queer way with him.
But you kiiow, miss, he's rich an'young, and such like
cannot right understand the thoughts of a po©r old
woman such as me. But howsever, I did my best to
do all as he bade me; but maybe I'm plagiiing you,
missjwi'my chatter. "
" Oh rio, Nancy ! Go On; and tell me all. " ■■•''■
** Well, my rheumatiz got better — I know not whether
wi'going to church or not; but one frosty Siinday I got
this cold i'my eyes. Th* inflammation didn't come on
all at once like, but bit by bit. But I wasn?t going to
tell you about my eyes ; I was talking about -my trouble
o'mind! And to tell the truth,^ Miss Grey, I don't
think it was ianyways eased by coming to church-^
nought to speak on^ at least. I like got my health better,
bat that didn't mend my soul. I hearkened and heark-
feaed tte ministers^ and read an'read at my prayer-book,
but it was all like sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal
Thfe sermons I couldn't understand, an'th'prayer-book
only (Served to show me how wicked I was, that I could
read such good words an'never be no better for it, and
often feel It a sore labour an'a heavy task beside, in-
stead of a blessing and a privilege as all good Christians
does. It seemed like as all were barren an'dark to me.
And then them dreadful words,'Many shall seek'to
enter in, and shall not be able.'They like as they fair
dried Up my sperrit.
" But one Sunday, when Maister Hatfield gave out
aboat the sacmment, 1 noticed wYiete \\e ^id,'If there
*e any of yon'that cannot quiet Yds ovitv coxisid'^xv'cfc^XjQS.
guireth further comfort or co\inse\, \et \v\m coxfifc^^
AGNES GEEY. J9
nepoF^Se otLbcr discreet and learned mmister of God's
vqrd, and open liis grief/'So next Sunday morning,
if ore service^ I jast looked into the vestry, an'began a
:a}king to th'rector again, I hardly could fashion to
lakesnch a hberty/but 1 thought when my soul was at
Jtake I shouldn't stick at a triile. But he said he hadn't
time to attend ib me them. 1
*'* Andj indeed/ says he,'Vv^ nothing to say to you
Dut what Tve'said before. Take the sacrament, of
course, and ^o on doing your duty ; and if that won't
serve you, nothing will. So don't bother me any more,*
'* So then I went away. But I heard Maister Weston
— Maister V/eston was there, missr^this was his first
Sunday at Horton^ yoti know, an'he was i* th* vestry
in his surplice, helping tb'rector on with his goWn,*':- ,11
** Yes, Nancy/'" ■'. -i .. ■-,•:. fr.; ^tk'? rnun im-..|
'* And I heard TiimiJ^sk/Maister Hatfidd wlio I'waa!S
an'he says,'Oh, she's a canting^ old fooL^ ^^ * .• /'
''And I was very ill grieved, Miss Grey ; but I went
to my seat, and I tried to do my duty as aforetime, but
Lilike got no peace. An'I even took the sacrament;
but I felt as though I were eating and drinking to my
Dwn damnation all th* time. So I went home, sorely
trotibled. ■ f ; t-.r ,'j ■
'* But next day, afore I'd gotten fettled up — for in-
dead, miss, rd iQ heart to sweeping an* fettling an*
ivashing pots, u. I sat me down i* th'muck-^who should
:ome in but Maister Weston 1 i started siding stuff
Ihen, , -an'sweeping an'doing; and I expected he'd
Degir*. a-calling me for my idle ways, as Maister Hatfield
jvould'a done. But I was mistaken; he only Md me
jood-mornin* like, in la quiet dacent way. So I dusted
lim a chair, an* fettled up th* fireplace a bit; but I
ladji't forgotten th* rector's words, so says I,'I wonder,
ar, you should give yoxirself that trouble to come so
[ar to see a " canting old fool " such asTue* ^ ^
. ^'He seemed taken aback at that, \i\il V^ ^«^^'^^
eisnade me'nt the rector was oniy m y^^\'^tv,^^^
1^ i^^aJdn't ,do, Jie says,'Weil, Kancv i ^^^ ^^^
gjb AONES GREY.
think Iso much abotit it;; Mr. Hatfield was a little out of
humour just then. You know we're none of us perfect
—even Moses spoke unadvisedly with hislips* But now
^t down a minute, iiiycta can spare:ihe time,» and tcH
fiieiafliyour doubts and fears, andl'll tiiy to.Temovc
ithemJ ^ ■': ..:■ • ■ • • !': .-..
" So I sat me down anent him. He was quite, a
^ttlangery you know, Misis Grey, and even. yo«n|[^ nor
Maistfer'Hatfield, I believe ; an'I had thought mm not
^ pleiisant'-iobking asrihim, and rather; a bit.crossish
at'first to'look at;'But he spoke so civil Hke; .And when
'th* cat, poor thing, jiuhpcd on.to his- kneej'he.only
Istroked her, and gave a bit of a smile ; so I thought that
was a good sign, for once, when she did so to th'rector,
he kiiocked her oft, like as it might be in scorn and anger;
poor thing. But you can't expect a cat to know man-
;nerft'like sL Christian,'you kiiowj Miss Grey.^ • i
" No, of course'not, NancJy. But what did Mr. Westoa
Say'-then?. " : .'■-■.■■■ v^: • •■ • ■ .• ■■'! > ■■■■ •
f " r. He said naught; but he- listened to me as steady
3^ patient as oomdbe,'an'never a bit o'scorn about hini
So I'went on, and lelled him all; just as^ I've telled you-r
an* moretoo. ; - ii -
" * Well,'says he, * Mr. Hatfield was quite right in
telling you tb persevere in doing your duty ; but; in ad-
vising you to go to'Church and attend to the service, and
so on, he didnH niean that was the whole of a Ghrifr
tiatt's^ > duty. = He only thought you might there learn
what: more was- to be done, and be led to take deUgtt
in those exercises, instead of finding them a task and a
burdki. And if you had asked him to explain those
words that trouble you so much, • I think he would have
told you* that if many shall seek lb enter in at the strait
gate and shall not be able, it is their own sins that hinder
them-^just as a man widi a large sack on his back might
wish to pass through a narrow dborway, arid find it mi-
vo^ible to do so unless he would leacve \fts ^ajck \«Smd
yjn; But you, Nancy, I dare say, \v^ve no ^m^ ^laX^a^
Mz/ef not gladly throw taslde. ii yo\x Isnew \tfaw t *
1
AGNES GREY. g%
& d«ed, sir, you speak tnitli/ said, I,
i^ell/.says he,'you kaow the first and great; comj
lent, and the second, which is like unto it — on
rtwo commandments hang all the. law and the
Its ? You say you cannot love God ; but it
I me that if you rightly consider'who and what
Irou cannot help it. : He is your father, your best
f ■ Every blessing, everything good, pleasant, or use-
lies fi'om Him,; and everything evil, everything you
bason to hate, to shun, or to fear, comes from Satan
f enemy as weU as ours. And for ihi$ cause was
manifest in the flesh^that He might destroy tb?^
bf the devil. In one word, God is LovEj and th^^
of iove we have within us the nearer we are .tu
ihd the more of His spirit we possess.'
PelL, sir/ I said, * il I can always think on th^^e
1 think 1 might weE love God; but how can I
ly neighbours when they vex me^ ^d be so con-
and sinful as some on ^em is ?', ,
t may seem a hard matter/ sa^?^'he^'to ilove our
burSj who have so much of what is evil about them^
bose faults so often awaken the evil that liogexs
^ourselves; but remember that Z/^ made thejn,.i%nd
ms themjf and whosoever loveth him it hat begat
[Wm that is begotten also. And if God so lovetHi
{t He gave His only begotten Son to die for us,
felt also to love one another. But if you cannot
litive affection for those who do not care for yop,
tti ^t least try t6 do to, them as you would they
J do unto you. You can endeavour to pity their
I and excuse their oftences^ and to do all th^ good
Ih to those about you. And if you accustom
if to tills, Nancy, the very eltort itself will make
te them in some degree, to say nothing of, the good^
far kindness wdnld beget in them, though they
liave tittle else that is good about tKem, . \i ^^
Ipd and wish to serve Uxm, \et yx% Xv^ V^ ^^^X^
> do His work, to labour lor Hl-g. ^Xoftv)— -^^^^
92 AGNES GREY.
which is the peace and happiness of all the world. . How
ever powerless we may seem to be, in doing all the gooc
we can'through hfe the humblest of us may do mud
tdwards it; -and let us dwell in love, that He may dwd
in us and We in Him. The more happiness we bestow
the niore we shall receive, even here, and the greatei
will be our reward in heaven " when we rest from oiii
labours.* I believe, miss, them is his very words, fa
rvfe thought'em ower many a time. An'then he tool
that Bible, an'read bits here and there, an'explainec
'em as clear as the day ; and it seemed like as a new
light broke in on my soul, an'I felt fair a glow about mj
heart, an'only Nvisned poor Bill an'all the world coulc
ha'been there an* heard it all and rejoiced wi'me.
" After he was gone, Hannah Rogers, one o'th- neigb
bouts, CSEune in and wanted me to help her to wash. 1
telled her I couldn't just then, for I hadn't set on th'
potaties for th'dinner, nor washed* up th'breakfast stufl
yet. So then she began a-calUng me for my nasty idk
ways. I was a little bit vexed at first, but I never said
nothing wrong to her. I only telled her, like all in a
quiet wayj'at I'd had th'new parson to see me, but I'd
get done as quick as ever I could, an'then come an'help
ner. So then she softened down, and my heart like as
it warmed towards her, an'in a bit we w^ viery good
friends. An'so it is, Miss Grey:'A soft answer turueth
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.* It isn't
only in them you speak to, but in yoiirseH. "
'" ■ Very true, " Nancy, if we cotdd always remember it "
; " ^Ay; ifwfecould.'^'
''And did Mr. Weston ever come to see you again ? "
- *^ Yes, many a time; and since my eyes has. been so
bad he's sat an'read to me by the half-hour together.
But you know, miss, he has other folks to see, and other
things to do — God bless himt An'that next Stmday
hef preached such a sermon 1 His text was, * Come*anto
^K? all ye that ia hour and are Yieavy \aAesv, ^.twi I will
" ^ve yon rest/ and thein two blessed vwsea tYis^l io^^cm
ou wasn't there, miss— you was witYi vo > 3ii irv^x^^ > Cm
lit it made me so happy ! And I am happy now,
ik Godi An'I take a pleas me now in doing little
o'jobs for my neighbours ^ such as a poor old body
» half blind can do ; and they take it kindly of me,
as he said. You see, miss, I'm knitting a pair o'
kings now. They* re for Thomas Jackson. He's a
srish old body, an'weVe had many a bout at threap -
one anent t'other, an'at times we've differed sorely.
[ thought I couldn't do better nor knit him a pair
'arm stockings ; an'I've felt to like him a deal better,
r old man, sin'I began. It's turned out just as
ster Weston said. " i'
Well, I'm very glad to see you so happy, Nancy,
so wise. Bnt I must go now ; I shall be wanted at
hall/'said I_ And bidding her good-bye I departed^
nising to come again when I had time, and feeling
■ly as happy as herself.
t another time I went to read to a poor lalmurer who
in the last stage of consumption, The young ladieis
been. to. see him, and somehow a promise of reading
been extracted from them ; but it was too much
,ble, so they begged me to do it instead. T went,
ngly enough ; and there too I was gratified with the
ses of Mr. Weston, both from the sick man and his
. Ttie former told me that he derived great comfort
benefit Irom the visits of the new parson, who fre-
itly came to see him, and was *'another guess sort
lan " to Mr. Hatfield, who, before the other's arrival
[orton, had now and then paid him a visit ; on which
sions he would always insist upon having the cottage
r kept open, to admit the fresh air for his own con^
ence, without considering how it might injure tlie
iter ■ and having opened liis prayer-book and hastily
. over a part of the Service for the Sick* would hurry
y again, if he did not stay to administer some harsh
ike to the afflicted wife, or to make some thou^ktles & ^
to say heartJess, observation, TatYi-fei ^i-aiexiN.^lR^Vsi'^^-'
ie than dimmish the troubles oi t\ve ^M^e^Tm^ v=^vt -
94 AGKES OHEY;
with me quite in a different fashion, an'talk to me as
kind asowt, an* oft read to me too,, an* sit. beside mejnst
like-a " brother/*'. ■ i * ■•''
" Just for all. the world:!'-.exdaimed his vdie,*, fAoi
about a three wik sih*, when he see*d how poca}; Jem
shivered wi* cold, an* what pitiful fires: we. kept/, he ajcsd
if wer stock of coals was nearly done. I telled him it
was,'an'we was ill set to get more; But you knocwy mum,
I -didn*! think o* him helping )us; .But; howsevterj he
sent us- a sack o'coals next day; an* we* ve. had good
fires eyer sin', an'a great blessing it is= this. winter time.
But that*s his way. Miss Grey. When hewcoraes into: a
poor body!s house arseein* sick folk, he like': notices
what they most stand i'need on ; an* if he thinks they
can*t readily get it theirselni he never says nowt abo«rt
it^ but just gets it for'em. -An'it isn't everybody'at
'ud do that *at has as little as he has; for. you Iomjw;
mum, he's nbwt at all to live on but what he. gets foa
th* rettor, an'that's little enough, they say.V=
, I remembered then, with a species, of exultation, that
he had'frequently beeh st^ded a vulgar brute by the'ami*
able Miss Jiurray, because he wore- a silvef watch: and
clothes not quite so bright and fresh as Mr. Hatfteld-sJi/-
■ tii returning to the lodge I felt very happy, and thanked
God'that I had now something to think aboui^ some-
thing to dwell on as a reUef from the weary monotony,
the lonely drudgery of my i present Ufe — for I was lonely.
Never, from month to month, from year. to year, except
during my brief; intervals, of'test at home, did I isee
one creature to whom I oould open'my heart, or freely
speak 5ny thoughts with any hope f of sympathy or even
colrtiprehensioh — never one, unless i it were j poor Nancy
Brown, with whom I could enjoy a single moment of real
social intercourse, or wh6se conversation was- calculated
to render me better, wiser, or hap^er than; " before, or
whd, as far as I couid see, could be greatly benefited'by
mme^ My only companioiis had been \iaamiablechil-
^ren, and ignorant^ wrong - headed gitte^ iiom ^\s»9)b W
^^MD^ folly unbroken solitude was oiten ^ .T«!i^ftl m«

AGNES GREY.
9S
kestly desired and dearly prired. But to be restricted
5 such associates was a serious evil, both in its immediate
ffects and the consequences that were likely to ensue,
[ever a new idea of stirring thought came to me from
without ; and such as rose within me were, for the most
artj miserably crushed at once^ or doomed to sicken
nd fade away, because they could not see the hght.
Habitual associates are known to exercise a great in-
Uence over each other's minds and manners. Those
fliose actions are for ever before our eyes, whose words
re ever in our ears, will naturaUy lead us, albeit against
iir will, slowly, gradually, imperceptibly, perhaps, to
ct and speak as they do. I will not presume to say
ow far ihis irresistible power of assimilation extends,
■ut if one civilized man were doomed to pass a dozen
tars amid a race of Intractable savages, unJess he had
ower to improve them, I greatly question whether'at
bB close of tliat period hcwouJd not hive become at
^ast a barbarian himself. And I, as I could not make
ly young companions better, feared exceedingly that
bey would make me worse— would gradually brin^ my
selings, habits, capacities, to the level of their own,
^thout, however, imparting to; me their light-iheajted-
^ss and cheerful vivacity. > i i-;;!
'Already I seemed to feel my intellect deteriorating,
iy heart petrifying, my soul contracting, and I trembled
»t my very moral perceptions should become deadened,
ly distinctions of right and wrong confounded, and all
ly better faculties be sunk at last beneath the baneful
ifltience of such a mode of life. The gross vapours of
iiih were gathering around me, and closing in upon my
iward heaven ;■ and thus it was that Mr/ Weston rose
t length upon me, appearing like the moming*star in
ly horizon, to save me from the fear of utter darkness ;
nd I rejoiced that I had now a subject for contemplation
bat was above me, not b^^neath. I was glad to see that
11 the worJd was not made up ot B\ooTi^^^fe,^^5?t^^j^'^j
ntij^Ids, Ashbys, etc., and tliat \\\\maT\ ^tilci^'^:^'^^ " **'
X A mem dieaMk > oi i the rniagiim^ionj N^Y^^jgefe ^^^ ^^^^^
^ AGNES GREY.
little good and no harm of a .person,- it; is easy And pleasai
to.imagine > more. In'short,, it is needless to analy^ J
my thoughts; but Sunday was now become « a day
peculiar delight to tne (I was now almost broken; in
the, back comer in the carriage), for I hked to hear- hit
and I liked to see him too, though I knew he was n
handsdpie, or even what is caHed agreeable, in outwai
aspect,: but certainly he was not ugly. . , :. : j
■ In stature he was a little,- a very little, above ..tl
middle size. The outline of his face would • be > pr
noikneed too square for beauty, but to me it aiinounp
diecision of character ; his dark brown hair was not cai
fully eurled like Mr: Hatfield's, but simply brushed asit
over a; broad white forehead ; the e5^brows,. I suppofi
werel too projecting^ but from imder those dark bro^
there gleamed an eye of singular power, brown in coloti
not large, and somewhat dedp-set; but strikingly br
Uant, and fi:dl 6f expression: There was ; character, to
in the mouth — something that bespoke a man of fir
putpose and a habitual thinker ; and when he smiled-
but X will not speak of that yetj for at the time I mei
tion I had never seen him smile ;. and indeed his gener
appearance did- not impress liie with the idea of a tBia
given to such a relaxation, nor of siich an individu
as ;. the. cottagers described Mm. I had. early formed'ir
opinion :of Hm, and in spite ,of Miss Murray's objurg
tions was fully convinced that he'was a man of stroi
Senfee,. ftrmiaith, and ardent piety, but thoughtful ar
stem; artd when I found that^ to his.-other good qiM
itiea,: was added thsLt of .true benevolence and.g^itl
considerate kindness, the discovery perhaps delighted n
the more, as I had not been prepared to expect it.
CHAPTER XIL
THE SHOWER.
The next visit I paid to Naticy Bxowtv.Nvas *\tv ^ ^«pn
^^eJr in March ; for though 1 had maii^y. ^ " ^^ifc vTX«3k >
mBkes grey. 97
uring the day, I seldom could look upon an hour as
Qtirely my own, since, where everything was left to the
iprices of Miss Matilda and her sister, there could be
order or regularity. Whatever occupation I chose,
fen not actually busied about them or their concerns,
had, as it were^ to keep my loins girded^ niy shoes on
ly feet, and my staff in my hand, for not to be immedi-
tely forthcoming when called for was regarded as a
rave and inexcusable offence, not only by my pupils
rid their mother, but by the very servant, who came
1 breathless haste to call me, exclaiming, " You* re to
D to the schoolroom directly, mum. The young ladies
WAITING IJ'* Glirtiax of horror I actually waiting for
leir governess 1 1 I ,
But this time I was pretty sure of an tiour or two to
lyself, for Matilda was preparing for a long ride, and
.osali6 was dressing for a dinner-party at Lady Ashby^s;
J I took the opportunity of repairing to the widow's
> ttage, where I found her in some anxiety about her
it, which had been absent all day. I comforted her
ith as many anecdotes of that animal's roving propen-
ties as I could recollect, *'Vm feared o* th'game-
nepers/'said she ; " that's all'at 1 think on. If th'
Dxm^ gentlemen had been at home 1 should'a thought
iey*d been setting their dogs at her, an'worried her,
^or thing, as they did many a poor thing's cat • but
haven't that to be feared on now/'Nancy's eyes were
»tter, but still far from well. She had been trying to
rake a Sunday shirt for her son, but told me she could
ily bear to do a little bit at it now and then, so that it
nogfessed but slowly, though the poor lad wanted it
idly. So 1 proposed to help her a little, after I had
sad to her, for I had plenty of time that evening, and
^ed not return till dusk. She thankfully accepted the
iier* " An'you'll be a bit o* company for me too,
ilss, " said she ;'* I like as I feel lonesome without m^
itJ* But when I had finished tead\u^, -^tv^ ^qs^w^ ^^^^^^
ill of a seam, with Nancy's capBiCiciu'r, \ > \2 > s^'O^^^^^
^ed on to mv Unger bv means oi ^ toW ol i?-^^'^ ^^ ^
98 AGNES GREY,
disturbed by the entrance of Mr, Weston, with the ideati-
cal ca,t in his arms. I now saw that he could smile, and
very [pleasantly too.
" , Tve done you a piece of. good service, Naincy, " he
began ; then seeing me,, he acknowledged my presence
by a slight bow. I should have been invisible toiEfet-
field or any. other gentleman of those parts^ " I've de-
livered your cat,*'he continued, **. from the hands, or
rather the gun, of Mr^ Murray's gamekeeper/',
" God bless you, sir ! " cried the grateful old woman,
ready to weep for joy as she received her favourite from
his: arms.
*'Take care of it, " said he, " and don't let it go near
the rabbit warren, for the gamekeeper swears he'U shoot
it if he; sees it there again^ He would have :done so
to-day if I had not been in time to stop. him.-=-I believe
it is raining > Migs Grey, " added he, more quietly, ob-
serving that I had put aside my work and was preparing
to depart. " Don't let me disturb you. I shan't 3tay
two minutes. "
" You'll both stay while this shower gets owered, " jsaid
Nimcy, as she stirred the fire and placed another chair
beside it.'*,What ! there's room for all. "
" j can see better here, thank you, Nancy, " replied I,
taking my work to the wijidow, where she ha4 the good-
ness to suffer me to remain unmolested, while she got a
bru^ to reniove.the cat's, hairs from. Mr. Weston's coat,
carefully Mdped the rain from his. hat, and gave, the cat
its supper, busily talking all the time— now thanldng her
clerical friend for what he had done, now wondering how
the cat had found out, the wap " en, and now lamenting
the. probable, consequences of such a discovery. He- lis-
tened with a quiet, good-natured smile, and at length
took, a seat in compliance with her pressing invitations,
but repeated that he did not mean to stay.
** I have another place to go to, " said he, " and I see "
(gJancmg B.t ihe book on the table) " some one else has
been reading to you. " •■
/'Yes, sir : Afiss Grey has been ai^ Vim^ «»s > t^^i^ tot
AGNES GREY. 90
bapter, an'now she's helping me with a shirt for our
;ill. But I'm feared she'll be cold there.— ^Won't you
Diti^ tt > th'fire, miss ? " "
" No, thank you, Naney ; I'm quite warm. I nitist go
3 soon as this sh6wer is 6ver. " •'
" O miss, you said . you could stop while dusk ! "
rted the provoking old woman; and Mr. Westbft seized
is hat. ■ " ■ ■ ■ ■ " ■■■■■ "
" Nay, Siri^'exclaimed she; *'pray don't go nON^ while
; raing so faist. "'•'•'■'*'
" But it strikes me'Fm keeping your yisitor £[wa'^
:om the fire. "
" No, you're not; Mr. Weston, " repUed 1, hoping
llere was no harm in a falsehood of that description. ■ •
" No, sure! " cried Nancy. " What! there's lots o'
56m. " - .■■.-■ : .^ >
" Miss Gr6y, " said he, half jestingly, as if he felt -it
tecessary to'change the present subject, whether hi Had
ny thing particular to say or not, " I wish you Would
lake my peace with the Squire when you see him.'" He
rss by when I rescued Nancy's cat, and did not quite
pprove of the deed. I tolil'him I thought he " ittight
etter spare all his rabbits than she her cat, for which
udacious assertion he treated me to some ratlier uh-
efttlemanly language, and, I fear I retorted a'tri^e
i)o Warmly. "
" Oh, lawful sir ! I hope you didn't fall out wi'th'
laister for salke 6'my cat ! He cannot bide ariswer-
ig again, .can th'maister! "
" Oh, it^s'ho matter, Nahcy. : I don't cAre about it,
ially. I said nothing very uncivil ; and I suppose Mr.
[urray is accustorned to use rather strong language
^hen he's heated.^'■ .''
" Ay, sir ; it's a pity. "
** And now I really must go. I have to visit " a place a
lile beyond this, and ypu wotlld not have me to ret\it^
1 the dark. Besides, it has neaiV^ doivfe t AxccwJ, ^ < 3^ •
> good-evening, -Nancy. — Good-eveum^,'^\S5 > Qx > t^i*
''Good-evening, Mr. Wo?ton ; bwt doTv'V devetv^^^.^?
lOO AGNES GREY.
me for maJang your peace with Mr. Murray,, for I never
see himT-to speak to. "
" Don't you ? It can't be helped, then,-'replied he, in
dolorous Resignation ; then with a peculiar half -smile he
added, ** But never mind ; I imagine the squire has
more to apologia for than I, " and left the cottage* •
I went on with my se > ying as long as I cpuld see, and
then bade Nancy gooid-evening, checking her too Uvely
gratitude by the undeniable assurance that I had only
done for her what she would have done for me if she had
be^^ m my place and I in hers. I hastened back to
Horton Lodge, where, having entered the schoolroom,
I , found the tea-table all in confusion^ the tray flooded
with dops, and Miss Matilda in a most ferocious humour.
" Miss Grey, whatever have you been about ? I've had
tea half an hour ago, and had to make it myself, and
drink it all alone. I wish you would come in sooner. "
" I've been to see Nancy Brown. I thought you would
not be back from your ride, "
" How could I ride in the rain, I should like to know ?
That damned pelting shower was vexatious enough,
coming on when I was just in full swing ; and then tp
come and find nobody in to tea ! And you know I can't
make the tea as I like it. "
" i didn't think of the shower, " replied I (and indeed
tlie thought of its driving her home had never entered
my head).
" No, of course ; you were under shelter yourself, and
you never thought of other people. " :
I bore her coarse reproaches with astonishing equa-
nimity, even with cheerfulness, for I was sensible that I
had done more good to Nancy Brown, than harm to her ;
and perhaps some other thoughts assisted to keep up my
spirits and impart a relish to the cup of cold, overdrawn
tea, and a charm to the otherwise unsightly table;, and—
I had almost said — to Miss Matilda's unamiable face.
But she soon betook herself to the stables, and left me
to tb^ quiet enjoyment of my solitary meii.
CHAPTER XII L
THE PRIMROSES.
> S Murray now always went twice to chxirch, for she
loved admiration that she could not bear to lose a
^le opportunity of obtaining it ; and she was so sure
it wherever she showed herself, that, whether Harry
Hham and Mr. Green were there or not^ there was cer-
i to be somebody present who would not be insensible
her charms, besides the rector, whose official capacity
lerally obliged him to attend. Usually, also, if the
ither permitted, both she and her sister would walk
tie-^Matilda, because she hated the confinement of the
riage ; she, because she disliked the privacy of it, and
Dyed the company that generally enlivened the first
e of the journey in walking fi-ora the church to Mr.
sen's park gates, near which commenced the private
A to Horton Lodge, which lay in the opposite direc-
a, while the highway conducted in a straightforward
Irse to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh
Itham. Thus there was always a chance of being
oinpanied, so far, either by Harry Meltham, with or
hout Miss Meltham, or Mr. Green, with jjerhaps one
both of his sisters, and any gentleman visitors they
jht have:
Whether I walked with the young ladies or rode with
ir parents depended upon their own capricious will,
Ihey chose to'* take ** me, I went; if, for reasons
t known to themselves, they chose to go alone, I
k my seat in the carriage, I liked walking better,
: a sense of reluctance to obtrude my presence on
; one who did not desire it always kept me passive
these and similar occasions ; and I never inquired
D the causes of their varying whims. Indeed this
5 the best policy, for to submit and obU^'^ ^■Si &'^^
^emess's pRft ; fo consult their own p\^a.SMi^ N^^as, ^'^^^J^^^
the pupils. But when I d\d walk, Vcv^'^^^'^ ^ " ^^ ^
\1n2ey was g^eneiail;g^^ttgft|y|jm^^^^g " ^^ " ^
I
r02 AGNES GREY,
none of the before-mentioned ladies and gentlemen evei
noticed me, it was disagreeable to walk beside them, ai
if Ustening to what they said, or wishing to be though
one of them, while they talked ovet me, or across ; anc
if their eyes, in speaking, chanced to fall oiii rae, it seem^t
as if they looked on vacancy — as if they either did.no:
see me, or were very desirous to make it appear; so, -I
was. disagreeable, too, to walk bi^hind, and thus.appeai
to acknowledge my own. inferiority; for, ia truth, J
corisidered.myself pretty nearly as good as the best o
thiem.^. and: wished them to know that! did so, and. no
toiniagine that I looked upon myself as a mere domestic
who. knew her own place too well to'walk beside sue!
fine ladies, and gentlemen , as they were—though he]
young ladies nright iohoose to have ber with them, .anc
even condescended to .converse with: her when no bettea
company were at hand. Thu3-:-I am. almost ashaiuejc
to confess it — but indeed I gave myself XXQ little ttoubk
in my endeavours (if I did keep, .up with them) tp tappeai
perfectly unconscious or regardless of their, preiSence^ af
if ..J were whoDy absorbed in jxiy own reflectionsj or the
contemplation of surrounding, objects; or if I iiiageted
behind^ it,was some bird or insect, sqpie tr^ oi: flQW9r»
that ^attmcted " my attention, and having. .duly .examin64
that > I;W:Oi < ld piMT^e my wfdkalpne, at; a leisurely pac^
until my pupils had bidden adieu to their companions
a^^.rtumed. off into the quiet,, private road,- ; . . . /
One:^uch occasion I particularly wellremeniber,;. It
was jB. lovely aftenioon about the; dose of March, Mr.
Greefli .^d his sister^ bad sent their carriage back empty,
in /order to enjoy the bright sunshine and bzilmy air. in
9i sociable walk home, along with their visitors, Captain
Somebody, and Lieutenant Somebody-else (a couple of
military fops), and the Misses Murray, who, of coursje,
contrived, to join. them. .Such a party was highly agrp^
abk to'Rosalie ; but ;not finding it equally suitable to
/Z2r ^^te, I presently fell back, and .besjgacn. to .botanize
^^d entomologize along the. gveeur " baxiiVLS «c£v^ \ > \3A.^iKNi
^d^'^s, till the company was cotiftijdeiab\v *^ «t^viistft^
AGIfES GREY. lOJ
nd I could hear the sweet song of the happy lark,
en my spirit of mi'sajithropy began to melt away be-
ith the soft, pure air and genial sunshine; but sad
jufhts of early childhobd, and yaamings for departed
% or for a brighter future lot, arose instead. As my
s wandered over the steep banks covered with young
Lss and greeii- leaved plants, and surmounted by bud-
ig hedges, I longed intensely for some familiar flower
yt might recall the woody dales or green hill-side-s of
tue. The brown moorlandSj of course, were out of the
estion. Such a discovery would make my eyes gush out
th water, no doubt; but that was one of my greatest
joyments now. At length 1 descried, high up between
J twisted toots of an oak, three lovely primroses, peep-
\ so sweetly from their hiding-place that the tears
eady started at the sight ; " but they grew so high'above
i that I tried in vain to gather one or two, to dream
fH and to carry with me» I could not reach theUfi tin-
s I climbed the bank, which I was deterred from doing
hearing a footstep at that moment behind me, and
5 therefore about to turn away, when I was startled
" the words; *'Allow me to gather them for you. Miss
iyi'^ spoken in the grave, low tones of a well-known
ice. Immediately the flowers were gathered and iii
^ hand. It was Mr. Weston, of course. Who else
uld trouble himself to do so much for 7nc ?
[ thanked Mni; whether warmly or coldly I cannot
I, but certain I am that I did not express half the
Ltitude I felt: It was fooKsh, perhaps, to feel any
ititude at all ; hut it seemed to me, at that mon^ent,
if this were a remarkable instance of his good-nature,
act of kindness which I could not repay but never
> u}d forget, so utterly unaccustomed was I to receive
± civilities, so little prepared to expect'them from
one within fifty milies of Horton Lodge. Yet this
not prevent me from feeling a Utile utieoxxA^xV^^y^^
hh presence, and I proceeded to ioWoy? v^ ^^^-^^^ " S
fiuch quicker pace than before, l\vou^ t^^Vks^^
Weston had i^i^^ hint ^^ij^myg^ ^*j\\ > ivr-
I
306 AGNES GREY.
I pitied Wm .from my heart; .1 almost'wept fovsya
pathy. And this, I thought, accoimted fdt theishade (
prematute thoughtfulness thait so f reqiaently'clouded h
brow; and obtained for him the reputation, of a m6ra
and -sullen disposition with the charitable Missi Mnita
a^nd all her kin.- *'But,'-thought I, " he is not so mise
able as- 1 should be under such a deprivations HeJeac
an'active Ufe, and a wide /field for useful exertion ilw
before him. He can make friends, and he can-jnakie
home too if he pleases;, and doubtless. -he; will -jfjie*
sortie -time. God grant the partner of that home', ma
bis'worthy of his choice^ and make it a- happy one-^^suc
a- home as he deserves to have ! And how delightful;
would: be to-^ • " But no matter what I thought; : ■■
• * I " began this book with the intentioh of concealir
nothing, that those who liked might have the. benefit :i
perusing a fellow-creature's .heart-; but we haviai s < m
thoughts thkt all the angels in heaven are* welcome < 1
behoH but not our broth^r*metai > ^not even i the best an
kindest attiongist them: - •'. r .
'By this time the Greens had taken themselves to the
own abode, and the Murrays had turned down the piivart
irdad, whither I hastened to follow them* I fonnd ti
two girfe wamj in an animated: discission on the respec
tive merits of the two young officers ; . but on seeing in
Ifeodalli^ broke off in tiie middle of a sentente tk > exdsthi
with'irialicious glee,-^'i'J'-
" Oh, ho, Miss Grey ! you're come at last, are'yon
No wdnder you lingeiled so long behind ; and^oviondi
you always stand up so vigorously for Mr. i^ye6tDn whe
I abuse him. Ah, ha ! I see it all now!'■ ,'< i» v "
" Now; come, Mis Murray, don't be foolish, " : said]
attempting a good-natured^ laugh ; " you know sac
nonsense cari make no imptession on me:'^ - ■
But she itill went ott talking such intolerable stuff-
her sistefr helping hef with approffaiate fictiffii. coined fo
tAe oecasion-^that I thought it necessary: to say some
/tfiZr?^ in jny own justificatioiv. ^^ ■
''WMt iMly aJl this k I'* 1 ^xc\«iived.''■ \i^.^
AGKES GREY,
I's road happened to be the same as mine for a feM
yards, and if he chose to excliange a word or two ifl
passing, what is there so remarkable in that ? I assured
you I never spoke to him before — except once. "
** Where ? where ? and when ? " cried they eagerly. <
*'In Nancy's cottage,**
" Ah, ha ! you've met him there, have you ? ** ex*
claimed Rosalie, with exultant laughter. — " Ah \ now;
Matilda, I Ve found out why she's so fond of going t
Naiicy Brown's 1 She goes there to flirt with Mi^S
'Weston. " ■ ^
*'Really, that is not ux > rth contradicting. I only ^ti
him there once, i tell you, and how could I know hte w^
coming ? "'...
Irritated as I wks at their foolish itiirth and vexation
imputatlonSj the uneasiness did not continue long/ Whei
: they had had their laugh out, they returned again t4
the captain and lieutenant ; and while they disputed an^
commented upon them my indignation rapidly cooled
The cause of it was quickly forgotten, and I turned m^
thoughts into a pleasanter channel: Thus we proceedec
up the park, and entered the haU ; and as I ascendo <
the stairs to my own chamber I had but one thotigh^
within me, my heart was filled to overflowing With om
single earnest wish. Having entered the i room and shd!
the door, I fell upon my knees and offered up a fcrveri
but not impetuous prayer.'* Thy will be done,** I strovi
to say tlirougliout, but *^ Father, all things are possitA
with Thee, and may it be Thy will, " was sure to follov*
That wish— that pJ^ayer— both men and women wouh
have scorned me for, "'butj Father, Thou wilt not de^pimfi
I said, and felt that it w^as true. It seemed to me thafl
another's welfare was at least as ardently implored fd
as my own — ^nay, even ^^^ was the principal object a
my heart's desire. I might have been deceiving mysell
but that idea gave me confidence to ask and power 1^
hope I did nat askw vain. As lot l\i^ ^fvmT^:yi^^,\'^*
two of them in a gkfts in my room \1t\\\\'^^^ ^^x^ ^
Qi^tely withered, afid the ho^samakd 1\\t^nn \\v.^^^
I08 AGNES GREY.
and the petals of the.ather I pressed betweeti ±he leaves
of my Bible. . I have theim still, and mean to keep them
always.- ;•
CHAPTER XIV. : ■• •
■ , THE RECTOR. . ,. ! . .
The fallowing day was as fine as the preceding one. i Sddi!
^ter breakfast Miss Matilda, having gaU^pedandblun*
dered through a few unprofitable lessons, and Veogeabl)
thumped thevpiauao for an hour, in a terrible humou
with both me and it, because her mamma would not give
her a hoHday, had betaken herself to her favourite'plaoe
of'jfesprt:— the yards, the stables, aiKi the dcfg-kekine}s ;
^d Miss Murray was gone forth to enjoy a quiet ramfali
with a new fasmonable novel for her companion, leaviitli
me- in the schooliroom hard at work upon a water^ccdoHi
drawing which I had promised to do; for her,'and whidi
she ipsisted upon my finishing that day.
At my feet lay a fittle rough terrier. It was the pro^
ferty.of Miss Matilda-, but she hated the animal, and in-
tended to. sell it, alleging that it was quite spoiled. It
was really an excellent dog of its kind, but she aflftrmed
it wals fit for nothing, and had riot, even the sense to
know its. own mistress.
The fact was, she had purchased it when but a small
puppy, msisting at first that ho one should touch it but
herielf; but soon becoming tired of so helpless arid
troublesome a nursling, she had gladly yielded to iriy
entifeaties to be allowjeditQ take charge of it ; and I, by
carefully nursing the little creature from infancy, to
adolescence, of course had obtained its affections — ^a re-
ward r should have greatly valued, and looked upon ail
far outweighing all tiie trouble I had had with it, had
not poor Snap's grateful feelings exposed him to many
a harsljL word and many a spitieful kick and pittch Iroin
-^is owaer^ and were he not now m daug^ei oi\j€\a.^''«^
iway " in consequence^ or transieiied to ^wafc iroia^
AOITCT grey " iag
-hearted master. But how couM I help it ? I
Mild not make the dog hate me by cruel treatmeiit, and
i€ would not propitiate him by kindness.
However^ while I thus sat^ working away with my
2ndl, Mrs, Murray came, half sailing, half bustling, into
le room.
'" Miss Grey/'she began, " dear ! how can you sit at
DTir drawing such a day as this ? " (She thought I was
3itig it lor my own pleasure.) " I wonder you don't put
a your bonnet and go out with the young ladies/'
'* I think, ma'am, Miss Murray is reading ; and Miss
atilda is amusing herself with her dogs. "
" If you would try to amuse Miss Matilda yourself a
^tle more, I thinlc she would not be driven to seek
nusement in the companionship of dogs and horses and
rooms so much as she is ; and if you would be a little
lore cheerful and conversable with Miss Murray, sh^
ould noft so often go wandering in the fields with a book
her hand. However, I don't want to vex you, "
Ided she, seeing, I suppose, that my cheeks burned
id my hand trembled with some nn amiable emotion.
Do, pray, try not to be so touchy ; there's no speaking
r you else. And teU me if yon know where Rosalie is
me, and why she likes to be so much alone,/'
" She says she likes to be alone when she has a new
KJk to read. "
'* But why can*t she read it in the park or the garden ?
Try should she go into the fields and lanes ? And how
it that that Mr. Hatfield so often finds her out ? She
Id me last week he'd walked his horse by her side all
) Moss Lane ; and now Tm sure it was he I saw from
y dressing-room window, walking so briskly past the
Lrk-gates, and on towards the field where she so fre-
lently goes, I wish you would go and see if she is
.ere ; and just gently remind her that it is not proper
r a young lady of her rank and prospects to be wander-
g about by herself in that raatinei, e.^T^^=^^ v^ ^C?c^
teutians of any one that presun\es to a.d^ie,'=^ V^^ ^'^^ > ^
ue poor neglected girl that h a & - rq- pax'i^ ^Q -«^!^
ft'5
no AGNES - < > REY.
and no friends to take care of her ; and tell her that "
papa would be extremely angry if he knew of her tr^
ing Mr. Hatfield in the familiar mariner that I fear
does. And oh I if you — if any governess had but Zi
a mother's watchfulness, half a mother's anxious ca/i
I should be saved this trouble, and you would see ai
once the necessity of keeping your eye upon her, and
making your company agreeable to Well, go— go;
there's no time to be lost,'* cried she, seeing that I had
put aWay my drawing materials, and was waiting in tb
doorway for the conclusion of her address.
According to her prognostications, I found Miss Murray
in her'favomrite field just without the park, and un
fortunately not alone, for the tall, stately figure of Mi
Hatfield was slowly sauntering by her side.
Here was a poser for me. It was my duty to intemii
the iMe-h'tHe, but how was it to be done ? Mr. HatficS
could not be driven away by so insignificant a person i
I ; and to go and place myself on the other side of Mil
Murray, aiid intrude my imwelcome presence upon h(
without noticing her companion, was a piece of rudene
I could not be guilty of. Neither had I the coura^ 1
cry aloud from the top of the field that she was wante
elsewhere. So I took the intermediate course of wall
ing slowly but steadily towards them, resolving, if ni
approach failed to scare away the beau, to pass by an
tell Miss Murray her manrnia wanted her.
She certainly looked very charming as she stroller
lingering along under the budding horse-chestnut tre <
that stretched their long arms over the park-paling
with her closed book in one hand, and in the other a grao
ful sprig of myrtle, which served as a very pretty pla;
thing, her bright ringlets escaping profusely from b
little bonnet, and gently stirred by the breeze, her fa
cheek flushed with gratified vanity, her smiling bh
eyes now slyly glancing towards her admirer, now gazii
downward at her myrtle spn%. " ftuX.'tswa.T^, x^savToa
before me, interrupted her m tVie roi^V o\ ^xofc > w
^crt, half^plsiyM repartee, by calcK\xv^^^\^^^^« ^
rgs^^Rl^^ TIT
vehemently tugging thereat, till Mr. Hatfield, %vith
his cane, administered a resounding thwack upon the
animal's skull, and sent it yelping back to me, with a
clamorous outcry that afforded the reverend gentleman
grtat amusement. But seeing me so near, he thought^
I suppose, he might as well be taking his departure ; and
as I stooped to caress the dog, with ostentatious pity; to
show my disapproval of his severity, T heard him say,^'
'* When shall 1 see you again, MLss Murray ? "
*'At church, I suppose/'replied she, *^ unless your
business chances to bring you here again, at the precise-
thoment when I happen to be walking by/*''
"'I could always manage to have business here, if I
knew precisely when and where to find you/'
''But if I would, I could not inform you^ for I am s6
tmmethodical, I never can tell to-day what I shall d < i
to-morrow. " i': < > t
'* Then give me that, meantime, to comfort me/* feaid
he, half jestingly arid half in earnest, extending his hand
for the sprig of myrtle.
^ No, indeed, I shan't/'
•['Dot pray do ! I shall be the most miserable of
PRi if you don^t; You cannot be so cruel as to deny
me a favour so easily granted and yet so highly prized/^
pleaded he, as ardently as if his life depended on it. -'
By this time I stood within a very few yards of themj
mpatiently waiting his departure,
*'There, then 1 Take it and go, " said RosaB'e.
He joyfully received the gift, murmured something
hat made her blush and toss her head, but with a little
augh that showed her displeasure was entirely affected^
B^ then with a courteous salutation withdrew;
•^ Did you ever see such a man, Miss Grey ? " said she,
fffimg to me. " Vm so glad you came I I thought t
leaver should ge^ rid of him ; and T was so terribly afraid
> f papa seeing him/'
** Has he been with you long ? ** ^ ^
*'No, not long; but he's so extieTneV^ \tk^^'C\^^
ud he's always hanging about, pieten^iiii^ " to:^ ^^
112 AGNES GREY.
or his clerical duties require his attendance in thea
parts, and really watching for poor me, and pouncinj
upon me wherever he sees me. "
" Well, your niamma thinks you ought not to go be
yond the park or garden without some discreet, matronl;
person like me to accompany you, and keep off all in
truders. She descried Mr. Hatfield hurrying past th
park-gates, and forthwith dispatched me with instruc
tions to seek you up, and to take care of you, and like
wise to warn'* ■ ,
" Oh, mamma's so tiresome ! As if I couldn't tak
care of myself ! She bothered me before about Mr. Hal
field, and I told her she might trust me ; I never shoul
forget my rank and station for the most delightful ma.
that ever breathed* I wish he would go down on hi
knees to-morroM^, and implore me to be his wife, that
might just show her how mistaken she is in supposin
that I: could ever Oh, it provokes me sol T
think that I could be such a fool as to fall in love / It i
quite beneath the dignity of a woman. to do such
thing. Love ! I detest the word ! As applied to on
of OUT'seXi I think it a perfect insult. A preference
might acknowledge, but never for one like poor Mr. Hai
field, who has not seven himdred a year to bless himsd
with. . I like to talk to him, because he's so clever an
amusing. I wish Sir Thomas . Ashby were half as ma
Besides, I must have somebody to flirt with, and no on
else has the sense to come here. And when we go oui
mamma won't let me flirt with anybody but Sir Thoma
-^if he's there ; and if he's not there, I'm bound hani
and foot, for fear somebody should go and make up sonj
exaggerated story, and put it into his head that I'l
engaged, or likely to be engaged, to soijiebody else ; oi
what is more; pjrobable, for fear liis nasty old mothe
should see or hear of. my ongoings, and conclude tha
I'm not a fit wife for her excellent son — ^as if the said soi
were not the ^eatest scamp in Christendom, and -as i
^uy woman of common decency weie noX. ^ > «o\:\si lo
S^ood fof him. "

Murray ? And doesydi
know it| and yet %vish you to marry him ? "
" To be sme she does. She knows more against h
than I do, 1 believe. She keeps it from me lest I sho^
be discouraged, not knowing how little I care about m
things. For it's no great matter, really. He'll bel
tl right when he's married, as mamma says ; and refor^
^kmkBS make the best husbands, everybody knows.'
^B^y wish he were not so ugly — that's all / think abo^
^Bitit then there's no choice here in the country, and p
H^ WiU not let us go to London: " i
''But I should think Mr. Hatfield would be far bettl
" And so he would, if he were lord of Ashby Pai
I t tere's not a doubt of it- But the fact isj I nit^i H
lai Ashby Park, whoever shares it with me/'i
yst. *'But Mr. Hatfield thinks you like him all this ti
1i^ You don't consider how bitterly he will be disappoii^
It r when he finds himself mistaken/'i -i
dh " No, indeed ! It ^dll be a proper punishment for
cai pt^sumption— for ever daring to think I could like hij
icij I should enjoy nothing so much as lifting the veil fij
HJluseyes/'I
nsd *'The sooner you do it the better, then/'j
^ " No, I tell ybu I like to amuse myself with li
ok^ Besides, ;hc doesn't really think I hke him. I take §^
oat care of that. You don't know how cleverly I mans
CH£ He may presume to think he can induce pie to like t
va^ for which 1 shall punish him as he deserves. "
i2b: ^'Well, mind you don't give too much reason iot^
oey presumption— that's all, " replied L I! i
iW But all my exhortations were in vain ; they only itij
ai ber somewhat more solicitous to di^uise her wishes i
LIm- ber thoughts from me. She talked no more to me ahi
the rector, but 1 could see that her mindj if not i
heart, was fixed upon him still, and that she was int
Upon obtaining another interview; {ox t\\QU^, \sn. clCs
plja/jce wkh her mother's request, 1 -w^s* ivqw cjOkOsK^
\ihe companion of her rambles ior a t\mfe, ^^ ^ " ^
''In wandering in the iields and \aiie,s \Vi5a.Ns|
1.14 AGNES GREY,
the nearest proxiiinity to the road ; and whether sh(
talked to me or read the book she carried in her^ hand
she'kept continually pausing to look round her, of'gaz <
up the iroad to see if any one was coming ; and U'<
horseman trotted by, I coiild tell by her unqijadified abus
of the poor equestrian, whoever he might be,'that sb
hated lum because he was not Mr. Hatfield.
; " Surdy, " thought I, " she is not so indifferent, to his
as she believes herself to be, or would have others t
believe her; and her mother's ankiety is not so wholl]
causeless as she affirms. "
Tht'ee disiys passed awny, and he did not make hi
appearance;^ . On thei afternoon of the fourth, as we wer
walking beside the park palings in the memorable fidd
each furnished with a bo6k (for I always took- care ti
provide myself with something to be doing when sb
did not require me to talk)j she suddenly intemipta
my studies by exclaimiiig, —
'*'G Miss Grey ! do be so kind as to go and see Marl
Wood, and take his wife half a crown from me ; I shoul(
have given or sent it a week ago, but quite foiigot
There ! " said she, throwing me her purse, and speakinf
very fast. " Nevar mind getting it out now, but tala
the purse and give them what you like. ■ I woiJd gc
with you, but I want to finish this volume. I'll conH
and meet you when I've done it. Be quick, will you-
ail^d— oh, wait; hadn't you better read to him a bit!
Run to the house and get some sort of a good book
Anything will do. "
I did as I was desired ; but suspecting something iron
her hurried manner and the suddenness of the request
I'just glanced back before I quitted the field, and then
Was Mr. Hatfield about to enter at the gate below. B]
sending me to the house'for a book, she had just pre
vented my meeting him on the road.
^'Never CTind, " thought I ; " there'll, be no great ham
daae^ .Poor Mark, will be glad ol kiltie \«Xi-cxcwrft., %a <
^^erbaps of the good book too; and *\i ^i^^ x^cX.Qt e^a
teaj Miss. Rosalie's heart, it will oiAv \iMLm\i\^ Asex ^
leT^aiid if they do get married at last, it wiU only
ave her from a worse fate ; and she " will be quite a good
!nough partner for him, and he for her/*
Mark Wood was the consumptive labourer whom I
mentioned before. He was now rapidly wearing away.
Hiss Murray, by her hberality, obtained literally the
)lessing of him that was ready to perish ; for though
iie half-crown could be of very little service to hinij he
m^ glad of it for the sake of his wife and children, so
mm to be widowed and fatherless^ After I had sat a
ew minutes, and read a little for the comfort and edifica-
ion of himself and Ins afflicted wife, I left them ; but
had not proceeded fifty yards before I encountered
ii. Weston, apparently on his way to the same abode,
le greeted me in his usual quiet, unaflected way, stopped
8 inquire about the condition of the sick man and his
imily, and with a sort of unconsciouSj brotherly dis-
egard to ceremony, took from my hand the book out of
fhich I had been reading, turned over its pages, made
:lew brief but very sensible remarks, and restored it ;
hen told me about some poor sufferer he had just been
id ting, talked a little about Nancy Brown, made a few
bser\^ations upon my little rough friend the terrier
:iat was frisking at his feet, and finally upon theibeauty
f the weather, and departed.'
I have omitted to give a djetail of . his words, from a
otion that they would not interest the reader as they
id me, and not because T have forgotten them. No ;
remember them well, for I thought thcin over and over
gain in the course of that day and'many succeeding
nes, I know not how often, and recalled every intona-
ion of his deep, clear voice, every fiash of hk quick,
rowTi eye, and every gleam of his pleasant but too
ransient stnile. Such a confession will look very ab-
ard, I lear, but no matter. I have written it, and they
hai read it will not know the writer.
While I was waJking along, bapp^ V^\^m, ^xv^^'c-'^^
fifi aJJ around. Miss Murray came ^sajst^wa^ *^^ ^^^
^er buovRnt step, flushed cKeek, -^ivd i^^eLvasx^*^
Il6 AGNES GREY.
showing me that she too was happy in her owa way.
Running up to me, she put her arm through mine, and
without waiting to recover breath, began, —
" Now, Miss Grey y . think yourself highly honoured,
for I'm come to tell you my news before I've breathed
a word of it to any one else. "
" Well, what is it ?''
" Oh, such news ! In the first place, you must know
that Mr. Hatfield came upon me just after you were
gone. I was in such a way for fear papa or mamma
should see him ; but you know I couldn't call ymi back
again, and so I Oh dear ! I can't tell you all about it
now, for there's Matilda, I see, in the park, and I must
go and open my budget to her. But, however, Hatfield
was most unconmionly audacious, unspeakably compli-
mentary, and imprecedentedly tender — tried to be so, at
least; he didn't succeed very well in that, because it's
not his vein. I'll tell you all he said another time.'*
" But what did you say ? I'm more interested in that "
" I'll tell you that too at some future period. I hap-'
pened to be in a very good humour just then ; but though'
I was complaisant and gracious enough, I took care not
to compromise myself in any possible way. But, how* |
ever, the conceited wretch chose to interpret. my amia*
bility of temper his own way, and at length presimied upon
my mdulgence so far — ^what do you think ?--he actiuffly
— made me an offer ! "
" And you "
*^I proudly drew myself up, and with the greatest
coolness expressed my astonishment at such an occur-
rence, and hoped he had seen nothing in my conduct to
justify his expectations. You should have seen how his
countenance fell I He went perfectly white in the face.
I assured him that I esteemed him and all'that, but
could not possibly accede to his proposals ;'and if I
did, papa and mamma could never be brought to give
heir consent .
'''But if- they could,'- said Yve, *NVOxa!^ > jcsv3s^ \«
nting?'
AGNES GREY. IX;
"'Certainly, Mr. HatjSeld,'I replied, with a cool de-
cision which quelled all hope at once. Oh, if you had
seen how dreadfully mortified he was— how crushed it
the eaxth by his disappointment ! Really, I almost
pitied him myself.
" One more desperate attempt, however, he made.
After a silence of considerable duration, during which
he struggled to be calm, and I to be grave — for I felt a
strong propensity to laugh, which would have ruined
aU — he said, with the ghost of a smile, —
. "'■ But tell me plainly, Miss Murray, if I had the wealth
of Sir Hugh Meltham, or the prospects of his eldest son,
would you still refuse me? Answer me truly, upon
your honour.'
. "'Certainly,'said I.'That would make no difference
whatever.'.
" It was a great lie, but he looked so confident in his
own attractions still that I determined not to leave him
one stone upon another. He looked me full. in the face ;
but I kept my countenance so well that he could not
imagine I was saying anything more than the actual
truth.
*'* Then it's all over, I suppose,'he said, looking as if
he could have died on the spot with vexiation and the
intensity of his despair. But he was angry as well as
disappointed. There was he, suffering so ungpeakably,
and there was I, the pitiless cause of it all, sO iitterly
impenetrable to all the artillery of his looks and words,
so calmly cold and proud, he could not but fed Some
resentment, and with singular bitterness he beg^^ —
" /I certainly did not expect this, Miss Murray. I might
say something about your past conduct, and the hopes you
have led me to foster, but I forbear > on condition'
''/'No. conditions, Mr. Hatfield !'said I, now truly
indignant at his insolence.
i. .*^rTheii let me beg it as a favour,'he replied^ lowetvsMji
hb.)JirfcaH!e at once, and taking a YmmVAec Voxi^—'\^ " *
^traat Hat you will not mentioix ttas aiSaix \.o «k^ ^
jfrlf^yoUiWiU keep silence about \V AQoKt^ ^
Il8 AGNES GREY.
be no unpleasantness ori either side— nothing, I mean
beyond'what is quite unavoidable ; for my own feeling
I will endeavour to keep to myself, if I cannot anni
hilate* them— ^I will -try to forgive if I cannot forget th
cause of my sufferings. I will not suppose, Miss Murray
that you know how deeply you have injured me —
would not have you aware of it ; but if, in addition t
the injury you have already done me — pardon me, bu
whether innocently or not, you have done it — and if yoi
add to it by giving publicity to this ^unfortunate affaii
dr naming it ai all, you will find that I too can speai
and though you scorned my love, you Will hardly scor
my;'
" He stopped, but he bit his bloodless lip, and looke
80 terribly fierce that I w^ quite frightened. Howeva
my pride upheld me still, and I answered disdainfully,-^
~ " ^I do not know what motive you suppose I coul
have for naming it to any one, Mr. Hatfield; but if'
were disposed to d6 so, you would not deter me b;
threats, and it is scarcely the part of a gentleman ti
attenipt it.'
"'Pardon me. Miss Murray,'said he ;'I have lovet
you so intensely, I do still adore you so deeply, that ]
would not willingly offend you ; but though I nevd
have loved, and never can love, any woman as I hirvt
loved yon, it is equally certain that I never was so ill-
treated by any. On the contrary, I have always founc
your sex the kindest and most tender and obliging o;
God's creation, till now.'(Think of the conceited fefiov
saying that!)'And the novelty and harshness oftb
lesson you have taught me to-day, and the bitteme^ o;
being disappbinted in the only quarter on which tbi
happiness of my life depended, must excuse any appear
ance of asperity. If my presence is disagreeable to you
Miss Murray,'he said (for I was looking about me tc
show how little I cared for him ; so he thought I was tirec
of him, I ;S?uppose)—'if my presence is disagreeable tc
you. Miss Murray, you have ority^ to -piQioasfc -mfc ^i^s
ramar I named, and I will relieve vou a > L oxve^ ,Tc«
AG^ES^RBY. 119
Ere niariy ladiefe — some even in this parish— who would
be delighted to accept what you have so scornfully
trampled tinder your feet* They would be naturally
inclined to hate one whose surpassing loveliness has so
completely estranged my heart from them and blinded
me to their attractions ; and a single hint of the truth
from me to one of these would be sufficient to raise such
a talk against you as would seriously injure your pros-
pects, and diminish your chance of success with any
other gendeman you or your mamma might design to
entangle.'
'*'What do yon mean, sir ?'said I, ready to stamp
with passion. iftn! a
*'* I mean that this'afiair from begitining to end
spears to me like a case of arrant flirtation^ to say the
least of it— snch a case as you would find it rather in-
oonvenient to have blazoned through the world, especi-
ally with the additions and exaggerations of your female
rivals, who would be too glad to pubhsh the matter,
if I only gave them a handle to it. But I promise you,
on the faith of a gentleman, that no word or syllable
that conld tend to your prejudice shall ever Escape ray
lips, provided you will——',
'*'Well, well, I won't mention it/ said L'You may
pely upon my silence, if that can afford you aiiy consola-
tion.'
■J*'You promise it ?'
^''Yes/ I answered, for I wanted to ge* rid of Mm
iow-
*''Fai^well, then !'said he, in a most doleful, heart-
iick tone, and with a look wliere pride vainly struggled
igainst despair, he turned and went away, longing, no
loubt, to get home, that he might shut himself up in
ais study and cry, if he doesn't burst into tears before
to gets there/'
'* But you have broken your promise already/'said
[, truly horrified at her perfidy. • \'1
'* Oh, it's only to yon. I know vovl v70^ 1 -^^^^aX^-^'J
'CertRinly Install not. But you ^st^ ^tm -^^ ^^^^
I20 AGNES GREY.
tell your sister, and she will tell your brothers when the;
come homC) and Brown immediately, if you do not tei
her yourself ; and Brown will blazon it, or be the mean
of blaioning it, throughout the country. "'
. " No, indeed, she won't. We shall not tell her at ali
unless it be under the promise of the strictest secrecy.*-
" But how can you expect her to keep her promise
better than her more enlightened mistress ? "
" . Well, well, she shan't hear it then, " said Miss Mim:aj
somewhat snappishly.
" But you will tell your mamma, of course, " pursued 1
'^ and she will tell yofur papa. "
" Of course I shall tell mamma. That is the ycr
thing that'pleases me so much. I shall now bfeabl
to convince her how mi & taken she was in her feaj
about me. "
" Qhy that's it, is it ? I was wonderiiig what it wa
that delighted you so much.''
" Yes; and another thing is, that I've humbled Mi
Hatfield so charmingly; and another Why,youmus
allbW me some share of female vanity ; I don't pretew
to be without that most essential attribute- of our ses
And if you had seen poor Hatfield's intense eagerness ii
making his ardent declaration, and his. flattering pro
posal, and his agony^-of mind, that no effort of.prid
could conceal, on being refused, you would have allows
I had some cause to be gratified. " i..
" The " greater his agony, I should think, the less you
cause for gratification. "
- " Oh, nonsense ! " cried the young lady, shaking her
self with vejcation. " You either cati't , understand mi
or yoa won't, if I had not confidence in your magna
nimity I slrotdd think you envied me. But you will, pei
haps, comprehend this cause of pleasure, which is a
great as any — namely, that I am delighted with mj^
for my prudtece, my self-conunand, my. heartlessness, i
you j)lease. I was not a bit taken by smprise, not a bi
confused, or awkward, or foolish; l^wstoxitfcd^sxis^fe
A^ / ought tOi.hsLve. done; and was cottt?^e\^N tqln^cn

1
AGNES GREY,
mistress throughout. And here was a man, decid
pod-looking^ Jane and Susan Green call him be wit
mg^ly handsome — I suppose they're tw^o of the ladiea
Eretends would be so glad to have him ; but, howel
e was certainly a very clever, witty, agreeable d
panion— Dot what you call c lever ^ but just enough
J make him entertaining, and a man one needn't be ashaij
Af of anywhere, and would not soon grow tired of, M
W to confess the truth, I rather liked him^better eveiij
W Jate, than Harry Meltham— and he evidently idolized m
H| and yet, though he came upon me all alone and unpi
ife pared J I had the wisdom and the pride and the streng
^ to refuse him'— and so scorn fully and coolly as I did*,
•* have good reason to be proud of thatf^'4
^ " And are you equally proud of having told him w
■ his having the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham would ma
no difference to you, when that was not the case, ai
^ of having promised to tell no one of his misadventuy
I apparently without the slightest intention of keej
your promise ?'''i,
" Of course I What else could I do ? You would (
have had me^^— But I see, Miss Grey, you*re non
'■ a good temper. Here's Matilda; I'll see what she:
k mamma have to say about if - i
* She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, ^
thinking, no doubt, that I envied her. I did not-i
'- least, I firmly believed I did not. I was sorry for h
II was ama^ed^ disgusted at her heartless vanity. I w
dered why so much beauty should be given to those i
^ made so bad a use of it, and denied to some who wa
make it a benefit to both themselves and others.
But God knows best, I concluded. There are, I i
pose, some men as vain, as selfish, and as heartless
ehe is, and, perhaps, such, women may be useful to p^
ish th & m. J
122 AGNES GREY.
CHAPTER XV.
THE WALK.
'• Oh dear 1 I wish Hatfield had not been so .predpi-
tate 1''said Rosalie next day at 4 p.m., as, with a por-
tentous yawii, she laid down her worsted- work and looked
listiiessly towards the window. " There's no induceroejit
to go out now, and nothing to look forward to. The
days; will be so long and dull when there are no parties
to enliven them ; and there are none this week, or next
either^ that I know of. "
i " Pity you were so cross to him, " observed Matilda, to
whom this lamentation, was addressed.'* He'U nev^
coine again; aijd I suspect you liked him, after all: I
hoped you would havjB taken- him: for your beau, and
left dear Harry to mei " . .
'" Humph! My beau naust be an Adonis indeed
Matilda., the admired of all beholders, if I am to be cour
tented with him alone. I'm sorry to lose Hatfield, I
confess, but the first decent itian or number of men
that come to supply his place will be more than ya^
come. It's Sunday to-morrow. I do wonder how he'D
look, and whether he'll be able to go through the service
Most likely he'll pretend he's got a cold, and make Mr.
Weston do it all. "
. " Not he ! " exclaimed Matilda, somewhat contemptu-
ously; " Fool as he is, he's not so soft as that comes to. "
Her sister iwas slightly offended. But the event proved
Matilda was right : the disappointed lover performed
his pastoral duties as usual. RosaHe, indeed, affinned
he looked very pale and dejected. He might be a little
paler, but the difference, if any, was scarcely perceptible.
As for his dejection, I certainly did not hear his laugh
ringing from the vestry as usual, nor his voice loud iii
hilarious discourse, though I did hear it uplifted in rating
tlie sexton in a manner that made \5nfc coxv^e^^tioti
tare; and in bis transits to and iiom V5a & ^\iL^\\. ^ssft
'^ communion-tahle there was laoie oi ^\e.TMCL \iKscfi

I AGNES GREY. I
mistress throughout. And here was a man, decide*
good-looking — Jane and Susan Green call him bewitd
iDgly handsome — I suppose they're two of the ladies
pretends would be so glad to have him ; but, howev*
he was certainly a very clever, witty, agreeable co]
panion— not what you call clever^ but just enough
make him entertaining, and a man one needn't be ashamei^
of an3rwhere, and would not soon grow tired of. Arkj
to confess the truth, I rather liked him^better even,
late, than Harry Meltham — ^and he evidently idolized miS
and yet, though he came upon me all alone and unprr
pared, I had the wisdom and the pride and the strengtls
to refuse him — -and so scornfully and coolly as I did, J
Lve good reason to be proud of that !'" H
" And are yon equally proud of having told him th^
s having the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham would mafe
difference to you, w^hen that was not the case, am
having promised to tell no one of his misadventure
iparently without the slightest intention of keepiii
your promise ? ^'i
" Of course ! What elSe could I do ? You would m
have had me— — But I see, Miss Grey, you're not ii
a good tem] > er. Here's Matilda; Til see what she am
mamma have to say about it.''i
She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, and
thinking, no doubt, that I envied her. I did not — ^at
least, I firmly believed I did not, I was sorry for her
I was amazed, disgusted at her heartless vanity. I won
dered why so much beauty should be given to those wb
made so bad a use of it, and denied to some who wouli
make it a benefit to both themselves and others, i
But God knows best, I concluded. There are, I sup
po^e, some men as vain, as selfish, and as heartless a
slie is. and, perhaps^ such women may be useful to pui
ish them. ^

124 AGNES GltEY.
by the way j for as we went along she kept wonderin
'^ what Hatjield would do or say if we met him/^ eti
As we passed Mr. Green's park-gates she " wondera
whether he was at home, great stupid blockhead/'A
Lady Melt ham's carriage passed us she ^'wondered wba
Mr. Harry was doing this fine day, " and then began t
abuse his elder brother for being ** such a fool as to gl
married and go and Jive in London/'j
t; " Why^ " said I, *'1 thought you wanted to h ve j
London yourself/* I
" Yes, because it's so dull here. But then he makesi
still duller by taking himself off ; and if he were m
married I might have him instead of that odious 3
■S'homas/'
fi Then, observing the prints of a horse's feet on tl
somewhat miry road, she''wondered whether it wasi
gentleman's horse/'and hnally concluded it was, !^
the impressions were too small to have been made by
'* great, clumsy cart-horse ; " and then she " wonden
who the rider could be,'* and whether we should men
^im coming back, for she was sure he had only pas3 <
Biat morning ; and lastly, when we entered the villaj
and saw only a few of its humble inhabitants movii
about, she *'wondered why the stupid people couldn
keep in their houses ; she was sure she didn't want i
see their ugly faces and dirty, vulgar clothes— it wasn
for that she came to Horton 1 " . i
Amid all this I confess I wondered too, in seen
whether we should meet or catch a glimpse of son*
body else, and as we passed his lodgings I even went i
far as to wonder whether he was at the window. C
entering the shop, Miss Murray desired me to stand
the doorway whfle she transacted her business, and ta
jer if any oae passed. But, alas i there was no o|
sibie besides the villagers, except Jane and SvsA
'ireen, coming down the im^ s^lie^t, ■a?pi^-*ix < e^lV'^ q
turning from a. W3lk,
" Stupid things i " muttered she, ^^ ^m c^t^^ ^vA i
AGN15S GREY. 125
have their dolt of a brother with them ? Even be would
be better than nothing. "
She greeted them, however, with a cheerful smile, and
protestations of pleasure at the happy meeting equal to
their own. They placed themselves one on each side
of her, and all three walked away chatting and. laughing
as young ladies do when they get togetjier, if they be
but on tolerably intimate terms. But I, feeling myself
to be .one too many, left them . to their merriment j and
lagged behind, as usual on such occasions. I had no
relish for walking beside Miss Green or Miss Susan like
one deaf and dumb, who could neither speak nor be
spoken to.
But this time I was not long alone. It struck me,- at
first, as very odd that just as I was thinking about Mr.
Weston he should come up. and accost me; but after-
wards, on due reflection, I thought there was nothing
odd about it, imless it were the fact of his speaking to
me — -for on such a morning aijid so near his own abode
it wais natural enough that he should be about ; and as
for my thinking. of him, I bad been doing that, with
little intermission, ever since we set out on pur journey,
so there was, nothing remarkable in that.
*'You are alone again, Miss Grey, " said he.
" Yes. " ,
" What kind of people are those ladies — ^the Misses
Green? "
" I reaUy don't know. " .
" That's strange^ when you hve so near and see them
So often. "
" Well, I suppose they are Hvely, good-tempered girls ;
but I imagine you must know them better than I do
j^ourself, for I never exchanged a word with either of
them. " .
" Indeed ! They don't strike me as being i^atticwl^MLV^
reserved. " ..,.:. ■ . .-
" Very likely they are not ^ so to peop\^ oi \iafcvt cs
ass,, but they consider them^ves as inoNm% vsx ^
different sphere from me. "'
126 AGNES GREY.
He made no reply to this, but after a short pause he
said,—
" I suppose it's these things, Miss Grey, that make
you think you could not live without a home ?''^
** Not exactly. The fact is, I am too socially disposed
to be able to live contentedly without a friend ; and as
the only fHends I have, or am likely to have, are at home,
if it, or rather if they were gone, I will not say I could
not live, but I would rather not live in such a desolate
world. "
" But why do you say the only friends you are likely
to have ? Are you so unsociable that you cannot make
friends? "
" No, but I never made ohe yet ; and in my present
position there is no possibility of doing so, or even of
forming a common acquaintance. The'fault may be
partly in myself, but I hope not altogether. "
" The fault is partly in society, and partly, I- should
think, in your intimate neighbours, and partly, too, in
yourself, for many ladies in your position would make
themselves be noticed aiid accounted of.'But your
pupils should be Companions for you in sortie degree;
they cannot be many years younger than yourself. "
" Oh yes, they are good company sbmetimies ; but I
cannot call them friends, nor would they think of be-
stowing such a name on me. They hive other com-
panions better suited to their tastes. "
" Perhaps you are too wise for them. -How do you
amufee yourself when alone ? Do you read much ? "
" Reading is my favourite occupation, when I have
leistire for it and books to read. " •
From speaking of books in general, he passed to dif-
ferent books in particular, and proceeded by rapid transi-
tions from topic to topic, till several matters, both of
taste and opinion, had been discussed considerably within
the space of half an hour, but without the embellish-
ment of many observations from Ymtadi, \ifc \ > ^\s\!|, «^-
^enfly Jess bent upon oommumcatmg lois cr?m ^o\i^\
Jd predilections than on discovetitig trixve. 1^.^ > s
n
AGNES GREY.
iiof the iact or the art to effect such a purpose by s]
fully drawing out my sentiments or ideas through tl
real or apparent statement of his own, or leading th€
conversation by imperceptible gradations to such topics
as he wished to advert to ; but such gentle abruptness
and such single*nxinded straightforwardness could no^
possibly offend me. * i , l|
*'And why should he Interdst himself at all in m|
moral and intellectual capacities ? What is it to him
what I think or feel ? " I asked myself. And m]
heart throbbed in answer to the question.
But Jane and Susan Green soon reached their home.
As they stood parlej^ng at the park-gates, attempting
to persuade Miss Murray to come in, 1 wished Mr. Weston
fould go, that she might not see him with me when she
imed round ; but rmiortiinately his business, whic
as to pay one more visit to poor Mark Wood, led hii
K pursue the same path as we did till nearly tha clos
our journey, W^hen, however, he saw that Rosali
id taken leave of her friends and I was about to jo^
er, he would have left me and passed on at a quick^
_ ace ; but as he civilly lifted his hat in passing her, t
my surprise, instead of returning the salute with a stif
ungracious bow, she accosted him with one of her sweetei
smiles, and, walking by his side, began to talk to hii3
^th all imaginable cheerfulness and affability ; and ^
mm proceeded all three together,
^ After a short pause in the conversation Mr, Westq
made some remark addressed paitictdarly to me, as r«
f erring to something we had been talking of before ; bn
before I could answer, Miss Murray replied to the ok
servation and enlarged upon it. He rejoined ; and froB
thence to the close of the interview she engrossed hi <
entirely to herself. It might be partly owing to na
own stupidity, my want of tact and assurance, b^it i \^
xnyseli wronged. I trembled with appteJtv'e^u^vsa., " ^
listened with envy to her easy, rapid ft.O'^ ^^ \iV\.ex-3i
md saw with anxiety the bright smile vnXb. > NViv^
^ed mto his /ace from time to time— iox ^\i & ^^
128 AGNES GREY.
ing a little in advance, for. the purpose (as I judged) of
being seen as well as heard. If her conversation was
light and trivial, it was amusing, and she was never at
a loss for something to say, or for suitable words to ex-
press it in. • There was nothing pert or flippant in her
manner now, as when she walked with Mr. Hatfield;
there was only a gentle, playful kind of vivacity, which
I thought must be peculiarly pleasing to a man of Mr.
Weston's disposition and temperament.
When he was gone she began to laugh, and muttered
to herself, " I thought I could do it r'
" Do what? " I asked.
*'Fix that man. " -
" What in the world do you mean ? "
'" I mean that he will go home and dream of me. I
have shot him through the heart. "
'* How do you know ? "'
" By many infallible proofs, more especially the look
he gave me when he went away. It was not an im^
pudent look — I exonerate him from that — ^it was a look
of reverential, tender adoration. Ha, ha ! he's not quite
such a stupid blockhead as I thought him. "
I made no answer, for my heart was in my throat, or
something like it, and I could not trust myself to speak.
" O God, avert it ! " I cried internally-— " for. his sake,
not for mine ! " "
Miss Murray made several trivial observations as we
passed up the park, to which (in spite of my reluctance
to let one glimpse of my feelings appear) I could only
answer by monosyllables. Whether she intended tO
torment me, or merely to amuse herself, I could not tell
land did not much care ; but I thought of the poor
man and his one lamb, and the rich man with his thott-
sand flocks, and I dreaded I knew not what for Mr.
Weston, independently of my own blighted hopes.
Right glad was I to get into the house and find mysell
2Jon & once more in my own room. " NL^ teA. Vrwpvsisfc =to3
^fjf^^ ^^^o the chair beside the \)ed, andX^^ptv^^'!?^^**^
thepiUow, to seek relief in a passionate bw^^lol Xros
AGKES GREY,
]
There was Ein imperative craving for such an m
gence ; but^ alas I I must restrain and swallow back n
feelings still. There was the bell — the odious beU for t!
schoolroom dinner; and I must go down with a cal
face» and smile, and laugh, and talk nonsense^yes, ai
eat too, if possible, as if aE was right, and I was jti
returned from a pleasant walk.
I
I
CHAPTER XVI .
THE SUBSTITUTION,
Next Sunday was one of the gloomiest of April
a day of thick dark clouds and heavy showers,
of the Murrays were disposed to attend church in ti
afternoon, excepting Rosalie. She was bent upon goii
as usual, so she ordered the carriage, and I went wi
her— nothing loath, of course, for at church I migi
look without fear of scorn or censure upon a formd
face more pleasing to me than the most beautifuM
God's creations ; I might hst en without disturbance!
a voice more charming than the sweetest music to I
ears ; I might seem to hold communion with that so
in which I felt so deeply interested, and imbibe its pun
thoughts and hohest aspirations, with no alloy to &
felicity except the secret reproaches of my consdes
which w^ould too often whisper that I was deceiving > i
own self, and mocking God with the service of a h^
more bent upon the creature than the Creator.
Sometimes such thoughts would give me trouble enop
but sometimes I could quiet them with thinking — i1
not the man, it is his goodness that I love. " Whats
ever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whi
soever things are honest and of good report, think
these things: " We do well to worship God in His wod|
and I know none of them in which so m^axi^ ci\^\^ ;'
butes, so much of His own spirit shme%, ^ " & w " ^
faithful serv-ant whom to knov^ and Tvot XQ ^^-
I30 AGi^ES (JREY.
were obtuse insensibility in me, who have so little dse
to occupy my heart.
Almost immediately aiter the conclusion of the ser-
vice Miss Murray left the church. . We had to stand in
the porch, for it was raining, and the carriage was not
yet come. I wondered at her coming forth so hastily,
for neither young Meltham nor Squire Green was there ;
but I soon found it was to secure an interview with Mr.
Weston as he came out, which he presently did. Having
saluted us both, he would have passed on, but she de-
tained him, first with observations upon the disagreeable
weather, and then with asking if he would be so kind as
to come some time to-morrow to see the granddaughter
of the old woman who kept the porter's lodge, for the
girl was ill of a fever, and wished to see him. He prom*
ised to do so. . •
. " And at what time will ybu be most likely to conies
Mr. Weston ? The old woman wiE like to know when
to expect you. You know such people think more about
having their cottages in order when decent people come
to see them than we are apt to suppose. "
'! Here was a wonderful instance of consideration from
the thoughtless Miss Murray. Mr. Weston named'an
hour in the morning at which he would endeavour to be
there. By this time the carriage was ready, and the
footman was waiting, with an open umbrella^ to escort
Miss Murray through the churchyard. I was about to
follow, but Mr. Weston had an umbrella too, and ofiered
me the benefit of its shelter, for it was raining heavily,
" No, thank you; I don't mind the rain, " I said. I
always lacked common sense when taken. by surprise.
" But you don't like it, I suppoise. An umbrella will
do you. no harm, at any rate, " he replied, with a smile
that showed he was not offended, as a man of worse
temper or less penetration! would have been at such a
refusal of his aid, I could not deny the truth of his
assertion, and so went with him to the carriage.: He
^ven offered me Ms hand on getting Viv: — ^ax \MMww:«sBarY
iece of civility; but I accepted tbat ^oo, iox Vea:^^^
" AGNES :GRKy, I3I
ing offence. One glance he gave, one little smile
parting; it was but for a moment, but therein I
i, or thought I read, a meaning that kindled in
heart a brighter flame of hope than had ever yet
an.
I would have sent the footman back for you. Miss
ly, if you'd waited ^a moment. You needn*t have
en Mr. Weston's umbrella/'observed Rosalie, with
sry un amiable cloud upon her pretty face.
I would have come without an umbrella, but Mr,
5ton offered me the benefit of his^ and I could not
e refused it more than I did without offending him, "
iied I, smiling placidly — for my inward happiness
ie that amusing which w^ould have wounded me at
ther time.
" he carriage was now in mation. Miss Murray bent
^ards and looked out of the window as we were pass-
Mr. Weston, He was pacing homewards along the
seway, and did not turn his head.
iStupid ass t " cried she, throwing herself back again
fhe seat. " You don't know whcd youVe lost by not
dng this way I "
What has he lost ?''
A bow from me that would have raised him to the
snth heaven I "
midc no answer, I saw she was out of humour, and
erived a secret gratification from the fact, not that
was vexed, but that she thought she had reason to
so. It made me think my hopes were .not entirely
offspring of my wishes and imagination.
I mean to take up Mr. Weston instead of Mr. Hat*
I " said my companion after a short pause, resuming
LCthing of her usual cheerfulness- " The baJl at Ashby
k takes place on Tuesday, you know, and mamma
iks it very likely that Sir Thomas w^ill propose to
then. Such things are often done in the privacy of the
room, when gentlemen are most easU^ ewa^^a.^^^ -^sv^i
es most enchRuting, But li \ a.111 1q Vs^ psx.'t^^ ^
, I must make the best oi tYie pt^CTvt \mve ^ " * "
% ^ ^
132 AGNES GREY.
determined Hatfield shall not be the only man who shall
lay his heart at my feet and implore me to accept the
worthless gift in vain/'
** If you mean Mr. Weston to be one of your victims, "
said I, with affected indifference, " you will have to
make such overtures yourself that you will find it dij0 & cult
to draw back when he asks you to fulfil the expectations
you have raised. "
" I don't suppose he will ask me to marry him, nor
should I desire it. That would be rather too much pre-
sumpf ion. But I intend him to feel my power. He
has felt it already, indeed ; but he shall acknowledge it
too* And what visionary hopes he may have he must
keep to himself, and only amuse me with the result d
them — for a time.'*
" Oh that some kind spirit would whisper those
words in his ear I " I inwardly exclaimed; I was far'too
indignant to hazard a reply to het observation aloud,
and nothing more was siiid about Mr. Weston that day,
by me or in my hearing. But next morning, sooil after
breakfast. Miss Murray came into the schoolroom wheit
her sister was employed at her studies,, or rather her les^
sons — for studies they were not^ — ^alid said, ** Matilda', I
waint you to take a walk'with me about: eleven o'clock. "
" Oh, I can't, Rosalie! I have to give orders about
my new bridle and saddle-cloth, and speak to the fat-
catcher about his dogs. Miss Grey must go with
you. "
" No, Iwant you,** said Rosahe ; and calling her. sister
to the window, she whispered an explanation in her ear,
upoti which the latter'consented to go.
I remembered that eleven was the hour at which Mr.
Weston proposed to come to the porter's lodge, and re-
membering that I : beheld the whole contrivance. Ac-
cordingly, at dinner, I was entertained with a long
account of how Mr. Weston had overtaA:en them as they
wer & walking along the road ; and how they had had
a Jong walk- and talk with him, and leaa^ iovmd him
'ui'te an agreeable companion ; and Yycw ^Yvia iroa^ > mwi
AGNES GREY.
Se^xi, and evidently was, delighted with them and theifl
iog condescension, etc.

CHAPTER XVLh
CONFESSIONS.
4s 1 am in the way of confessions, I may as well acknowr
edge that, about this time, I paid more attention to
iress than ever I had done before. This is not sa34ng
Biuch, for hitherto I had been a httle neglectful in that
particular. But now, also, it was no uncommon thing
to spend as much as two minutes in the contemplation
Bif my own image in the glass, though I never could de-
dve any consolation from such a study, I could dis-
cover no beauty in those marked features, that pale,
hollow cheek, and ordinary dark brown -hair. There
might be intellect in the forehead, there might be expres-
sion in the dark gray eyes ; but what of that ? A low
Grecian brow and large black eyes devoid of sentiment
Jirould be esteemed far preferable. It is foolish to wish
or beauty. Sensible people never either desire it for
hemselvcs or care about it in others. If the mind be
mt well cultivated, and the heart weU disposed, no one
ver cares for the exterior. So said the teachers of our
hildhood, and so say we to the children of the present
ay. All very judicious and proper, no doubt i but are
ich assertions supported by actual experience ?
: We are naturally disposed to love what gives us
leasiire, and what more pleasing than a beautiful face
-when we know no harm of the possessor, at least ? A
tile girl loves her bird — why ? Because it lives and
sdls ? because it is helpless and harmless ? A toad
kemse lives and feels, and is equally felpV^'sa ^x\^\x-ar^
ss ; but though she would not butt -a tou^i, ^^ c^ax^
pe it nice the bird, with its graceiuY iorrcv, ^o^ " ^ S.^'iS^
dj > iight, speaking eyes; If a vroman \s ia\x ^^^^^
te^e IS praised for both qualities, ^^x^ ^sv^^^^^
134 ACjnes grey.
former, by the bulk of mankind. If, on the otlier band,
she is disagreeable in person and character, her plainness
is commonly inveighed against as her greatest crime,
because, to common observers, it gives the greatest
offence ; while, if she is plain and good, provided she is
a person of retired manners and secluded life, no one
ever knows of her goodness except her immediate con-
nections. Others, on the contrary, are disposed to form
unfavourable opinions of her mind and disposition, -if it
be but to excuse themselves fof their instinctive dislike
of one so unfavoured by nature, and vice versa with her
whose angfel form conceals a vicious heart, or sheds a
false, deceitful charm over defects and foibks that wouW
not- be tolerated in another. They that have beauty,
let them be thankful for it, and make a good use of it like
any other talent ; they that have it not, let them cob*
sole themselves, and do the best they can without it
Certainly, though liable to be overestimated, it is a gift
of God, and- not to be despised. ■ Many will feel ^ this
who have felt that they could love, and whose hearts
tell them that they are worthy to be loved again, while
yet they are debarred by the lack of this or some sucb
seeniing trifle from giving and receiving that happiness
they seem almost made to feel and to impart. As weD
might the humble glow-worm despise that power of giving
light without whibh the roving fly might pass her and
repass her a thousand* times, ^ and never rest beside her.
She might hear her > yinged i darling buzzing over and
around her, .;he vainly seeking her, she longing to be
found, but with no power to maike her presence known,
no voice to call him, iioivings to follow his flight. The fly
must seek another mate, the worm must live and die alone.
Such were some of my reflections about this period.
I nlight go on prbsihg mor6 and more, I might, dive
much deeper, and disclose other thoughts, propose ques-
ti'ons the reader might be puzzled lo. answer, and deduce
^^^uiiients that might startle his pre^u^c«a, ox ^\\sa^
rovoke his xidicule, becauise bft coxAd no^^. carcc^^stoa
^m; but I forbear. ^^
AGNES GREY.
Now, therefore, let us return to Miss Murray. She
accompanied her mamma to the ball on Tuesday, oi^
course splendidly attired, and delighted with her proa
pects and her charms. As Ash by Park was nearly tegj
miles distant from Horton Lodge, they had to set oil
pretty early, and I intended to have spent the evemi|
with Nancy Brown, whom I had not seen for a long thne
but my kind pupil took care I should spend it neitha
there nor anywhere else beyond the limits of the school
room, by giving me a piece of music to copy, which keg
mc closely occupied till bedtime. About eleven ne:S
m^Dining, as soon as she had left her room, she came ^
tell me her news. Sir Thomas had indeed proposed t
her at the ball — an event which reflected great cred^
on her mamma's sagacity, if not upon her skill in con
trivance, I rather inchne to the belief that she ha^
first laid her plans, and then predicted their succesi
The oi!er had been accepted, of course^ and the bridqj
groom-elect was coming that day to settle matters wit
Mr. Murray. |
K Rosalie was pleased with the thoughts of becomin(
stress of Ashby Park. She was elated vnih the prog
pect of the bridal ceremony and its attendant splendoii
and ^clat, the honeymoon spent abroad, and the subs^
quent gaieties she expected to enjoy in London and eis^
where. She appeared pretty well pleased, too, for th <
time being, with Sir Thomas himself, because she ha <
so lately seen him, danced with him, and been fiattere^
by him ; but after all she seemed to shrink from th
idea of being so soon united. She wished the ceremoni
to be delayed some months, at least, and I wished it top
It seemed a horrible thing to hurry on the inauspicious
match, and not to give the poor creature time to thin!
and reason on the irrevocable step she was about to tak^
I made no pretension to " a mother's watchful, anxiou
care, " but I was amaxed and hottifed ^t ^t^,^^^^^
beartlessness, or wa.nt of thought lot l\vt:iTe,aS. ^^^ ^^
child; and by my unheeded wamiT^^'S. aiv6. ^i^^^V-a^
^ainly strove to remedy the evil-'SAis^ U > : > .^^^^
136 AGNES GREY,
laughed at what I said, and I soon found that her reluct-
ance to an immediate Union arose chiefly from a desire
to do what execution she could among the young gentle-
men of her acquaintance, before «he was incapax:itieLted
from further mischief of the kind. It was for this cause
that, before confiding to me the secret of her ehgageiheftt
she had extracted a promise that I would not mention
a word on the subject to any one. And when I saw this,
and when I beheld her plunge more recklessly than evet
into the depths of heartless coquetry, I had no more pity
f6r her. *'Come what will, " I thought, *'she deserves
it. Sit Thomas cannot be too bad for her, and the sooner
she is incapacitated from deceiving and injuring others
the better. "
The wedding was fixed for the ist of June. Between
that and the critical ball was little more thaii six weeks;
but, with Rosalie's accomplished skill " and resolutei exer-
tion, much might be done, even within that period,
especially as Sir Thomas spent most of the interim is
London, whither he went up, it was said, to settle affairs
with his lawyer, and make other preparations for the
approaching nuptials. He endeavoured to supply the
want of his presence by a pretty constant fire of billets-
douk. But these did not attract the neighbours'attenr
tion and open their eyes as personal visits would have
done ; and old Lady Ashby's haughty, sour spirit xi
reserve withheld her from spreading the news, while* her
indifferent health prevented her coming to visit her future
daughter-in-law ; so that, altogether, this affair was
kept far closer than such things usually are.
. Rosalie would sometimes show her lover's epistles to
me, to convince me what a kind, devoted husband he
would make. Sh6 showed me the letters of another in-
dividual too, the unfortunate Mr. Green, who had not
the courage, or, as she expressed it, the " spunk, " to
plead his cause in person, biit whom one denial would not
fatisfy; he must write again and ^%tov.'^^ n^^xJA
ot have done so if he could have seen Ai5afe ^catL^ < yi & \fii
^ Jdol made over his moving appeals lo \vet i^dssas
^d heard her scornful laughter, and tlie opprobrious
epkhets she heaped upon him for his perseverance, li
** Why don't you tell him at once that you are ew
gaged ?'* I asked, 3
t " Oh^ I don^t want bini to know that/'replied shoj
If he knew it, his sisters and everybody would knovi
, and then there would be an end of my— ahem I And
besides, if I told him that, he would think my ^ngagei
ment was the only obstacle, and that I would have hioi
if I were free ; which I could not bear that any maij
should think, and he of all others, at least. BesidesJ
I don*t care for his letters/'she added contemptuously j
" he may write as often as he pleases, and look as gredi
a calf as he hkes when I meet him. It only amuses me/«
Meantime, young Meltham was pretty frequent in his
risits to the house or transits past it ; and, judging bj
Matilda's execrations and reproaches, her sister paic
more attention to him than civility required — in othel
ift^ords, she carried on as animated a flirtation as t
I presence of her parents would admit. She made somi
r attempts to bring Mr. Hatfield once more to her fee
but finding them unsuccessful, she repaid his ha ugh t
indifference with still loftier scorn, and spoke of hi
Mth as much disdain and detestation as she had formcrlj
done of his curate. But, amid all this, she never for d
moment lost sight of Mr. Weston. She embraced ever^/
opportunity of meeting him, tried every art to fascinate
him, and pursued him ^^^th as much perseverance as il
she really loved him and no other, and the happiness q!
her life depended upon eliciting a return of affections
Such conduct was completely beyond my comprehei*
fiion. Had I seen it depicted in a novel, I should hav*
thought it unnatural ; had I heard it described by other^
I should have deemed it a mistake or an eKaggeration^
but when 1 saw it with my own eyes, and suffered fronS
it too, I could only conclude that excesswe^ nf^t\\V'^,'^
drunkenness, hardens the heart, en^Aa^^e^ Vae: \^c^*^'
" --ervcrts the feelings, and that dogs ^ts tvicvl ^Ocve
W Wjbich, wiaen gorged to t\ve t'hito^V, ^v
!^
138 AdNES -^GREY.
gloat over what they cannot devour, and grudge the
smallest morsel to a starving brother.
She now became extremely beneficent to the poor
cottagers. Her acquaintance among them waa more
widely extended, her visits to their humble .dwellings
were more frequent and excursive than they had eVer
been before. Hereby she earned among them the reputa-
tion of a condescending and very charitable young lady,
and their encomiums were sure to be repeated to Air.
Weston, whom also she had thus a. daily chance of meet-
ing in one. or other of their abodes, or in her transits to
and fro; and often, likewise, she could gather, through
their gossip, to what places he was Hkely to go at such
and such a time, whether to baptize a child, or to visit
the aged, the sick, the sad, or the d5dng, and most Skil-
fully she laid her plans accordingly. In these excur-
sions she would sometimes go with her sister — ^whom,
by some means, she had persuaded or bribed to enter
into her schemes — ^sometimes alone, never, now, with me ;
so that I was debarred the pleasure of seeing Mr. Weston,
or hearing his voice even in conversation with another,
which would certainly have been a very great pleasure,
however hurtful or however fraught with pain. I cotild
not even see him at church ; for Miss Murray, imder some
trivial pretext, chose to take possession of that comer
in the family pew which had been mine ever since I
came, and unless I had the presumption to station my-
self between, Mr. and Mrs. Murray > ..I must sit with my
back to the: pulpit, which I accordingly, did.
Now, also, I never walked home with my pupils. They
said their mamma thought it did not look well to see
three people out of the family walking, aiid only two
going in the carriage ; and as they greatly prrferrcd
walking in fine weather, I should be honoured by going
with the seniors. " And, besides, " said they, *'you can't
walk as fast as we do ; you know you're ^ways. lagging
behind, " I knew these were false excuses, but I made
7o objections, and never contradicted svlAv ^isai^xtioos^
^ knowing the motives wldch. dictated.^Jtvim. .^oA'^
a
5NES GR
the afternoons, during those six memorable week!
never went to church at all If 1 had a cold, or a
slight indisposition, they took advantage of that to w^
ine stay at home ; and often they would tell me they
not going again that day tliemselves, and theji prel
to change their minds and set oil without telling mi
i managing their departure that I never discovered i
f change of purpose till too late* Upon their return hon
on one of these occasions, they entertained me with
, animated account of a conversation they had had
»Mr. Weston as they came along. " And he asked if j
were ill, Miss Grey/* said Matilda ; *'but we told
c you were quite well, only you didn't want to com^
< church. So he'll think you* re turned wicked. "
- Ail chance meetings on week-days were likewise <
If fully prevented ; for, lest I should go to see poor N;
m Brown or any other person, Miss Murray took good
tf to provide sufficient employment for all my leisure hq
,r There was always some drawing to finish, some ml
" _ to copy, or some work to do, sufficient to incapacity
£L me from indulging in anything beyond a short wi
^ about the grounds, however she or her sister might
5 occupied, "'
[T One morning, having sought and waylaid Mr, Wes
If they returned in high glee to give me an account of t
interview,'* And he asked after you again,''i
it Matilda, in spite of her sister's silent but imperai
ni intimation that she should hold her tongue. " He m
dered why you were never with us, and thoughts
cf must have delicate health, as you came out so seldon
» " He didn't, Matilda ; what nonsense youVe talking
*'O Rosalie, what a lie I He did, you know ; and 1
said— Don't, Rosalie — ^hang it I— I won't be pinch
so J — ^And, Miss Grejr, Rosalie told him you were i
II well, but you were always so buried in your books
Of you had no pleasure in anything else, "
i'* What an idea he must have of m.^V Y'^^s^'i^
n)'*And/'J Bsked, " does old > iancA^ evet m^^\^^
140 AGNES GREY.
" Yes ; and we tell her you axe so fond of readisj
and drawing that you can do nothing else. "'
" That is not the case, though. If you had told'hei
I was so busy I coiUd not come to see her, it Would have
been nearer the truth. "
" I don't think it would, " replied Miss Murray^ sud-
denly kindHng up. f'Fm sure you have plenty of: time
to yourself now, when you have so little teaching to da'*
It was no use beginning to dispute with such indulged,
unreasoning .creatures, so I held my . peace. I was
accustomed now to keeping silence when things dis-
tasteful to my ear were uttered; amd now, tooi I wM
used to wearing a. placid, smiling cotmtenance when my
heart was bitter within me. Only those who have fdt
the like can imagine my feelings^ as I sat with an assump-
tion of smiling indifference, hstening to: the accounts d
those meetings and interviews with Mr. Weston, whid
they seemed to fmdsuch pleasure in describing to n«i
and hearing things asserted, of him which, from tW
character of the man, I knew toi be exaggerations and
perversions of the truth, if not entirely false— thing!
derogatory to him, and flattering to them, especiall]
to Miss Murray — ^which I burned to contradict, or, a1
least, to show my doubts about, but dared not, lest,'in
expressing my disbelief, I - should . display my intwesl
too. X)ther: things I heard which I felt or feared wen
indeed too true ; but I must still conceal my arixietj
respecting him, my indignation against them, beneati
a careless aspect: others, again, mere hints of some-
thing said or done, which I longed to hear more 6f, bd
could not'venture to inquire. So passed the weary time.
I-Goiild not even comfort myself with saying, " She will
soon be miariied, and then there may ber hope. "
Soon after her marriage the holidays woilld come, and
when I returned from home most likely Mr. Westor
would be gone, for I was told that he and the rectoi
could not agree (the rector's fault, of course), and he
»a5 aZ > c» & t to remove to another pVace!,
-N^o, besides my hope in God, my oiv\y eoTv^^^XKo^^
AGNES GEEfr, ~ I4I
n thinking that, though he knew it not, I was more
vx)rthy of his love than Rosalie Murray, charming and
ngaging as she was, for I could appreciate his excel-
mc'e^ which she could not, I would devote my life to
be promotion of his happiness ; she would destroy his
appiness for the momentary gratification of h,et owu
anity* " Oh, if he could but know the differeace S'^
would earnestly exclaim. ^'But no ; I would not hava
im see my heart. Yet, if he could but know her hollow-
ess, her worthless, heartless frivolity, he would then be
ife, and I should be — aiptosi happy, though I might
ever see him more 1 ** , ,
I fear by this time the reader is well-nigh disgusted
rith the folly and weakness I have so freely laid before
im- I never disclosed it then, and would not have done
3 had my own sister or my mother been with me in
he house. I was a close and resolute dissembler — in
his one case, at least. My prayers, my tea^rs, my w^ishes,
Bars, and lamentations were witnessed by myself and
leaven alone* , ^ . / . u ;: ^ ^
When we are harassed by sorrows or anxieties, or long
ppressed by any powerful feelings which we must keep
ourselveSj for which we can obtain and seek no sym-
lathy f rom any living creature, and which yet we cannot
t Will not wholly crush; we often naturally? seek relief
1 poetry— and often find it, too— whether in the eifn-
ions of others, which seem to harmonize with our exist-
tig case, or in our own attempts to give utterance to
hose thoughts and feehngs in strains less musical, per-
hance, but more Appropriate, and therefore more pene-
rating and sympathcitic, and, for the time^ more soothing
ic more powerful to rouse and to unburden the oppressed
lad swoUen heart. Before this time, at WellNvocd House
jid here, when suffering from home*sick melancholyj I
lad sought relief twice or thrice at this secret source of
xmsolation; and now I flew to it again, with greater
ividity than ever, because I seemed: to ttfiiyi yI \?J3t.^
IstiJJ preserve those relics of past sufeim^ " asx " ^ e^^^^
^^ like pilla^rs of mtojess, set jllji ,mAt2.ve\!k\Tv^ S^?.x^^
142 ACNES GREV.
the vak ol life^ to mark particular occuhresicesi- T
footsteps are obliterated now, the face of the coon
may be changed, but the pillar is still thi^e, tO'tem
me howall thinjgs were when it w^ reared: Lest
reader should be curious to see any of thesfe eftusic
I'^11 favour him with one short specimen.^ Odd «
lahguid a & the lines may seem, it was almost a { > ^
of grief to which they owed their being. • »'■''■■
: , ^* Oh, they have robbed me of the hope ; ; ., i . • .'■
V,. : , . My spirit held so dear ;'■.•..'...'f^r,.-
They will not let me hear that voice ..;'.'
My soul delights to hear.'''•■'''"'
>'> :■ ■■ .'. :•■.•;■■ ■ •:'; .■; . ■;!. ■.'- " : ,1
. ,■■•. : j,'f . " .They will not kt toe see. ^t/acfe,;,.\ .. ,'. ■:.'
,.. Iso.delighttoseeij , .,.,.. ;
,'Arid they have taken all thy smiles
■ ■ ■ And ail thy love from me. ■'■ " i'-'
V Well, let them seize on all they can } ; . - f ; . r
: ^,.. . One treasure still is mine — ,^,
A heart that loves to think on thee, "
And feels the worth pf thine. "''■
: Yes, at least they could not deprive me'bf that,
could think of hira day and nightj and I iould feel 4
he was worthy to be thought of ; Nob6dyikn©w him
I did, liobody could appreciate him as I did, nobody co
love him as I-*-could, if I might; but there was
evil. What business had I to think so much of one t
never thought of me ? Wai^ it not foolish ? Was it
wrong ?'Yet, if I found such deep dehghtiiw think
of " him, and if I kept those thoughts to myiself, t
troubled no one else with them, where was thcharir
It? I :would ask myself. And such reasoning j
ventied " me frorti making any sufficient effort to shake
iny fetters. ■■ " -'■
But'if those thoughts brought delight; it was a paiii
troubled jdeasure, too near akin- to anguish, and one t
did me more injury than I was aware of. :It was
indulgence tAat a person of mote Nrndom ox *n^t^
pezience would doubtless have deaaied YveKft\l-\ ^^xi^
AGNES OREY*
S? dreary to turn my eyes from the contemplation of
ijt bright object and force them to dwell on the dull,
ry^ desolate prospect around, the joyless, hopeless,
.tary path that lay before me I It was wrong to be
joyless, so desponding ; I should have made God my
md, and to do His will the pleasure and the business
my hfe ; but faith wels \veakj and passion was too
ji this time of trouble I had two other causes of aflflic-
|;i The first may seem a tiifle, but it cost me many
»ar. Snap, my httle dumb, rough* visaged, but bright-
fdj warni-liearted companion, the only thing I had to
e me, was taken away, and delivered over to the
der mercies of the village rat-catcher, a man notorious
his brutal treatment of his canine slaves. The other
s serious enough: My letters from home gave intima-
u that my father's health was worse. No boding
rs were expressed, but I was grown timid and de-
indent, and could not help fearing that some dreadful
amity awaited us there. I seemed to see the black
uds. gathering round my native hUls, and to hear the
prv muttering of a storm that was about to burst and
lofate our hearth. « -
•'J i lu —
CHAPTER XVI IL
I
Hk MIRJH 4f^pr ;^OURNING.
^TSt of June arrived at last, and Rosalie Murray was "
nsmuted into Lady Ashhy. Most splendidly beau-
li she looked in her bridal costume. Upon her return
oi church, after the ceremony, she came flying into
! schoolroom, flushed with excitement, and laughing,
f in mirth, and half in reckless desperation, as it
med to me,
* NoWj Miss Grey, I'm Lady Ashby I'* she exclaimed,
t's done; my fate is sealed. T^'e.Te!^* i^a e!s^!£ > NNs^%
•k now. Fm come to receive ^oux csTvii^^^VN^^^'^'^
bid you gaod-by^ ; and tii^ja Tia^QSi^^^'^ ^^ > 5S^ > ^^^^^
1
144 AGNES GREV.
Naples, Switzerland, London 1 Oh dear ! wha^ : ± deal
I ■ shall see »aiid'hear before I coane back: again J Bui
don't forget rhe. i I shan^t'forget you, though I've been
a naughty.'. girl;- Come, why; don't you congratulate
me-? "'; ..■■■■: .'■•■■■ y., : : . . ■■■..■:• .- , ■ ^ -J .
• " I cdnndt .'congratulate yon, " I replied, " till- I.jknoiy
whether this < jharige is really; for the better. But I sin-
cerely hope it is, and I wish you true happiness aoJd the
be^t -of -blessings/ •:■■ " ■ •• -n . ■■ ..'■ ■■ > •.•. .--i. ; i.i
'/V*'Well,: good-byej the'carriage is waiting, and -they're
caHiixg me.'': •■■.■•.'■•.'iv:.- -. •. i -..j-iir-; .;:•-.■:
She g^ve me a ^hasty kiss, and was hunrjidng away^ bu^
suddenly .'Tetiiming,'embraced me with more affectieni
than- I thought her capable of evindngj and depaiFted
with tears in her eyes. Poor girl I I really'loved'her
then; and forgave! her from my heart all the injiiry slw
had done liie, and- others als6. She had:not > > haH:iknowh
ityl was sure ; andl prayed God to pardon her too.: i^ --i
ij > During thensoiiainder of that. day of festal sadness^il
was left i to my < »wn. devices. . Being too much udhingfod
for anyi steddy; odchiipation, I- wandered aboiut " with»ia
book in. tny'hand jiosr; several hours, more thinking , thas
reading, for I had many things to think about. In tUs
evening I made use of- my liberty to go and see my old
friend Nancy once again, to apologize for my long ab-
sence (which must tew sa^med /sO? neglectful and un-
kind) by telling her how busy I had been, and to talk,
or read, or work for her, Whichever might be most ac-
eeptablei.aiid also, of course, to tell her the- |riews of thtt
importaiit day^ and'j > ^rha|)^^to obtaih a.Milemixm & f
tion from herih; return respecting Mr. Wefetoii'slext)et*cd
departurci; But of this she seemed to know ilothii^;, and
Lhofied,^ as she! did, that it was all :a;ialse cepOTt: She
was very g^ad to see ble ; but, , happily, .her; leyes wtre
now so nearly well that she was almost independent of
liiy services. :'Sh^ was deeply lntei < e$ted in th6 wedifing ;
ifzjt while I amnsed her with the i details of the festive
efep; ^/rc spiendours'of the bridfli parV7 wi " i. oi.'^i3Qa\icv^ft
«raa/i^ she'dften-oj^ied and daook Wt.*«^^ «sw^. " «ri^

^might come of it. She seemed, like me, to regard
.ther as a theme for sorrow than rejoicing, I sat a
time talking to her about that and other things,
no one came.''
lall I confess that 1 sometimes looked towards the
'with a half-expectant wish to see it open and give
mce to Mr, Weston, as had happened once before;
that, returning through the lanes and fields, I often
ted to look round me, and walked more slowly than
at all necessary— ^f or though a fine evening It was
a hot one-^atid finally felt a sense of emptiness and
ppointment at'having reached the house without
ting CiT even catching a distant glimpse of any oBe,
pt a'few labourers returning from their work ? .
mdavj however, was approaching ; I should see hirh
, for now that Miss Murray was gone I could have
old comer again. I should see him, and by look,
ch, and manner 1 might judge whether the circum-
ce of her marriage had very much afflicted him.
pi!y I could perceive no shadow of a diffenence* He
\ the same aspect as he had worn two months ago —
-, look, manner, all alike unchanged. There was the
I keen-sighted, unclouded truthfulness in his dis-
se, the same forcible clearness in his style, the same
est simplicity in aH he said and did, that made itsetf
marked by fJie eye and ear, but ieJt upon the hearts
16 audience.'''
walked homje with Miss Matilda, hut he did not jo\
Matilda was now sadly at a loss for amusement, and
:ully in want of a companion : her brothers: at
ol, her sister married and gone, she too young to be
itted into society, forw^hich, from Rosalie's example,
was m some degree beginning to acquire a taste-^a
\ at least for the ooihpany of certain classes of gentle-
; at this dull time of year— no hmiting going on, no
fting even — for thooigh she might not :|oin iw ttASi,
as something to see her father ot iW ^la.Ttv*^^^'^'^ ^ i
mth the dogs, and talk with t^t^m XiT\ ^:tv^\^ xfe^^i:^
rts I
.146 AGNES GREY.
was denied the solace which the companionship of tl;
coachman, grooms, horses, greyhounds, and pointei
might have afforded ; for her mother ha'mg, notwitl
standing the disadvantages of a country life, so satii
factorily disposed of her elder daughter, the pride of h <
heart, had begun seriously to turn her attention. to 41
younger ; and being truly alarmed at, the roughness <
her manners, and thinking it high time to work a n
form, had been roused at. length to exert het authoritj
and prohibited eatirely the yards, ^tables, ketoels, :an
€oach " hou^. Of course she wto not implicitly obeyed
but; indulgent as she had hitherto been, when dnceb^
spirit was roused her temper was not ^o .gentle ais sli
required that of her. governess to be, ajad'her will wa3 nc
to be ^warted with impunity. After many a scene, c
contention between mother and daughter, many a wk
]ent outbreak which I was ashamed to witness, : in whic
^he father's authority was of ten called in to confirm wit
oaths and threats the mother's slighted prohibitions-
for even A^ could see that " Tilly, though dhe .wiouMlmV
made a fine lad, was not quite what a yoimg lady ough
to be " — ^Matilda at length foimd that her easiest phi
was to keep clear of the forbidden regions, unless sb
could now and then steal a visit without her watckh
nw)ther's kno^dedge.
Amid all this, let it not be imagined that I escapet
without many a reprimand and many an: implied ■ iB
proach, that lost none of its sting from not being opehl;
worded, but rather wounded the more deeply because
from that very reason, it seemed to preclude self-defence
Frequently I was told to amuse Miss Matilda with^ othe
thmgs, and to remind her of her mother's precepts ant
prohibitions. I did so to the best of my power ; bu
she would not be amused against her will, and could no
against her taste ; and though I went beyond mere re
minding, such gentle remonstrances as I could use wer(
utterly wejBfectual.
'" Z?earMiss Grey, it is the strangest ^JoMi^. 1 toj^^
^u can't help it, if it's not in youi uat«ae» > oal\ i»ow
AGNES GREY, I47
Win the confidence of that girl, and make your
ieasi as agreeable to her as that of Robert or
cpjifialk the best about the things in whioh
t interested, " I repHed. ■ • • ,
that is a strange confession, however, to come
governess / Who is to form a young lady'fe
^ondert if the governess doesn't db it ? I have
vernesses who have so completely identified
1 with the reputation of their young ladies for
ad propriety of mind and. manners that th^y
^h to speak a word against them, and to hear
^t blame imputed to their pupUs was worse
i censured in their own persons. And I reaJly
*ry natural, for my part/'
u, ma'am P *'
tf course. The young; lady^s proficiency and
iiiof more consequence to the governess than
s well as to the world. If she wishes to prosper
ation she must devote all her energies to her
all her ideas and all her ambition uili tend to
plishment of that one object* When we wish
upon the merits of a governess, we naturally
e^ young ladies she professes to have educated;
Hacojrdingly. The judicious governess knows
tknows that, while she lives in obscurity her-
ipil's virtues and defects will be open to every
;hat,. unless she loses sight of herself in their
I, she need not hope for success. You see,
it is just the same as any other trade or pro-
ley that wish to prosper'must'devote them-
y and soul to their calHng, and if they begin
p indolence or self-indulgence tliey are speedily
by wiser competitors. There is litde to choose
person that ruins her pupils by neglect and
corrupts them by her example. Xonjl^*^^'t'^-
mpping these little hints', ^om V^o^ \v\^^^
1*12 g-ood. Many ladies -wo^Vi ^^ " ^^ " ^vC^S
strongly, and many wouVA i\o\ XiovW^Jjg
^48 AGNES GREY,
selves to speak at all, but quietly look out^fora substitute.
That, of course,'! would be the easiest plan. But I know
the advantages of a place like this to a person in your
situation, and i have no desire to part with you, as! I am
sure you would do very well if you: will only think of
these things and try to exert yourself di.liUle more. Thfen,
I am convinced, « you would soon acquire that delicate
tact which alone is wanting < to give you a propfer inflo-
isnce over the mind of your pupil. "
:I'was about- to give the lady some idea of the'fallacy
of her expectations, but she sailed away as soon as;.sl»
had concluded her speech. Having said what she wished,
it -was no part; of her plan to await my answer. It wis
my business to hear^ gnd not to speak. < i
However, as I have said, Matilda at length yielded in
some degree to her mother's authority, (pity it had not
been exerted before^v and: being thus, deprived of almost
every source of amusement, there was= nothing for it bit
to take long rides with the groom and long walks with
the governess^ and to visit the cottagefe and farm-houses
on her father's estate, to kill time in chatting with! the
old men and. women that inhabited themii In. one mi
these walks. it was our chance to meet Mr. Westdn. This
^as what I had long desirqd ; ^ut now, fora nAoment, I
wished either he or I were away. I felt my heart throb
so violently that I dreaded lest some out ward, signs'of
emotion should appear ; but I think he haix^y glanded
at me, and I .was soon calm enough. After a bnef saluta-
tion to both > he'asked Matilda if she had lately heaud
from her sister. !« ; .. :,
'" Yes, " replied shefc:'* She was at. Paris when she
WTotfe, and very well, and very) happy; " i
'She spoke the last word . emphatically, and i^lidth a
glance impiertinentiy sly. He < ^d not seem; to notice
it, but replied, with equal femphasis, and veryiSeriousiy; —
*'J hope she .wilj continue tobeso.'*'is
" Do you. think it Hfcely V ■ 1 veiv\^¥ce4v\issk \^^
ar Matiida bad started tm vx puisv & t oi \vhc ^^%^ ^^^
^ < ^haBing a levQtet. \ ■ ■ •- \ ■ • ■'-■'■^■■■■■^■-
AGNES GREY. 1 49
" I, cannot tell, " replied he. " Sir Thomas may be a
tter man than I suppose^ biit from all I have heard
d seen it seems a pity that one so yonng and gay and
and interesting (to express many things by one word)^
lose greatest, if not;, her . only .'fault, appears to be
oughtlessness — no trifling fauli, : to be surie,. since it
nders the possessor liable to alinost every other, tad
poses him to so many temptations— but it seems a
ty that she ^ould be thrown away On'such a man.
was her mother's wish, I. suppose ?'" ,'"
Vyes; and her own too, I* thinkjifor she always
jghed at niy attempts to. dissuade her .from;: the
^v'- ■ •■■• ■ ■•■■ " ■• ■■ "'■■ ■■'■'-'
" You did attempt it ?: Then, at least you. will have
e satisfaction of knbwing that it is rto fault of yours
any harm should come of it. ■ As for Mrs. Murrayy I
m^t know how she can justify her conduct. Hf I had
ificient acquaintance with her I'dask her. " j'
" It seems unnatural ; but some people think rank
id Weill th the chief good, and if they can i secure that
r their children they think they have done their-duty.''
" True ; but is it not strange, that persoips of expeii^
Lce, who have been married. thtoisdves, should judge
■ fabely?'-'■.. /■• . . ■■■ .- =.■
Matilda now came panting back, with the'lacerated
»dy of the young hare in her hand. . i
** Was it your intention to kill that hare, or to save it >
iss Murray ? " asked Mr. Weiston, apparently puzzled
her gleeful countenance. . . ■
" I pretended to waijt to save it, " / she answered,
mestly enough,''as it was so glaringly out of- season,
it I was better pleased to see it killed. iHowever, you
:n both witness that I couldn't help it.. .Prince was
itermined ;to have her^ and he clutched her by the
ick, and killed her in a minute. Wasn't it a noble
lase? "
" Very — for a young lady aftier a leveret. " . ..
There was a quiet sarcasm in t\v & Aoofe. cA\a^ " t^^.
fich was not lost upon her. SVie s\vra^^e^ V^'^ " ^^^
150 AGNES GREY.
ders, and turning away with a significant • • Humph ! "
asked me how I had; enjoyed the fmiw I. repli«i that
I saw no fun in the matter,'but admitted that J bad ioot
observed the tra^action/very narrowly.'^ .. • , l^i ;
" Didn't you see how it doubled-^^just iliker- ait^^d
hare ?.i -and. didn't you.hear it scream?! " . : > fi.;v,b.ff.
: i " TmBiappy to say I did not. " ^ - : • :; n:^'^!'-.:
" It cri6d out just like a child* " — ? < i f > /i:/
.nn Poor Uttle thing 1 Whatwilllybu ddi^ wiiih it ? f v;-
" Come along. T shall leateit in the 3 & istrh6u$0'W«
come- .to. I ddn't.wdntJto taker it home,i for ffsavijp^pa
should scold nie for lettihg ihe < iog kill it; " . ^ F. m1 -in " ,
Mr. Weston was now gone, and we too went o & qnir
way ; but as we returned,: after having .deposited the
hans in a- farm-thouse, and: demolished sonke ^icen:^
dnd: curr6.nt!Wneiin exchange, we met'him rdtirrmn^
also frdm the eboeoution of Ms inission^ whatever it ml^
be. He carried in his hand acluster of'beautiful ib &
YkMs, which he offered to me, observing;, with a szhik,
that though he had seen so Uttle of ide for the last two
ihpnifehs,'he had not f 6rgotten ■ that blnebeDsi were limmi
bered among my favburite flowers.''■ It was done TaS a
siihple act < rf good-will, : without ccMnplimenti or remaifc
able courtesy, or any look that could be construed lihte
" reverential, tender adoration^'(vide Rosalie Miirra^);
but still it was something to find my unimportant saying
so well remembered, it wsis Something thiat he had notiided
so accurately the time I hard ceased to be visible.'!'
" I was told, " said he, " that you were a perfect book-
worm^ Miss Grey-^«o completely absorbed in your sthdies
that yoii were lost to every other pleasmre. " - •'. - .
'* Yes, and it's quite true ! " cried Matilda* .''
" No, Mr. Weston ; don't believe it It's a scandalous
libel. These young ladies are too fbnd of making random
assertions at the expense of their friends, and you ought
to be careful how you listen to them. "
" I hope this assertion is groundless, at any rate* "
'''Why ? Do you particularly object \x > ^a^i«^ ^^ja & j-

AGKES GRBY. 151
No; but I object to any one so devoting himself
ar herself to study as to lose sight of everything else.
Except under peculiar drctimstanceSj I consider very
Jose and constant study as a waste of time, and an
njury.to the mind as well as the body. "
" Well, I have neither the time nor the inclination
or such transgressions,**
We parted again.
Well, what is there remarkable in all this ? Why
lave I recorded it ? Because, reader^ it was important
enough to give me a cheerful evening, a night of pleasing
breaniis, , and a morning of felicitous hopes. Shallow-
irained cheerfulness, foolish dreams, unfounded hopes,
^GU would say ; and I will not venture to deny it. Sus-
Hcions to that eSect arose too frequently in my own
nind. But our wishes are like tinder. The flint and
^teel of circumstances are continually striking out sparks,
vhich vanisli immediateiy, imless they chance to fall
ipon the tinder of our wishes; then they instantly
gnite, and the flame of hope k kindled in a moment,
-^JButr alas! that very morning my flickering flame of
lOpe was disftially quenched by a letter from my mother,
afMch spoke so. seriously of my father's increasing illness
that I feared there was little or no chance of his recovery ;
md close at hand as the holidays were, I almost trembled
est they should come too late for me to meet him^ in
this world. Two days iifter^ a letter from Mary told me
tiis life was despaired of, and his end seemed fast ap-
proaching. Then, immediately, I sought permission to
anticipate the vacation, and go without delay. Mrs.
Murray stared, and wondered at the unwonted energy
ind boldness with which I urged the request, and thought
there was no occasion to hurry, but finally gave me leave,
stating, however, that there was " no need to be in
mch Station about the matter— it might prove a false
ilarm after all ; and if not, why, it w^as only iti tha
common course of nature — we tnu & t a\\ < i\^'?^TCN£?o!ms & -;
•nd I was not to suppose myself the otA^ a^vcX.^^
'. Jhe worH *'and oonclti^iig ^b.^savmg. \ x^wa^ " ^
3
152 AGNES GREY.
the phaeton to take me to O^ > . " And instead of
repining,'Miss Grey, be thankful for'^e . privileges yoo
^njoy; .'There's many a poor clergyman whose family
would be plunged into ruin by the event of Im- death;
but yoUy you see,. have influential f riendsfi ready; to ; con-
tinue their patronagej^amd to show you= every cdn'sSdeta-
tion/'" .•■■••.■ ...;-* ••. -'
I thanked her for her " consideratiam/* and. flew, to
myroom to imake some hurried ptcparations J6rViny
departure. My ibonhet and shawl being dn, and! a iew
thmgs'hastily cramrnedinto my largest tnmk, Idesd^mled.
But-i'!might have done the wojrkimora leisurely,, ifor .li)
one else was in'a hurry,.and: I had still a considerable
time to wait for the phaeton. Atl lengtl; it caitie to ithe
door, /and I was qff . But, oh, what a dreary jcnrbey
was that J how. utterly different from my former pas»
sages homewacdstj Being too late forthe last coach 1o
,;I had to feirfei a= cab for ten iniles, and'then k car
t < k takflime over the rugged hills. It was half-^t ten
before I reached hohie; They ^ere not in bed,'':. "
My Another: and sister both imet me in the pass^jge,
sad, silent, pale^ • I'Was so-miich shocked and terror-
stricken that I could not speak, to ask the inforrnktiofl
I so much longed yet dreaded to obtain. \'
" Agnfes! " said my mothet,'struggling to repress
some strong. emotion. ■''.
" O Agnes 1 " cried Maky, and burst into tears.''
" HoWiis he ?*'I askedj gasping fortjie answer, . ii
..: " Dead:!=^V ■.'.. " .■ i . i •■ ^- • . .
. :It ws^.the reply I had anticipated, but the .shock
seemed none the -less IremendouSi. ..:...''
•..-■•..■• ■■■•CHAPTER XIX. ■. •■.:. " .. ■'-
■'. I " THE LpTTER. ■ ;''I'^'_
^v f^ther^s. mortal rejcnains. had been q^oinsw^^ A^ ^^
> n2bj and we^- with'sad faces and sotr^y^x^^xtoKftX!
AGNES GREV.
1ST
lingering over the frugal breakfast-table, revolving
plans for onr future life/ My mother's strong mind had
not given way beneath eveji this affliction; her spirit ^
though ctushed, was not broken, Mary's wish was that
I should go back to Horton Lodge, and that our mother
should come and live with her a^nd Mr. Richardson at
the vicarage. She affirmed that he wished it no less
than hjers^lf, and that such an arrangement could not
fail to benefit all parties ; for my mother's society and
experiencfe would be of inestimable value to tliem, and
they wcmld do all they could to make her happy. Bat
no arguments or entreaties could prevail ; my mothef
was determined not to go. Not that she questionedi foif
a moment, the kind wishes and intentions of her daughter,
but she affirmed that so long as God ^ared her health
and strength she would make use of them to earn her
own livelihood, and be chargeable to no one, whether
her dependence would be felt as a burden or not. If she
could aHord to reside as a lodger in vicarage, she
would choose that house before all others as the place of
her abode ; but not being so circumstanced, she would
never come under its roof, except as an occasional visitor*
unless sickiiess tyt calamity should rejider her assistance
really needful, or until age or infirmity made. her incapable
of inlaintaining herselfp ._
''No, Mary,'* said she;'* if Richardson and you hav?
anything to spare, you must lay it aside for your family,
and Agnes and I must gather honey for ourselves.
Thanks to my having had daughters to educate, I have
not forgotten my accomplishments. God willmg, I will
check this vain repining, " she said, while the tears
coursed one another down her cheeks in spite of her
efforts ; but she ^viped them away, and resolutely shaking
back her head, continued,'* I will exert myself, and look
out for a small house, conirnodiously situated in some
populous but healthy district^ where w^ will l^ks: ^ K^^
young hdjes to board and educate — \i ^e c^vl ^t^.'^Cfe^^^^^J!3
imd^s jnany^day^/jupilsas will coiu^^ ,oi\^3^^*^ ^^sv\^
" 1 jto juastLUinii j^j^m^ ia4ih4r > > TftAft\i^asa^ a & ,^-g^^ ^^^^
154 AGNES GREY,
will be able to send us some pupils, or to assist fis with
theirJ Tecommendation's, no doubt. I shall not apply to
my Own. What say you to it, Agnes ? ^ Will you be
willing to leave youK present situation and tryf^'d^.ur .
'* Quite willing, mamma ; and th^ moiiey I have saved
will do to furnish the house. It shall be taken froih the
bank directly/'; ■ ,....'
-''When it is wanted. We must get the* house »aiid
settle on preliminaries first. " - !.; .r ,,.
'■Mary offered to lend the little she possessed;^ bat my
iftother dedined it^ saying that we niust begin /oiv aa
econcmiical plan, and she hoped that the whole pr part
^ mine, added 1x > what we could get by the sale o^-the
furniture^ aiid what little our dear papa had. krontrived
to lay aside former since the debts were paid^wotildibe
sufficient to last ui till Christmas; when; it: was hoped,
Something would accrue from our united labouiis.::'It
was dually settled that this should be'our plan,: aqd.that
inquiries < and prepa;rations should immediately hb set
on foioit:; and while my mother; busied herself with these^
I^should return to Horton Lodge at the dose :of my foor
weeks''vacation, and give notice for my- final depaaixue
^en things were in train for the speedy Gemmwcement
otf our^hool.
We were discussing these affairs on the morning I hsm
mentioned^ about'a fortnight after'my father's death,
when a letter was brought in for my mother,- on beholding
which the colour mounted to her face,'lately pale enough
with anxious watchings and excessive sorrow. " From
my father I " murmured she, i as she hastily tore off the
cover. It wa:s many years since she had heard froin
any of her own relations before. Naturally wondedng
what the letter might contain, I watched, her counte*
nance while she read it, and was somewhat surprised'to
see her bite her lip and knit her brows as if in aJnger.
When she had done she somewhat irrevierently cast it
on the table, saying with a scomM smile,*—
^'^I^i/r ^mijdpapa has bcen'« > \m
^ < 5 says, be bus no dbubt il have lotig xe^^eii^ft^ ^ las
A'GKES GREY, ISS
ifofrtunate marriage/ and if I will only acknowledge
ds, and confess I was wrong in neglecting his advice,
nd that I have justly suffered for it, be will make a lady
f me once again — if that be possible, after my long deg-
idation — and remember my girls in his will. Get my
esk, Agnes, and send these things away, I will answer
le letter directly. But, first, as I may be depriving you
oth of a legacy, it is just that I should teU you what I
lean to say. I shall say that he is mistaken in suppos-
ig that 1 can regret the birth of my daughters (who have
een the pride of my life, and are likely to be the com-
irt of my old age), or the thirty years I have passed in
ae company of my best and dearest friend ; that, had
ur misfortunes been three times as great as they were
anless they had been of my bringing on), I should still
le more rejoice to have shared them with your father,
nd administened what consolation I was able ; and had
is sMerings in illness been ten times what they were^ I
3uld noti regret having watched over and laboured to
dieve them ; that, if he had married a richer wife, mis-
jrtunes and trials would no doubt have come upon Mm
tffll ; while l am egotist enough to imagine that no other
roman could have cheered him through them so well—
ot that I am superior to the rest, but I was made for
im, and he for me ; and I can no more repent the hours,
ays, years of happiness we have spent together, and
rMch neither could have had without the other, than I
an tlie privilege of ha\Tng been his nurse in sickness and
JS- comfort in affliction,
II*-'Will this do, children ? or shall I say w^ are all very
wtry for what has happened during the last thirty years,
nd my daughters wish they had never been born - ,but
ince they have had that misfortune, they will be thankful
3E any trifle their grandpapa will be kind enough to
■estow? " ■'
Of course we both applaudod our mother's t€^:ilw^ < 3?v.
iatT}^ cleared away the breakiast i\itL^?.. \ \ii^Ci\5L^H^ *CesS
^k; the letmr was quickly writteiv an^ dv^-^Vc^^^\ ^
m^timtdAwur^ h^ot^rT no more oi om ^^a£^to^^
.156 AGNES GREY.
we saw his death announced in the newspaper a con-
siderable time after^ — all his worldly possessions, of
course, beings left to our wealthy, unknown cousins.
CHAPTER XX.
THE FAREWELL.
A HOUSE dn A " " ■ » the fashionable watering-place, was
hired for our seminary, and a promise of two or three
pupils was obtained to commence with.'I returned ;to
Horton Lodge about the middle, of July, leaving nay
mother to conclude the bargain for. the house, to; obtain
niore pupils, to sell off the furniture of our old abode,
and to fit out the new one. ; ;
We often pity the poor, because they have no leisure
to mourn their departed relatives, and necessity oUiges
them to labour through their severest afflictions; but is
not active employment the best remedy for overwhelm-
ing: sorrow, the surest antidote for despair ? It may be
a ilough comforter, it may seem hard to be harasised with
the cares of life when we. have no relish for its. enjoys
ments, to be goaded to labour when the heart is ready to
break, and the vexed spirit implores for rest only to weej
itt silence; ,but is not labour better than the rest wt
covet ?. and are not those petty, tonnenting cares less
hurtful than a continual brooding over the great afOicticm
that oppresses us ? Besides, we cannot have cares, and
anxieties^ and toil^ Nvithout hope— ^^ it be but the hope
of fulfilling t)ur joyless task, accomplishing some needful
project, or escaping some further annoyance. At any
rate, I was glad my mother had so much employment
for every faculty of her action-loving frame. lOur kind
neighbours lamented that she, once so exalted in wealth
and station, should be reduced to such extremity in her
t/tne df sorrow ; but I am persxladed^ia2A.^Y«b'VQw^^db^^
differed thrice as much had she been \eSt'm ^Sixx^tififc
'^tb liberty to remain in that Tiauae,- Ate ^otr tA.^si
bappihcss and late afRiction, and no stem necessity
prevent her from incessantly brooding over and
mentiiig her bereavement.
I (will not dilate upon thd feelings with which I left the
i. house, the well-known garden, the little village
ii^ch'— then doubly dear to me, because my father,
lo, for thirty years, had taught and prayed within its
ills, lay slumbering now beneath its f^ags — and the old
xe hills, delightful in their very desolation, with the
iTOW vales between, smiling in green wood and spark-
tg water, the house where I was born, the scene of all
f early associations, the place where throughout life
y earthly affections had been centred, — and left them
return no morci True, I was going back to Horton
Kige, where, amid many evils, one source of pleasure
t remained; but it was pleasure mingled witli excess-
* f^in, and ray stay, alas 1 was limited to six weeks.
i4 even of that precious time day after day slipped by
.d I did not see him. Except at church, I never saw
m. for a fortnight after my return. It seemed a long
ne to me ; and as I was often out with my rambling
ipil, of course hopes would keep rising, and disap pointy
ents would ensue ; and then I would say to my own
tart, -'Here is a convincing proof^if you would but
uy« the sense to see it or the candour to acknowledge
—that he docs not care for you. If he only thought
li/ as much about you as you do about him, he would
Lve contrived to meet you many times ere this. You
tipt know that by consulting your own feelings. There-
to have done with this nonsense. You have no ground
r hopei Dismiss at once these hurtful thoughts and
oiish wishes from your mind, and turn to your own
ity and the dull, blank life that lies before you. You
ight have known such happiness was not for yofu, "
But I saw him at last. He came suddenly upon me as
was crcBsing a held in returning itom a VmX Vt^ " ^-azopi
row^, which I bad taken the oppoilumVj q*'^ ^-^.-^^
lUe Matilda Murray was riding \\et rasX^^^^ " ^^
— ^ " K^ heard of the lieavy loss 1 \^^ ^^^^ " ^^
158 AGNES GREY.
He expressed no sympathy^ ioffered no condojqnoe,/ bu1
almost the -.first words he uttered were, " : How ^isc^ j^oui
mother ? " And this was no matter^of^ourse question^
for I. never told him tixsitiltikad. a mother. KHe.miisI
havfe learned the fajatjfrom others,- if he knew it at all;
and besides, there Was sincere ^ood-will, and even deep
touching^ imobtrusive sympathy in tha tone- and: maimei
of thb inquiry. .; I thanked: him with diie divility.'aiu]
told. him ^he.was-as well, as could be expected, **'Whai
will §h^ do ? " was the next question. Many would, have
deemed it an- impertinent ome, audgiven an evasive reply;
but jsnch an idea never entpred, my head, and I gave a
brief butl plain statement of mother's plans and pro^!)ec(K
i f* .Then you wiUJeave thiSi place shortly ? " said he^
^* Ye^, in a/month. " : : : •', .
-He paused- a- minute, . as if in thought. When he spokt
again, I hc^ed it would be to- express- his concern: at mj
departure, but it was only to say; ** I shbtld think JWB
will be willing enough to go.'?*'-■■: ;
. = *f Yei— for -soihe things/'1= replied. = .. . i - • : > : •'/■■■^
■ -f'Eor : some things only: . I wonder what should: malie
yau-regretitii'1 -.': -; • ;■ > ,:;■.;»■.
'. I was aiiLnayed :at thiis in some degree^, beoause it.enp
barrassed. mei- I had only one reason f6r regtettingst;
and that'was. a profound ^cret^ which he had no bvm
ness to troubleme about i > . - ;. i li
■ **.Why,'/. said I-^**. why. should yousupipose thati.I
dislike. tbe place ? " . ■ ■. .';
" lYou. told me so yourseK/f, was theidecisivie-irqjyi
'*■ You ! said, at least, that you ; could not live ^ontenjtedif
without, a friend^; and that: you had no friend here^laad
no possibility of milking oiie; and besides, I IaLO(\i7.yoii
wws^ dislike it/'i
" But if 3rou remember rightly I siddi oTiitoeant to say,
I. could not live contentedly withbttt a . friend'in the
se > iarA/. I was not sdi unreasonable als to i^uire one -al-
itrsys near me. I thi^k I couMl be ^^^^ m A Vcsviae fuB
^^ enemies, it j " But ho, t\iat^ft^iB^^^e.eitaKsaAk.TidhL\i
Mtitmerf.. ; J paused,. aadhastWy ^de^- KsA:^**^^
AGNES GREY* 1 59
i^eli leave a place where we have lived for
or three years without some feeling of regret/'
'Will you regret to part with Miss Murray, your «ole
ftainin^ pupil and companion ? *'
'* I dare say I shall in soine degree©. It wasiiot without
TOW I parted with her sister/^
'I can imagine that "
■ * Well , Miss Matildk is quits as'^ood— ^bettor, m one
CJfeCt.'*''^''-Jiiuli \U: ^iii v.'l vl.ijjf U
''What is that F'* "'''''
'•She's honest, "
''And the other is not ?
" I should not call her dishonest ;i but it must be con*
ecd she's a little artful/''...
" Aftfid i & she ? 1 sai\^ she was giddy and vitiil. And
to^/'he added, after a pause, -'I can well beheve she
la airtful too J but so excessively so as to assume an
pect of extrteme simplicity and unguarded openness,
i^/ " continued he musingly, *'that accounts for some
tie things that puzzled me a trifle before/'
After that he turned the conversation to more general
bjects. He did not leave me till we had nearly reached
6 park gates. He had certainly stepped a little out of
irway to accompany me so far, for he now went back
d disappeared down Moss Lane, the entrance of which
s had passed some tijne before, > Assuredly I did not
gret this circumstance. If sorrow had ^y place in
y heart, it was that he was gone at last, that he was
1 longer walking by my side, and: that that short in-
rvaJ of delightful intercourse was at an end. He had
rt breathed a word of love, or dropped one hint of
ndemess or affection, and yet I had been supremely
Lppy; To be near him, to hear him talk as he did talk,
id to feel that he thought me worthy to b < > so spoken
,i— capable of understanding and duly appreciating such
scourse^was enough.
^* Yes > Edward ^^^ston, I con\d itidead; \^ \iaws ^'^^ ^_
^se full of enemies if I had bvit one \t\fci\^ ^V^ Xtn^
l60 AGNES GREY.
you, " though we might be far apart j seldom to .hear from
each other, still more seldom to. meet, though toil, and
trouble, and vexation might surround me, still'< r ^ • It
would be too much happiness for me to dreaiji oil: :Yet
who. can tell, " said I within myself, as I proceeded.up the
paxk — " who can tell what this cine month. may. bring
forth ? I have lived nearly three-and-twenty years, and
I hay« suffered much, and tasted little pleasure: yet Is
it likely my life all through will be so clouded ? Is it
not possible that God may hear niy prayei?sj : disperse
these gloomy shadows, and grant me some bfeams of
heaven's sunshine yet ? Will He entirely deny to me;those
blessings which ire. so freely- given to others, who neither
ask them nor acknowledge them when .received ? , Ma;
I.ntot stiH ,hbpc and trust ?'• I did hope arid. tnifet for
a i while,'bui alas, alas! the time ebbed away. One
week followed another, and, exceptingone distant ^impm
and itwo -transient me^tiiags-4during which scaceely anw
thing was said — ^while I'was wallcing with Miss Matilm
I saw nothing of him, except, of cdurse, at church. . \ li:
^ And now the last Sunday; was come, and the last
service. I was often on the point of melting into teitfi
during the sermon— rthe last I wias to hear from him/tte
best I should hear from any one, I was well assured*
It was over; the congregation were departing, and I
must follow: I had then se^n him, and heard his voice
too,, probably for the last. time. In the churchyard
Matilda'was pounced upcm by the two Misses Green#
They had manyi inquiries to make about her sister, and
I know not what besides^ I only wished they would
have; done, that we might hasten. b & ick to Horton Lodge;
rionged to seek the retirement .of my own room, or some
sequeistered nook in the grounds, that I might deliver
myself up to my feelings— rto weep'my last farewell, & tid
lament my false hopies and .vain delusions. . Only this
once, and then adieu to fruitless dreaming;, theno^rth
oniy sober^ solidrisad reality aihwldt/otftu^^imy.inind.
Bat while I thus resolved, a lov/ .voice do^:\«^^wi
^'d,''I suppose you axe going this ^ve«^SL > lK\^^^«^'^''
A-GNES-^GRET,
i6t
^es/- I replied, . •
I was very mnch startled; and had I been at aU hysteri-
II y inclined, I certainly should have committed m^'^elf
some way then. Thank God I was not.
" Well/'said Mr. Weston,''I want to bid you good-
ie. It is not likely I shall see you again before you go/^
" Good-bye, Mr. Weston, " I said. Oh, how I struggled
say it caflmly I I gave him my hand. He: retained
a few seconds in his, , i Kt . Li^. • .
" It is possible we may meet^ again/'said he, ** Will
be of any consequence to you whether we do or not ? **
*'Yes, I should be very glad to see you again.*'
I could say no less. He kindly pressed my hand, and
*nt. Now I was happy again, though more inclined
'burst into tears than ever. If I had heen^ forced to
leak at that moment, a succession of sobs would have
evitably ensued ; and as it was^ I could not keep the
ater out of my eyes. I walked along with Miss Murray,
amng aside my face, and neglecting to notice several
iccessive remarks, till she bawled out that I was either
^af or stupid ; and then, having recovered my self-
> ssessic^, as one awakened from a fit of abstraction,!
iddenly lookcdup and asked what she had been saying " .

CHAPTER XXL
THE SCHOOL.
1^ Hdrton Lodge, and went to join my mother in
xr new abode at A ; I found her ta^cII in health.
^signed in spirit, and even cheerful, though subdued and
> ber, in her general demeanour. We had only three
Darders and half a dozon day -pupils to commence with,
at by due care and diligence we hoped ere long to
icrease the number of both.
.1 set myself with be Jit ting enei^ \o fejc^'a.T^^ " < ! & »
ities of this new mode of life. 1 caW \1 ntw^ ^^^ *^^
l62 AGNES GREY.
with my mother in a school of our owni and W6rid
a I hireling among strangers^ despised and trampled
by- old and young ; atad for th^ first few. .weeks. -1
by no means .tinhappyj *MtJs .possible we; may
dgain,'ij .anidi ! " . WiH it be of any. cotifeeiqiu«hicei! f <
whether wie^db or; not ?'/ • Tlhiose^ worlds iitill raing i
:eaJ?. and r^stfidiorivmy heart ; \they M^ke imy secret i
land support. .!'M. (shall seis him again. !iHe will , <
or he will write. " No promise, in fact, was too 1
6t'ltob extxivagattitifoir. Hope ttjiiwhisperlm.my en
did'mot: : believe half < d what she told ) me-^I pret <
to laugh.atit all.; <'but.I waia.far.motie'CDedulOus t
mys^i: isnippos^-! OthjeaJwise, S/I^hy ..did* myr. hissdrt
x1^iti?hen'> a;fcnoi3kj.was ,heafd atjthd fnontldbor/an
maSdi fwhoi (^iledl it, i < Iame:toi tell imy. fmotherx a g
mail wished tt) «eie. bwi^^ and; why ; was Lout lof hu
for tite .test .of fthe cfciy:^ /becaiuse^ it proy^ itoi be a n
BMLSter/. c»ttife /ifco.'o£tef,h}ss$ferviQes .to/ouc schod)?
iwhat, stopped my,,btea3llh iDU > a..njQjnent wheft^th^ii
nairi^, havimgr -broughtbii/'CoUpte i^i\ IpXttx & i jmy: xx\
siid, " H^re^ Agnes ;- thi»ris for:yc(u/Y. apdiithrew.c
them-ioimti? :.and wbftfc?m^e the.botrblood jnisl
Bay /fecei wh^ il siaW'it.vwas dinected ill ag^ntitei
hand ? and why, oh why, did that cold, sickening
of disappointment fall-oipon me -when I had torn
the cover and found it was only a letter from ]
which, for some reasMJir otbpt; ter [husband had dir
for her ?
Was it then come tolMs^lthat't should be disappi
to 5e0Eiiye! a/le < :t(5t from my .onJyTsi^teii,,.a|id -beeaTi^ i
»ot...writteii. by st. comparative stra^g^ ? wDeap, ft
Aiid;8h0 > had ^^rittto it so kindly, dlnd: thinking^ I si
be'$o pleased tJo hftve it •! - 1 was not worthy to^ re,j
And I believe^ in my indignation against myself, I^sl
hayeiptit it aside :tiil I had schooled myself into a l
frame of mind, and was become more deserving -c
JfMour.ahdiprivilege of its peTiusil. Bwit there wa
jzft»/j & er. ipoJdngr I oto,. I atid .wisMvA to ttiow. N»\iaX:^Tij
.fozitaiued;; > aonl/readit and d6 & v««aL^^o^^c^^^

GREY* lej
tinto the schoolrooro to attend to the pupils. But
Sst the caxes of csopies and sums, in the intervab of
?ictiog etrors here and reproving derelictions of duty
!te, I was in waxdly taking " ipy self to task with far
n^r severity. ^'What, a • fooii yon must t > e i "'said uiy
d to my heart, or my sterner to my softer self*''How
Id you ever dream th^t he ■ would write to yoti ?
at grounds have you for such a hopej or that he
see you,^ m give hiraseli ^jry trotible abont you, or
Qi think of you again ? V , ** What gromids ? " And
b Hope set before me that last abort interview, and
eated the words I had so iaithftillyi treasured in my
WoryJ'i^ Welj; and what was there in i that ? > Who
r hung his hopes tipon so frail a twig? What was
IB in. thdse words that any common afcc^uaintance
[ht not say to another? Of pourse it was possible
Is might meet again. He mighti have said so if you
I been going to NeiA^ Zealand ; but that did not imply
f mtentwn of seeing y6u. And theo^ as to the qnes-
1 that ioilowed, any one might ask that* And how
yoia answer ? Merely with a stupid, commonplace
ly, such as you would have given to Master Murray,
any/ one else yoti had been on tolerably civil terms
h^Vr " But then, " persisted Hope,''the tone and
nner m which he spoke/'" Ohj that is nonsense I
Eilways speaks impressively ; and at that moment there
?e the Greens and Mis^ Matilda: Murray just beford,
l^other people passing by, and he was ot > liged to, stand
yt beside you, and to speak very low, unless he wished
lybody to hear what he saidy which, though it w^as
long at all particular, of course he would rather not.^*
fat then, above i all, that emphatic yet genUe pressure
the hand, which: seemed to say,'Trust tm/ and many
et things besides, too delightful, almost too'flattering,
be Repeated, even to one's seli.'^ ^'Egnegious folly^
absurd to require contradiction — mere inventions of
imagination, which you ought to^ b^'aa\i " axts^^ ^^^*
yoa would but consider your owtx mv^-^lSXx^sS^^ ^^
^^ymtr unamiable reserve, yout iDoY\^ fe^x^^^vvsi'^-
1
1 64 AGNES GREY,
which must make you appear cold, dull, awkward, am
perhaps ill-tempered too — ^if you had but rightly w
sidered these from the beginning, you would never bm
harboured such presiunptuous thoughts ; and now th
you have been so foolish, pray repent and amend, an
let us have no Uiore of it. "
I cannot ,say that I implicitly obeyed my own i
junctions, but such reasoning as this became more ai
more effective as time wore on, and nothing was sen
or heard of Mr. Weston, until at last I gave up hopin
for even rny heart acknowledged it was all in vain. B
still I would think < of him ; I would cherish his image
my. mind, and treasure every word, look, and gesbn
that my memory could retain, and brood over Jiis exo
lenoes and his peculiarities, and, in fact, all I had see
heard, or imagined respecting him.
" Agnes, this sea air and change of scene do you i
good, I think ; I never saw you look so wretched,
must be that you sit too much, and allow the cares
the schoolroom to worry you. You must learn to ta
things easy, and to be more active and cheerful. Y
must take exercise whenever you can get it, and lea
the most tiresome duties to me. They vdll only ser
to exercise my patience, and, perhaps, try my tempci
little. "
So said my mother as. we sat at work one moroi
during the Easter hoUdays. I assured her that my «
ployments were not at all oppressive, that I was wi
or, if there was anything amiss, it would be gone as so
as the trying months of spring were over. When sm
mer came I should be as strong and hearty as shexon
wish to see me ; but inwardly her observation starti
me. I knew my strength was declining^'ihy^ sippfld
had failed, and I was grown listless aind despdlidiii|
and if, indeed, he could never care for m^,Bna.i odB
never see him more — ^if I was forbidden to taha
his happiness, forbidden ioi «vei Yo \asXe^ & fcj
A?ve, to bless, and to be blessed— tYiexL ^ifis^.tna
burden; and if my Heavenly ¥athfiJt > »aAajA3sa^

^^■■^■^ AOKES GKEV. 165
^ptJdbeglad to rest. But it would not do to die and
Be my mother. Selfish, unworthy danght^r^ to forget
Kfor a moment 1 Was not her happiness committed
^P great measure to my chai^ge, and the welfare of out
^ng piipiJs too ? Should I shrink from the work that
^B had set before me, because it w^^ not fitted to my
Hg ? Did not He know best what I should do, and
dre I ought to laboor ? and should I long to quit
lis service before I had finished my task, and t^Jtpeet
U enter into His rest without having laboured to earn
L ?''* No ; by His help I wiEl arise and address my^self
liigently to my ap|x^inted duty. If happiness in this
brld is not for me, I will endeavour to promote the wel-
Ire of those around me, and my reward shall be here-
'gr. " So said I in my heart; and from that hour I
permitted my thoughts to wander to Edward Wes*
> r at least to dwell upon him now and then — as
eat for rare occasions ; and whether it wafi really
" approach of summer, or the effect of these good
Bsolutiotis, or the lapse of time, or all together, tran-
iUillity of mind was soon restored, and bodily health
ind vigour began likewise slowly but surely to return^
Early in June F received a letter from Lady Ashby,
ate Miss Murray, She had written to me twice or thrice
tefore, from the different stages of her bridal tour, always
h good spirits, and professing to be very happy. I
wondered every time that she had not forgotten me, in
fte midst of so much gaiety and variety of scene. At
ength, however, there was a pause ; and it seemed she
lad forgotten me, for upwards of seven months passed
iWay, and no letter Of course I did not break my heart
ibout ihni, though I often wondered how she was getting
■n; and when this last epistle so unexpectedly arrived,
was glad enough to receive it. It was dated from
Lshby P^rk, where she was come to settle down at la.%1^
aving previously divided her tim^s bttwt^eiv " ^^ ^^ " ^
'^ent and the metropolis. She made -maiv^ ^^^ < ^
r having neglected me so long, asaUYed TCtve'^^
2d^rgotten- me, and had ofteA intetid^^ " ^-^ -^^^^^^
I66 AGNES GREY,
but had always been prevented by: something. S
acknowledged that -she had been leading ^very .d
sipated life, and I should think, her very wicked and:ve
thoughtless; but notwithstanding, that, 3he thought
great, deal, and, among other things, that she sh.ou
vastly like to. see me. " We have been several- days he
already, " wrote, she. " We have iiot a; single friei
with us, ?ind are likely to be very. dull. You know
never. bad ;a fancy fori living with my husband like t\
turtles in. a nest, werie he the. most delightjfui creatu
that ever wore'a coat; sp. do take pity upon, me ai
dome. I suppose your midsummer. hoUd9.ys cpmmen
in June, the same ^s oth^ people's, therefore ypu cann
plead want of itime ; and you must ajad shall come—
fact, I shall die. if you don't. I want you to visit me i
a friend, and 3tay a long time. There is nobody wii
me, asil told you before, , but ISir Thomas and .old Lac
Ashby^ but you needn't mind them — they'll troufa
US but. little .with their company. And you shall ha^
4, room to, yourself, whenever you lik^ to retire to. i
4nd plenty of books to read, when my compauay is m
sufficiently amusing. I iorget whether you like babie
If you do, ypu may. have the pleasure of seeing .mine-
the most charming child in the world, no doubt, and «
the more go', that I pm not troubled with nursing i
I was. determined I wouldn't be bothered with tha
Unfortunately it is a girl, and Sir Thomas has never fo
given I^e ^ but, however, if you will only come, I :promi
you shall be its governess as soon as it can speak, ai
you shall bring it up in, the way it should gOi and mial
a better, woman of it than its mamma. And you shs
see, my. poodle, too — a splendid little charpier imports
fromrParis ; and two fine Italian paintipgS; of great vali
(I iprget the artist)— doubtless you will be able to dii
cover prodigious beauties in. them, which you •mu^t ppii
out to ijnqj asr I only admire by hearsay; ai^d man
el^aiit: curiosities'besides, which 1 p\3aQ.c > MSfe^ .^H^^^
«o < / elsewb^rQ ; ,^nd finally, you s\ii\V ?^e». wj > v^^ \tf:
-rtbe splendid hous^ and grouudis 1 \^sfe^ \o c«r9^
,AGNES GREY. "
freatly. Alas! how far the promise of antidpatid
exceeds the pleasure of possession t There's a fine sent
ment i I assure yon I am become quite a grave ol
matron. Pray come, if it be only to witness the wondei
M change. Write by return of post, and tell me win
[ your vajcation commences, and siy that you will coid
; the day ^ter^ and. stay tijl the day before it. closes-— f
^mercy to Yours affectionately, /
jpotKf'^Rosalie AshbitJ^
^W»:.,-,. .. ■ ■■ .. ■ . . .- ^-■•; -..: .;. ; "'T* <
i. fil ishciwed this strange epistle i to'my mother^'and coi
suited her oo what 1 ought to do. She advised me to gc
and I ^^'t5nt^ willing enough to see i Lady Ashby, and hi
baby too, and to do anything I could to bendit her, t
JDonsolation or advice— for I imagined she'niust l > e ui
iiappy, or she would not have applied to me thus-^bt
feeling, as may readily be coriceiviedi tbart^ in acceptm
tiie invitation, I made a great saicrifice'for her, and did
?riolence to my feelings in many waya; Instead of bein
delighted'\^th the honourable distinction of being e]
treated by the baronet's lady to visit her as a fricn
However, I determined my visit should be only for
few days at most; and I will not deny that I deriv«
some consolation fr6m the idea that, as Ashby Park wa
pot very far from Horton, I might possibly see -Ml
" 7eston, or, at least, hear something about him.

CHAPTER XXII.
I
Ti(E visit;- i
iBfsr fPARK was certainly a T^eryidelightfnl residerio
le mansion was stately without,- commodious and eJegax
within;- the park was spacious and beautiful, chiefly o
account of its magnificent old trees^ its ^l^^^Vj \«3t'
of deer, its broad sheet of water, and S^ a-u^x^^t^ " ^^
that stretched beyond it— far there .v?idST\o \k < S^ < 2^^ ^'^
K the lands^: ape^ and ^^ " ^ ^«^^ ^ " ^^
I68 AGNES GREY.
that undulating swell which adds so greatly to the char
of park scenery. And so this was the place RosaJ
Murray ; had so longed tol call her own, that she mu
have a share of it, on whatever terms it might be offere
whatever price was to, be paid for the title of midtres
and whoever ^was to be her partner in the honour ai
bliss of -such a i)o§session I WelJ, I am not disposed
censure hernow.
She recrived me very kindly ; and though I was a po
clergyman's daughter, a governess, and a schoolmistres
she welcomed me with unaffected pleasure to her hoin
and, what surprised me rather, took some- pains tx > mal
my visit agreeable. I could see, it is tnie, that she e
pected me to be greatly struck with the magnificeh
that surrounded her ; and I confess I was rather annoy <
at her evident efforts to reassure me, and prevent d
from being overwhelmed by so much grandeur — it <
much awed at the idea of encountering het husbai
and mother-in-rlaw, or too much ashamed of my ow
humble appearance. I was not ashamed of it at adi
for, though plain, I had taken good care not to be shabt
or mean, and should have been pretty considerably i
toy ease, if my condescending hostess had not takeii sue
manifest pains to make me so; and as- for the inagnii
cence. that surrounded her, nothing that met my eyi
struck me or affected me half so much as her own alt^e
appearance. Whether from the influence of fashionabl
dissipation, or some other evil, a space of little moi
than twelve months had had the effect that might be &
pected from as many years, in reducing the plumpnei
of her form, the freslmess. of h^r complexion, the vivacit
of her movements, and tHi exuberance of her spirits.
.-: Ii'widied io'knbw if she was unhappy, but Ifdt itwa
not nay- > provinbe to inquire.'I inight endeavour to wi
her confideSncc!, but if she -chose to conceal her matr
monlal^ loeuces irdm me, I Would trouble her » ivith n
obtrusive > .qnestk > ns:'I therelote^ at iiist, COT & vadL-m^
^Ifnto a- J few ! general'inqmries \abavxt Yi^ \MMaWtt «
welfare, nnd a Jdw commendations on \b & > easx\.Y'< !i\
AGNES ORFY,
park, and of the little girl that should have been a boy-H
a smaU, dt^licate infant of seven or eight weeks old, whonfl
its mother seemed to regard with no remarkable degrei
of interest or affection, though full as much as 1 expectei;
: her to show. . - ^ ,
Shortly after my arrival she commissioned hfer mait
to conduct me to my room and see that I had everythin|
! wanted. It was a small, unpretejiding, but sufficiently
.comfortabie apartment. When I descended thence— ^
^having divested myself of all travelling encumbrancel
^and arranged ihy toilet with due consideration for thg
3 feelinigs of my lady hostess— she conducted me hersej
to the room I was to occupy when I chose, to beialon^
- or when she was engaged with visitors, or obliged to \m
mih Jier mother-in-law, or otherwise prevented, as ah
I Said, from enjojnng the pleasure of my society. It wa
a qoiet, tidy little sitting-room, and I was not sorry t\
he provided with such a harbour of refuge. , i i *,
** And some time, " said she, *'L will show yob th
Hbrary. • I never exiamined its shelves^ but I dare sa|
it is full of wise books ; and you may g6 and buirov
^nong them whenever you please- And now you shaJ
have some tea. 1 1 will soon be dinner-time, but I thought
as. yon were accustomed to dine at one, you would pen
haps like better to have a cup of tea about this time, an <
feo dine I when we hmch ; and then ^ you know, you cai
have your tea in this room, and that will save you fron
having to dine with Lady Ashby and Sir. Thomas, whie
would be rather aw^kward— at least, noft awkward, b«
rather— a— yon know what I m^an. I ■■ thought yoi
mightn't like it so well^ — espedally as we may have othe:
ladies and gentlemen to dine with us occasionally. i
" Certainly,^'said I, ** I womld much rather have ii
as you say'• ^ and if you have no: objection I should prefa
having all my meals in this roomj. " t
^ " Wliy so ? *'^
•'Because, I imagine, it would be inoi% ^J^^^aSs^^
Ladv Ashby and Sir Thomas.^'
'* ^^othing of th & kh
170 AK3NBS GREY.
*'At any ttite, it would be more agreeable t?o me. "
She made some faiiit objections, but soon conceded
and I Goidd see that the proposal''was a considerable
relief to hfei*-.- ■''■ ■':■■■■,■■ ■
" Now, come into the drawing-room, " said- :sba
'^There's thes dressing-bell j -but I won't go yet It's
no tse dressing jwhen there^s no one to see you ;• and 1
Want'tb : have a little discourse. "
The drawihg-room was certainly an imposing apait-
ment, and very elegiantly furnished ; but: I saw fts^young
mistress iglance towards me as we entered^ as if to notice
how I was impressed by the spectacle, andacc(»pdba^
I determined to= preserve. an aspect of stony indifference^
as if I saw nothing at all. remarkable* *. But this was
only for : a < moment. Immediately conscience whispered.
•VWhy shouldil disappoint her to isave my pride ? No,
rather let me sacrifice my pride to give her a little inno
cent gratification. " And I hohestly looked rohind, and
tdld^her it* was'a^ noble. rbomy. and very tastefmlly fur-
nished* She said Httlcy but I saw she was pleased* .
■ She'showed me her; fat French poodle, that laiy cmled
bp on a silk cushion, andthe two fine Italian paihtings^
whichv'hbwever, she would niot give me time to examine,
but, saying I must look at them some oliier day^ insisted
upon my admiring the little jewelled watch she i)id
purchased -in Geneva; and then she took me round the
room to point oilt'Siindry articles of veriu she had brougisi
& 6m Italy^-^anr^iikgant. little timepiece, and sevml
bu^ts, small graceful figures, and vases^ all'beautifully
carved in white marble. She spoke of these with aniina-
tioh^ > and heard my admiring comments with a smile of
pleasured That soon, however^ vanished, and was fol-
lowed by a melancholy sigh, as if in consideration of the
insufficiency of all such baubles to the happiness of the
human heart, and their -woeful inabiUty to supply its
insatiate demands. i
Then,'stretching herself upcxn a. couch, she motioned
«?e to a capacious easy-chair tiiai ^lood ov^QaAfc-^sw*
*Gfore the £re, but before a vadiB^o^cti wxAcw VJux'
AGNES GREY. I7I
s stimmer, be it remembered---a sweet, wanx^ evesiing
the latter half of June). I sat for a mpmentin siknce,
oying the still, piire air i and the delightful prospect of
i.pdik that lay before met rich in verdure''and foliage,
1 basking in yellow sunshine, relieved: hy the long
Ldov^s of declining day. But I mu^t itake iadvantage
fhis. pause. Ihad inquiries to make; aad,:.Ukii the
)stance of a lady's postsmpt/ the . Inidst , iitoottailt
;^t come last. So I begaii : iwith : asking af ter i Mt. ■, and
fr. > Murray, and Miss Matilda, I and the ■ younlg gentle^
; was told that papa had the gout, which made, hiiri
•y ferocious,'and'thaut he w,oiild aot giv^'uplhis'cbdice
les artd his stobstantial. dinners and suppers,! and/ had
axrelled with. his; physicisin,; because the.fettei: had
red to say .that no ipedicine could curie him^ while :h4
3d so ffedy ; that mamma tod the re$t IvWq. well;
.tadft'was still wild and r«:klete,;:but she. had got a
hionable governess, and was considerably improved ia
: manners^ and soon tb be introduced to iht ^orld } and
bn ahd Charles (now at home. for the holidays) Were,
ail accoulirtsi, " fine, bold; unruly,, mischievous boys. "
^* And how are the other people getting on ?. " said Ir-^
:he.Greens; for iriststnce ? ■':; . .. «■ . ;. .
^* Ah I Mr. Green is . heartbroken,, j you . kng'sv/'. re-
ed she, with a languid snaile. " He. hasn't got over
I disSappointment yet, and; never will, I suppoSfe, ■ He's
omed to be an old baJchelor ; and hia sisters are doing
sir best to get married.'* : :i; - ■ 1
" And the Melthams ? "
'^-Oh, they're jog^g on as usual, I suppose.; .but I
ow very Uttle about any of .them, except. Haxry/'
Id she, blushing slightly, and smiling agaiil. : . " I saw
great deal of Mm while we were in Lojidon ; for, as
'ya as -he heard .we were there, he came up^under pre-
ade of visiting his brother, and either followed me lijke
shadow wherever I went, or !met= me, We ^ \e^^s:)vssiK^
every turn. Ydu needn't look so sYiocVLe^ >'^K > s & Q*t«S
'as very discreet, I assure you; " but, /^om V»ss^ ^ ^ " ^
i;U AGNES OREY.
can't help being admired. ^ Poor fellow! He was i
my o!nly worshipper, though he was certainly them
conspicuous,! and,.'I think, the most devoted- amc
tbem-alli :.And that detestable — ahem — and Sir Thon
chose to take 6fience at him, or my profuse expimditu
or something^I don't ^exactly know what-^and hurr
me doiwn to the country at a moment's notice, wh
I'm to play the hermit, I suppose, for life. "
And she bit h^ lip, and frowned vindictively up
the fair domain she had oiice so coveted to call her o¥
" And Mr. Hatfield, " said I — " what is become
him ??*•«■ ■: ■:'■■■'" ••■ ■ ■-•'•••■'■ < :■■.:■'^ ■■ ..- •
'Again she brightened up, and Answered gaily j — :
'* ■ Oh, hfe invade up t6 an elderly siarist^r, and marri
her, not long since, weighing her heavy purse agai]
her feded charms, atid expecting to find that solace
gdld which Was denied him in iove — ha, ha ! "
" Well, and I think that's aU,'except Mr. West <
What is he .dc*ng ? ^*
" I donH know, I'm sure. He's gone from Horton.*!
" RoW'loing since ? and where is he gone to ? ^':
*M -know nothing ^about him, " replied she, ya\mii
" except that he went about a month: ago. " I ne^
asked where. " (I would have asked whether it was
af livingj'of merely another curacy, but thought it bet
not.) ■ " And the people'made a great roiit about 1
leaving,'* continued she, " much to Mr. Hatfield's d
pleasure ; for Hatfield didn't like him, because he h
too much influence with the common people, and I
cause he was not sufiiciently tractable and submissi
to hifai, and for some: other unpardonable sins — I doi
know what. But. now I pjositively must go and drei
The second bell will ring directly, and if I come to dinii
in this guise I shall never hear the end of it from Lsk
Ashby. It's a strange . thing one can't be mistress
one's own hotisfel Just ring the bell, and I'll send f
wjr mBiid, and i tell them to. get'you soioe tea* On
^^y^ c^ that intolerable vmmasi-^^^^'
'^'Wh < if* Xourmaid?.': . > —
AGNES GREY.
^_ " No ; my mother-in-law. And my unfortunate n
^^^ take ! Instead of letting her take herself off to sc
" ^^ other house, as she offered to do when I married, I j
^^^ fool enough to ask her to hve here still, and direct
^ affairs of the house for me, because, in the first pk
^ I hoped we should spend the greater part of the yeai
™ town, and in the second place, being so young and
experienced, I was frightened at the idea of havinj
P houseful of servants to manage, and dinners to ore
^ and parties to entertain, and all the rest of it, am
'''thought she might assist me with her experience — ^ne
dreaming she would prove a usurper, a tyrant, an incut
. a spy, and everything else that's detestable. I wish
P was dead ! *'
^ She then turned to give her orders to the footm
^- -who had been standing bolt upright within the door
the last half minute, and had heard the latter part
^ her animadversions, and, of course, made his own ref
,, tions upon them, notwithstanding the inflexible, woo(
countenance he thought proper to preserve in the drj
. > ing-room. On my remarking afterwards that he m
^ have heard her, she repUed, —
^; " Oh, no matter ! I never care about the footmt
- they're mere automatons. It's nothing to them w!
^ their superiors say or do ; they won't dare to repeat
5 And as to what they think — if the3r presume to think
* all — of course nobody cares for i:hat. It would b(
. pretty thing indeed if we were to be tongue-tied by i
? servants. "
^'So saying, she ran off to make her h^isty toilet, leav
^ me to pilot my way back to my sitting-room, where,
* due time, I was served with a cup of tea. After tha
^ sat musing on Lady Ashby's past and present conditi
^ and on what little information I had obtained respect
5 Mr. Weston, and the small chance there was of e
f I seeing or hearing anything more of him throu^kcwl -
'■'quiet drab-coJour life, which hencelotl\v « > ^^tcv^^ ^-^
no alternative between positive rainy dsi " ^^ ^^^ ^^
dull gray clouds without downiaW. M \eivg^iXv, \x^
174 AGNES GREY.
I began to weary of my thoughts, and to wish I k
where to find the library my hostess had spoken of,
to wonder whether I was to remain there doing not]
till bedtime.
As I was not rich enough to possess a watch, I c <
not tell how time was passing, except by observing
slowly lengthening shadows from the window, wl
presented a side view, including a comer of the p
a clump of trees, whose topmost branches had l
colonized by an innumerable company of noisy ro
and a high wall with a massive wooden gate, no dc
communicating with the stable-yard, as a broad carrij
road swept up to it from the park. The shadow of
wall soon took possession of the whole of the grounc
far as I could see, forcing the golden sunlight to ret
inch by inch, and at last take refuge in the very i
of the trees. Ere long even they were left in shado
the shadow of the distant hills, or of the earth its
and in S5nnpathy for the busy citizens of the rooker
regretted to see their habitation, so lately bathed
glorious light, reduced to the sombre, workaday
of the lower world, or of my own world within. F <
moment such birds as soared above the rest might
receive the lustre on their wings, which imparted
their sable plumage the hue and brilliance of deep
gold. At last that too departed. Twilight came st
ing on ; the rooks became more quiet ; I became n
weary, and wished I were going home to-morrow,
length it grew dark, and I was thinking of ringing f(
candle, and betaking myself to bed, when my hos
appeared, with many apologies for having neglected
so long, and laying all the blame upon that " nasty
woman, " as she called her mother-in-law.
" If I didn't sit with her in the drawing-room while
Thomas is taking his wine, " said she, " she would ne
forgive me; and then, if I leave the room the inst
lie comes — as I have done once ot Wiee—- M Ss^ ^h
pardonable offence against her dear TYvomas. S > ve t >
Solved such disrespect to fcer husband \ an^asioit
AGNES GREY. I.7S
rives never think of that nowadays, she supposes,
lings were different in her time. As if there was
)od to be done by staying in the room, when he
othing but grumble and scold when he's in a bad
u " , talk disgusting nonsense when he's in a good
id go to sleep on the sofa when he's too stupid for
which is most frequently the case now, when he
thing to do but to sot over his wine. "
it could you not try to occupy his mind with some-
better, and engage him to give up such habits ?
u-e you have powers of persuasion and qualifica-
or amusing a gentleman which many ladies would
i to possess. "
id so you think I would lay myself out for his
ment ! No ; that's not my idea of a wife. It's
sband's part to please the wife, not hers to please
and if he isn't satisfied with her as she is, and
ul to possess her too, he isn't worthy of her —
all. And as for persuasion, I assure you I shan't
3 myself with that. I've enough to do to bear
im as he is, without attempting to work a reform,
m sorry I left you so long alone. Miss Grey. How
'ou passed the time ? "
liefiy in watching the rooks. "
ircy I how dull you must have been ! I really must
^ou the Ubrary ; and you must ring for everjrthing
ant, just as you would in an inn, and make your-
►mfortable. I have selfish reasons for wishing to
you happy, because I want you to stay with me,
3t fulfil your horrid threat of running away in a
• two. "
ell, don't let me keep you out of the drawing-room
nger to-night, for at present I am tired, and wish
to bed. "
1/6 AGNES GREY.
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE PARK.
I CAME down a little before eight next morning, as
itijew by the striking of a distant clock. There was n
appearance of breakfast. I waited above an hour befor
it c:.'e, still vainly longing for access to the library
and aicer that lonely repast was concluded, I waite
again about an hour and a half in great suspense and dis
comfort imcertain what to do. At length Lady Ashb;
came to bid me good-morning. She informed n:ie sfai
had only ju c breakfasted, and now wanted me to tai
an early v. xlk with her in the park. She asked hoi
long I ha i been up, and on receiving my answer ex
pressed the deepest regret, and again promised to sh < M
me the library. I suggested she had better do so at once
and then there would be no further trouble either wid
remembering or forgetting. She complied, on conditioi
that I would not think of reading, or bothering with tb
books now ; for she wanted to show me the gardens, anc
take a walk in the park with me, before it became toe
hot for enjoyment — which, indeed, was nearly the caa
already. Of course I readily assented, and we took oiii
walk accordingly.
As we were strolling in the park, talking of what nq
companion had seen and heard during her travellinj
experience, a gentleman on horseback rode up anc
passed us. As he turned, in passing, and stared me fol
in the face, I had a good opportunity of seeing what hi
was like. He was tall, thin, and wasted, wiiJ^ a slighl
stoop in the shoulders, a pale face, but somewhat blotchj
and disagreeably red about the eyehds, plain features,
and a general appearance of languor and flatness, re-
lieved by a sinister expression in the mouth and the duD,
soulless eyes.
, "'/ detest that man! " wliispeted " LaA-^ k^c^^,^
> Jtter emphasis, as he slowly trotted \37.
AGNES GREY, 1 77
Who is it ?''I asked, unwilling to suppose that she
lould so speak of her husband.
*'Sir Thomas Ashby, " she rephed, with dreary com-
?sure,
*'And do you detest him, Miss Murray?*'said I, for
was too much shocked to remember her name at the
oment.
'* Yes, I do, Miss Grey, and despise him too ; and
you knew him you would not blame me/'
* * But you knew what he was before you mairied him/*
'* No ; I only thought so, I did not half know him
ally, I know you warned me against it, and I wish
had listened to you ; but it's too late to regret that
3W- And besides^ mamma ought to have known better
lan either of us, and she never said anything against
— ^uite the contrary. And then I thought he adored
le, and would let me have my own way. He did pre-
snd to do so at first, but now he does not care a bit
Dout me. Yet I should not care for that. He might
> as he pleased, if I might only be free to amuse myself
id to stay in London, or have a few friends down here.
Tit he mill do as he pleases, and I must be a prisoner
id a slave. The moment he saw I could enjoy myself
ithout him, and that others knew my value better than
imself, the selfish WTetch began to accuse me of coquetry
id extravagance, and to abuse Harry Meltham^ whose
loes he was not worthy to clean. And then he must
eeds have me down in the country, to lead the life of a
tm, lest I should dishonour him or bring him to ruiU;
-as if he had not been ten times worse evei " y way, with
is betting-hook, and his gaming-table, and his opera
iris, and his Lady This and Mrs, That — yes, and his
ottles of wine, and glasses of brandy and water too !
»h, I would give ten thousand worlds to be Miss Murray
gain I It is too bad to feel life, health, and beauty wast-
\g away, unfelt and unenjoyed, fot ^XiJ^ ?l \stoX & -a;
bat J " excMmed she, fairly buTstm^ mlo l^-a^x^ " vcv * < ^d
ttemess of her vexation.
Of course I pitied her exoeedmg\^, as ^^ " ^^^
178 AGNES GREY.
false idea of happiness and disregard of duty as
wretched partner with whom her fate was linl
said what I could to comfort her, and offere
counsels as I thought she most required — advisi]
first, by gentle reasoning, by kindness, example, a
suasion, to try to ameliorate her husband ; an(
when she had done all she could, if she still foui
incorrigible, to endeavour to abstract herself from
to wrap herself up in her own integrity, and trout
self as little about him as possible, I exhorted
seek consolation in doing her duty to God and n
put her trust in Heaven, and solace herself with t
and nurture of her little daughter, assuring her she
be amply rewarded by witnessing its progress in si
and wisdom, and receiving its genuine affection.
" But I can't devote myself entirely to a child
she. *'It may die — ^which is not at all improbab
" But, with care, many a delicate infant has 1
a strong man or woman. "
" But it may grow so intolerably Hke its fath(
I shall hate it. "
" That is not likely. It is a little girl, and s
resembles its mother. "
'* No matter ; I should Hke it better if it were a
only that its father will leave it no inheritance 1
can possibly squander away. What pleasure can
in seeing a girl grow up to eclipse me, and enjo]
pleasures that I am for eyer debarred from ? Bi
posing I could be so generous as to take delight i
still it is only a child ; and I can't centre all m};
in a child. That is only one degree better than d(
oneself to a dog. And as for dl the wisdom anc
ness you have been trying to instil into me, tha
very right and proper, I dare say, and if I wen
twenty years older I might fructify by it ; but
must enjoy themselves when they are young,
others won't let them, why, they mustYi'a.^fc M^^ewv
''The best way to enjoy yourseli \s to do v^Y^aX
^d hate nobody. The end oi reWgioti *\?» tio\.
AGNES GREY, 1 79
)w to die, but how to live ; and the earlier you be-
! wise and good the more of happiness you secure,
now, Lady Ashby, I have one more piece of advice
fer you, which is, that you will not make an enemy
)ur mother-in-law. Don't get into the way of hold-
ler at arm's length and regarding her with jealous
ust. I never saw her, but I have heard good as
as evil respecting her, and I imagine that, though^
and haughty in her general demeanour, and even
ting in her requirements, she has strong affections
hose who can reach them ; and though so blindly
:hed to her son, she is not without good principles,
capable of hearing reason. If you would but con-
;e her a little, and adopt a friendly, open manner,.
3ven confide your grievances to her — real grievances,
as you have a right to complain of — it is my firm
f that she would in time become your faithful
i, and a comfort and support to you, instead of the
Dus you describe her. "
it I fear my advice had little effect upon the un-
nate young lady ; and finding I could render my-
so Httle serviceable, my residence at Ashby Park
me doubly painful. But still I must stay out that
and the following one, as I had promised to do,
gh, resisting all entreaties and inducements to pro-
my visit further, I insisted upon departing the next
ling, affirming that my mother would be lonely
Dut me, and that she impatiently expected my re-
Nevertheless, it was with a heavy heart that I
adieu to poor Lady Ashby, and left her in her
:ely home. It was no slight additional proof of her
.ppiness that she should so cling to the consolation
ly presence, and earnestly desire the company of
whose general tastes and ideas were so little con-
d to her own — whom she had completely forgotten
^x hours of prosperity, and whose presence n^csvak^J^
ither a nuisance than a pleasviie, \i €tL < b c^vj^.^^ " *^
half her heart's desire.
1 8b AGNES GREY.
CHAPTER XXIV.
THE SANDS.
Our school was not situated in the heart of the towi
On entering A from the north-west there is a ro
of respectable-looking houses on each side of the broa <
white road, with narrow slips of garden-ground befoi
them, Venetian blinds to the windows, and a flight (
steps leading to each trim brass-handled door. In oi
of the largest of these habitations dwelt my mother an
I, with such young ladies as our friends and the publ
chose to commit to our charge. Consequently we wei
a considerable distance from the sea, and divided froi
it by a labjrinth of streets and houses. But the sc
was my delight, and I would often gladly pierce the to\is
to obtain the pleasure of a walk beside it, whether wit
the pupils, or alone with my mother during the vacation
It was delightful to me at all times and seasons, bi
especially in the wild commotion of a rough sea-breea
and in the brilliant freshness of a summer morning.
I awoke early on the third morning after my return fra
Ashby Park. The sun was shining through the blinc
and I thought how pleasant it would be to pass throng
the quiet town and take a solitary ramble on the sand
while half the world was in bed. I was not long i
forming the resolution nor slow to act upon it. C
course I would not disturb my mother, so I stole noise
lessly downstairs, and quietly unfastened the door,
was dressed and out when the church clock struck'
quarter to six. There was a feeling of freshness am
vigour in the very streets, and when I got free of th
town, when my foot was on the sands and my face to
wards the broad, bright bay, no language can describ
the effect of the deep, clear azure of the sky and ocean
t/ie blight morning sunshine on the semicircular barrie
of cragi^ cliffs surmounted by greexv, swd\vw^ bills, an(
on the s-nooth, wide sands, atvd t\v & \o^ xoO«s» ool ]
^^, looking, vnth their clothing oi v^ee^ ^ > ii^ mo^ & ^'i
AGNES GREY. l8l
:le grass-grown islands, and, above all, on the bril-
nt, sparkling waves. And then the unspeakable purity
i freshness of the air ! There was just enough heat
enhance the value of the breeze, and just enough wind
keep the whole sea in motion, to make the waves
ne bounding to the shore, foaming and sparkling, as
ivild with glee. Nothing else was stirring ; no living
ature was visible besides myself. My footsteps were
5 first to press the firm, unbroken sands. Nothing
•ore had trampled them since last night's flowing tide
1 obliterated the deepest marks of yesterday, and left
fair and even, except where the subsiding water had
b behind it the traces of dimpled pools and Uttle
ining streams.
Refreshed, deUghted, invigorated, I walked along, for-
:ting all my cares, feeling as if I had wings to my feet,
i could go at least forty miles without fatigue, and
Deriencing a sense of exhilaration to which I had been
entire stranger since the days of early youth. About
f-past six, however, the grooms began to come down
air their masters'horses — first one, and then another,
there were some dozen horses and five or six riders,
t that need not trouble me, for they would not come
far as the low rocks which I was now approaching,
len I had reached these, and walked over the moist,
5pery seaweed (at the risk of floundering into one of
5 numerous pools of clear, salt water that lay between
*m) to a little mossy promontory with the sea splash-
; round it, I looked back again to see. who next was
rring. Still there were only the early groom^s with
nr horses, and one gentleman with a little dark speck
a dog running before him, and one water-cart coming
t of the town to get water for the baths. In another
nute or two the distant bathing-machines would begin
move, and then the elderly gentlemen of regular
bits, and sober Quaker ladies, would be coming tc*
:e their salutary morning walks. IBul Ytfy^^N^-t/xsv-
esting such a scene might be, 1 co > 3\^ xvcA. ^n'^csX. Vc
less it, for the sun and the sea so dazzXfe^'ck^ ^^ " ^
l82 AGNES GREY.
in that direction that I could but afford one gizmo
and then I turned again to deUght myself with the sig
and the sound of the sea dashing against my promo
tory, with no prodigious force, for the swell was brofc
by the tangled seaweed and the unseen rocks beneat]
otherwise I should soon have been deluged with spra
But the tide was coming in ; the water was rising ; t
gulfs and lakes were filHng ; the straits were widenin
It was time to seek some safer footing ; so I walke
skipped, and stumbled back to the smooth, wide sane
and resolved to proceed to a certain bold projection
the cliffs, and then return.
Presently I heard a snuffling sound behind me, a]
then a dog came frisking and wriggling to my feet,
was my own Snap — the little, dark, wire-haired terrie:
When I spoke his name he leapt up in my face and yelli
for joy. Almost as much delighted as himself, I caug:
the little creature in my arms, and kissed him repeate < 5
But how came he to be there ? He could not ha^
dropped from the sky or come all that way alone,
must be either his master, the rat-catcher, or someboc
else that had brought him. So, repressing my extrav
fint caresses, and endeavouring to repress his likewis
looked round, and beheld — ^Mr. Weston !
" Your dog remembers you well. Miss Grey, " said h
warmly grasping the hand I offered him without cleaii
knowing what I was about. " You rise early.'*
''Not often so early as this, " I replied, with ama
ing composure, considering all the circumstances of ti
case.
" How far do you purpose to extend your walk ? "
" I was thinking of returning. It must be almcx
time, I think. "
He consulted his watch — a gold one now — and tol
me it was only five minutes past seven.
''But doubtless you have had a long enough walk,
said he, turning towards the tov/tv, to vf\\\e\\ I now pn
ceeded leisurely to retrace m^v steps •; ^xA " W ^ &
^ > eside me.
AGNES GREY. ]
^.'* In what part of the town do you Hve ? " asked
|r:, *'I never could discover. "
^ Never could discover I Had he endeavoured to do
t- then ? I told him the place of our abode. He asl
^ how we prospered in our affairs. I told him we w
-2- doing very well — that we had had a considerable ad
^ tion to our pupils after the Christmas vacation, and
jT pected a still further increase at the close of this.
^^ " You must be an accomplished instructor, " he <
n^ served.
J. ** No, it is my mother, " I replied, " She mana,
things so well, and is so active, and clever, £
£ kind. "
'* I should like to know your mother. Will you int
^ duce me to her some time, if I call ? "
^ " Yes, willmgly. "
^ " And will you allow me the privilege of an old frie
^ of looking in upon you now and then ? "
'^ ** Yes, if I suppose so. "
This was a very foolish answer, but the truth was
yji considered that I had no right to invite any one to
!^ mother's house without her knowledge ; and if I ]
^ said, " Yes, if my mother does not object, " it wo
appear as if by his question I imderstood more than i
y, expected. So, supposing she would not, I added,
J suppose so. " But of course I should have said sbi
thing more sensible and more polite, if I had had
^ wits about me. We continued our walk for a minute
$il6nce, which, however, was shortly reheved (no sn
relief to me) by Mr. Weston commenting upon
brightness of the morning and the beauty of the ti
and then upon the advantages A possessed d
many other fashionable places of resort.
*'You don't ask what brings me to A , " said
" You can't suppose I'm rich enough to come for
XL; own pleasure. "
• " I heard you had left Horton. "
p " You didn't hear, then, that 1 \iaA ep\. ^^X^sr >
: t
tc
1 84 AGNES GREY.
F was a village about two miles distant from
A .
" No, " said I. " We live so completely out of the
world, even here, that news seldom reaches me through
any quarter, except through the medium of the
Gazette. But I hope you hke your new parish, and that
I may congratulate you on the acquisition,''
" I expect to hke my parish better a year or two
hence, when I have worked certain reforms I have set
my heart upon — or, at least, progressed some steps to-
wards such an achievement. But you may congratulate
me now, for I find it very agreeable to have a parish aD
to myself, with nobody to interfere with me, to thwart
my plans or cripple my exertions ; and besides, I have
a respectable house'in a rather pleasant neighbourhood,
and three hundred poimds a year ; and, in fact, I have
nothing but solitude to complain of, and nothing but
a companion to wish for. "
He looked at me as he concluded, and the flash of his
dark eyes seemed to set my face on fire, greatly to my
own discomfiture — for to evince confusion at such a
juncture was intolerable. I made an effort, therefore,
to remedy the evil, and disclaim all personal application
of the remark by a hasty, ill-expressed reply to the effect
that, if he waited till he was well known in the neigh-
bourhood, he might have numerous opportunities far
supplying his want among the residents of F and
its vicinity, or the visitors of A , if he required so
ample a choice, not considering the compliment implied
by such an assertion till his answer made me aware of it.
" I am not so presumptuous as to believe that, " said
he,'* though you tell it me ; but if it were so, I am rather
particular in my notions of a companion for life, and
perhaps I might not find one to suit me among the ladies
you mention. "
" If you require perfection, you never will. "
''/ do not I have no right to re < \uire it, as being so
ar from perfect myself. "
J^f^re the conversation was iT > teTT\]LT > ted \y^J ^ ^waXss
AGNES GREY. 1 85
rt lumbering past us, for we were now come to the
isy part of the sands ; and for the next eight or ten
inutes, between carts and horses, and asses, and men,
ere was httle room for social intercourse till we had
med our backs upon the sea, and began to ascend the
ecipitous road leading into the town. Here my com-
Liiion offered me his arm, which I accepted, though
)t with the intention of using it as a support.
" You don't often come on to the sands, I think, "
id he, " for I have walked there many times, both
oming and evening, since I came, and never seen you
1 now ; and severd times, in passing through the town,
o, I have looked about for your school, but I did not
ink of the Road ; and once or twice I made in-
liries, but without obtaining the requisite informa-
> n. "
When we had surmounted the acclivity I was about
withdraw my arm from his, but by a slight tightening
the elbow was tacitly informed that such was not his
ill, and accordingly desisted. Discoursing on different
ibjects, we entered the town, and passed through several
reets. I saw that he was going out of his way to accom-
my me, notwithstanding the long walk that was yet
;fore him, and fearing that he might be inconveniencing
mself from motives of politeness, I observed, —
** I fear I am taking you out of your way, Mr. Weston.
believe the road to F lies quite in another direc-
Dn.
'* I'll leave you at the end of the next street, " said he.
'* And when will you come to see mamma ? "
" To-morrow, God willing. "
The end of the next street was nearly the conclusion
: my journey. He stopped there, however; bade me
3od-moming, and called Snap, who seemed a little
Dubtful whether to follow his old mistress or his new
laster, but trotted away upon being sum.ma^'^^ \s^ *v!sifc
iter.
''/ won't offer to restore him to ^ovu, " ^^ss Cit^'^-
cIMr. Weston, smiling,'* because 1 VO^e\vvo\r
1 86 AGNES GREY*
" Oh, I don't want him, " replied I, " now ths
has a good master. I'm quite satisfied. "
" You take it for granted that 1 am b. good
then ? "
. The man and the dog departed, and I returned h
full of gratitude to Heaven for so much bliss, and ]
ing that my hopes might not again be crushed.
CHAPTER XXV.
CONCLUSION,
" Well, Agnes, you must not take such long walks i
before breakfast, " said my mother, observing tl:
drank an extra cup of coffee and ate nothing, pie;
the heat of the weather and the fatigue of my long
as an excuse. I certainly did feel feverish, and
too.
" You always do things by extremeis. Now, if yot
taken a short walk every morning, and would con
to do so, it would do you good. "
" WeU, mamma, I will. "
" But this is worse than lying in bed or bending
your books. You have quite put yourself into a f e
" I won't do it again,V said I.
I was racking my brains with thinking how to tel
about Mr. Weston, for she must know he was co
to-morrow. However, I waited till the breakfast t:
were removed, and I was more calm and cool ; and
having sat down to my drawing, I began, —
" I met an old friend on the sands to-day, mamm;
" An old friend ! Who could it be ? "
" Two old friends, indeed. One was a dog. "
then I reminded her of Snap, whose history I ha
counted before, and related the incident of his su
appearance and remarkable recogmtioiv. " And
otiier, " continued L " was Mr. Weston, \^e cax;
Norton. "
AGNES GREY. 1 87
:. Weston ! I never heard of him before. "
iS, you have. I've mentioned him several times,
ve ; but you don't remember. "
re heard you speak of Mr. Hatfield. "
:. Hatfield was the rector, and Mr. Weston the
. I used to mention him sometimes in contra-
tion to Mr. Hatfield, as being a more efficient
nan. However, he was on the sands this morning
le dog — he had bought it, I suppose, from the rat-
r ; and he knew me as well as it did — probably
h its means. And I had a little conversation
im, in the course of which, as he asked about our
I was led to say something about you and your
nanagement ; and he said he should Hke to know
nd asked if I would introduce him to you, if he
take the liberty of calling to-morrow ; so I said
d. Was I right? "
course. What kind of a man is he ? "
very respectable man, I think ; but you will see
> -morrow. He is the new vicar of F , and as
only been there a few weeks, I. suppose he has
10 friends yet, and wants a Httle society. "
morrow came. What a fever of anxiety and ex- .
ion I was in from breakfast till noon — at which
e made his appearance ! Having introduced him
mother, I took my work to the window, and sat
to await the result of the interview. They got on
lely well together, greatly to my satisfaction, for
felt very anxious about what my mother would
of him. He did not stay long that time ; but
le rose to take leave, she said she should be happy
him whenever he might find it convenient to call
and when he was gone I was gratified by hearing
^—
ell, I think he's a very sensible man. But why did
back there, Agnes, " she added, " and talk so little^ "
5cause you talked so well, maTOnv'a. A " 5^^ " ^^^^ ^'^^^
d no assistance from me ; aivA. X^e^v^^^-* ^^^ ^^
sitor, not mine.'*
1 88 AGNES GREY.
After that he often called upon us several times in ti
course of a week. He generally addressed most of 1
conversation to my mother ; and no wonder, for si
cotdd converse. I almost envied the unfettered, vigoroi
fluency of her discourse, and the strong sense evina
by everything she said ; and yet I did not, for thoug
I occasionally regretted my own deficiencies for his saki
it gave me very great pleasure to sit and hear the tw
beings I loved and honoured above every one else in th
world discoursing together so amicably, so wisely, am
so well. I was not always silent, however, nor was
at all neglected. I was quite as much noticed as
would wish to be. There was no lack of kind words aiu
kinder looks, no end of deUcate attentions, too fine aa
subtle to be grasped by words, and therefore indescrib
able, but deeply felt at heart.
Ceremony was quickly dropped between us. Me
Weston came as an expected guest, welcome at all time?
and never deranging the economy of our household affairs
He even called me " Agnes. " The name had bed
timidly spoken at first, but finding it gave no ofEence i
any quarter, he seemed greatly to prefer that appell*
tion to " Miss Grey,'* and so did I. How tedious dsi
gloomy were those days in which he did not cornel
And yet not miserable ; for I had still the remembranoi
of the last visit and the hope of the next to cheer me
But when two or three days pass, i without my seeni(
him, I certainly felt very anxi(^us — absurdly, unreason
ably so ; for of course he had liis own business and th
affairs of his parish to attend to. And I dreaded th
close of the holidays, when my business also would begin
and I should be sometimes unable to see him, and some
times, when my mother was in the schoolroom, oblige!
to be with him alone — a position I did not at all dieSn
in the house, though to meet him out of-dbbn, and val
beside him, had proved by no tofias & tiuuMfabiilUd ^^ -i'
One evening, however, mtt»\BJ*
Ae arrived, unexpectedly, io^
blinder-shower during
AGNES GREY. I
stroyed my hopes of seeing him that day ; but now t
.■ storm was over, and the sun was shining brightly.
** A beautiful evening, Mrs. Grey,'* said he as
:. entered. — ** Agnes, I want you to take a walk with i
:: to . " (He named a certain part of the coast — a be
:: hill on the land side, and towards the sea a steep pre
i pice, from the summit of which a glorious view is to
7* had.) " The rain has laid the dust, and cooled a
L cleared the air, and the prospect will be magnificei
L'Will you come ?'*
5 ** Can I go, mamma ? "
5 " Yes; to be sure. "
=: I went to get ready, and was down again in a few m
i: utes, though, of course, I took a little more pains wi
i my attire than if I had merely been going out on soi
shopping expedition alone. The thunder-shower h
\ certainly had a most beneficial effect upon the weath
y. and the evening was most delightful. Mr. Weston woi
r have me to take his arm. He said little during our passa
e: through the crowded streets, but walked very fast, a
M appeared grave and abstracted. I wondered what v
I the matter, and felt an indefinite dread that somethi
r unpleasant was on his mind, and vague surmises cc
y ceming what it might be troubled me not a little, a
1 made me grave and silent enough. But these fantas
r vanished upon reaching the quiet outskirts of the tow
: for as soon as we came within sight of the venerable <
■. church, and the hill, with the deep blue sea beyo
i it, I found my companion was cheerful enough.
" I'm afraid I've been walking too fast for you, Agnei
: said he. " In my impatience to be rid of the town,
forgot to consult your convenience ; but now we'U wj
as slowly as you please. I see, by those light clouds
the west, there will be a brilliant sunset, and we sh
be in time to witness its effect upon the sea, at the m <
moderate rate of progression. "
When we had got about halfway up \5[ve\v^,^^ ^^'''
silence again, which, as usual, he > 3V3ls \\v^ ivx^X. \.o^i " ^^
" My house is desolate yet, Miss Gie^jT ^^ ^'^
IQO AGNES GREY.
observed, " and I am acquainted now with all the ladi
in my parish, and several in this town too, and mai
others I know by sight and report, but not one of the
will suit me for a companion. In fact, there is only oi
person in the world that will, and that is yourself, ai
I want to know your decision.*'
" Are you in earnest, Mr. Weston ? "
" In earnest ! How could you think I should jest o
such a subject ? "
He laid his hand on mine that rested on his arm. Hi
must have felt it tremble, but it was no great matter now
" I hope I have not been too precipitate, " he said in'<
serious tone. ** You must have known that it was not
my way to flatter and talk soft nonsense, or even tc
speak the admiration that I felt, and that a single word
or glance of mine meant more than the honeyed phrases
and fervent protestations of most other men. "
I said something about not liking to leave my mother,
and doing nothing without her consent.
" I settled everything with Mrs. Grey while you wen
putting on your bonnet, " replied he. ** She said I mighl
have her consent if I could obtain yours ; and I askec
her, in case I should be so happy, to come and Hve witl
us, for I was sure you would like it better. But she re
fused, saying she could now afford to employ an assistant
and would continue the school till she could purchase ai
annuity sufficient to maintain her in comfortable lodgings
and meantime she would spend her vacations altei
nately with us and your sister, and should be quite con
tented if you were happy. And so now I have overrule
your objections on her account. Have you any other ?'
" No— none. "
" You love me, then ? " said he, fervently pressing me
hand.
" Yes. " .:
« « « *
^erelpause. My " AsJil'toN^ewiBDjii
these p ^T'^es buv ^ cfi»2A %o ^j^'
years \\ co V^Afloso^^
POEMS
POEMS
p
oems
By
The Bronte Sisters
i
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London^ Edinburgh^ and New York
^905
CONTENTS.
.^Vll
>
Ry CURRER BELL.
s Wifis Dreahi, ... ... .„ .
I
'^05^
.. 6
Vife's Will,
.. 13
Vood,
.. IS
?J,
.. 19
t,
.. 27
••• ...'... ;
.. 38
etter, ...
.. 39
> ••• ... ... ...
.. 42
'timentf
.. 43
^acher^s Monologue,
.. 45
«,
.. 47
ence.
.. 49
ng Solace,
.. 51
IS,
.. 52
ling and Wishing,
.. 53
Thou Sleepest, ...
.. 54
^i >
.. 56
^yy
.. 57
T Stores,
.. 59
fissionary.
.. 6:
BY ELLIS BELL,
and Despondency,
66
firanr^,
3EMS BY CURRER BELL.
PILATE'S WIFE'S DREAM.
I've (quenched my lamp — I struck it in that start
Which every Hmb convulsed ; I heard it fall —
The crash blent with ray sleep ; I saw depart
Its light, even as I woke, on yonder wall ;
Over against my bed there shone a gleam
Strange, faint, and mingling also with my dream.
It sank, and I am wrapt in utter gloom.
How far is night advanced, and when will day
Retinge the dusk and livid air with bloom,
And fill this void with warm, creative ray ?
Would I could sleep again till, clear and red,
Morning shall on the moxmtain-tops be spread !
I'd call my women, but to break their sleep.
Because my own is broken, were imjust.
They've wrought all day, and well-earned slumbers
steep
Their labours in forgetfulness, I trust.
Let me my feverish watch with patience bear,
Thankful that none with me its sufferings share.
Yet, oh for light ! one ray would tranquillize
My nerves, my pulses, more than effort can ;
1*11 draw my curtain and consult the sVL\e & .
These trembling stars at dead oi m^lVi*^^'^^^^
Wild, restless, strange, yet cantvot " be xtvoxe ^x^'^^^
rban this my couch, shared by a TvaTCveXes*^ \e»x.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
All black — one great cloud, drawn from east to west,
Conceals the heavens, but there are lights below ;
Torches burn in Jerusalem, and cast
On yonder stony mount a lurid glow.
1 see men stationed there, and gleaming spears ;
A sound, too, from afar invades my ears.
Dull, measured strokes of axe and hammer ring
From street to street, not loud, but through the night
Distinctly heard, and some strange spectral thing
Is now upreared ; and fixed against the light
Of the pale lamps, defined upon that sky
It stands up like a column, straight and high.
I see it aU — I know the dusky sign —
A cross on Calvary, which Jews uprear
While Romans watch ; and when the dawn shall shine
Pilate, to judge the victim, will appear,
Pass sentence, yield Him up to crucify ;
And on that cross the spotless Christ must die.
Dreams, then, are true — ^for thus my vision ran.
Surely some oracle has been with me ;
The gods have chosen me to reveal their plan,
To warn an unjust judge of destiny.
I, slumbering, heard and saw ; awake, I know
Christ's coming death, and Pilate's life of woe.
I do not weep for Pilate. Who could prove
Regret for him whose cold and cruslung sway
No prayer can soften, no appeal can move ;
Who tramples hearts as others trample clay.
Yet with a faltering, an uncertain tread,
That might stir up reprisal in the dead : i
Jporced to sit by his side and see his deeds ; |
Forced to behold that visage Yvov]ii b-^ \vo\ir^ i
In whose gaunt lines the abhoiteul gaxet x^a;^
A triple hist of gold, and blood, ^lid^NN^—
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 3
A soul whom motives fierce, yet abject, urge —
Rome's servile slave, and Judah's tyrant scourge ?
How can I love, or mourn, or pity him —
I who so long my fettered hands have wrung,
I who for grief have wept my eyesight dim,
Because, while life for me was bright and young,
He robbed my youth, he quenched my life's fair ray,
He crushed my mind, and did my freedom slay ?
And at this hour, although I be his wife.
He has no more of tenderness from me
Than any other wretch of guilty life —
Less, for I know his household privacy,
I see him as he is, without a screen ;
And, by the gods, my soul abhors his mien !
Has he not sought my presence, dyed in blood —
Innocent, righteous blood, shed shamelessly ?
And have I not his red salute withstood ?
Ay, when, as erst, he plunged all Galilee
In dark bereavement, in affliction sore.
Mingling their very offerings with their gore.
Then came he — ^in his eyes a serpent smile.
Upon his lips some false, endearing word.
And through the streets of Salem clanged the while
His slaughtering, hacking, sacrilegious sword ;
And I, to see a man cause men such woe,
Trembled with ire I did not fear to show.
And now the envious Jewish priests have brought
Jesus — whom they in mockery call their king —
To have, by this grim power, their vengeance wrought,
By this mean reptile innocence to sting.
Oh, could I but the purposed doom avert,
And shield the blameless head from ciuel Vcq5\.\
Accessible is Pilate's heart to ieat,
Omens will shake hj^ so\i like aMtwrasv \^a^*
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Could he this night's appalHng vision hear,
This just man's bonds were loosed, his life were safe,
Unless that bitter priesthood should prevail.
And make even terror to their malice quail.
Yet if I tell the dream— But let me pause.
What dream ? Erewhile the characters were clear,
Graved on my brain ; at once some unknown cause
Has dimmed and razed the thoughts, which noMi
appear.
Like a vague remnant of some by-past scene —
Not what will be, but what, long since, has been.
I suffered many things. I heard foretold
A dreadful doom for Pilate, — ^lingering woes,
In far, barbarian climes, where mountains cold
Built up a solitude of trackless snows —
There he and grisly wolves prowled side by side —
There he lived famished — there, methought, he
died; I
But not of hunger, nor by malady.
I saw the snow around him stained with gore ;
I said I had no tears for such as he ;
And, lo ! my cheek is wet, mine eyes run o'er ;
I weep for mortal suffering, mortal guilt,
I weep the impious deed, the blood self -spilt.
More I recall not, yet the vision spread
Into a world remote, an age to come ;
And Still the illumined name of Jesus shed
A light, a clearness, through the unfolding gloom ;
And still I saw that sign, which now I see —
That cross on yonder brow of Calvary.
What is this Hebrew Christ ? To me unknown
Hi's lineage, doctrine, mission \ ^^t \vovf clear
Is God-like goodness in Yils aclvotvs ^\vcswcl\
How straight and stainless \s\vis\\ie'?.caxew:\
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. S
The ray of Deity that rests on Him
In my eyes makes Olympian glory dim.
The world advances ; Greek or Roman rite
Sufi & ces not the inquiring mind to stay.
The searching soul demands a purer light
To guide it on its upward, onward way.
Ashamed of sculptured gods, Religion turns
To where the unseen Jehovah's altar bums.
Our faith is rotten, all our rites defiled.
Our temples sullied, and, methinks, this man.
With his new ordinance, so wise and mild,
Is come, even as He says, the chaff to fan
And sever from the wheat ; but will His faith
Survive the terrors of to-morrow's death ?
* * * * *
I feel a firmer trust, a higher hope
Rise in my soul ; it dawns with dawning day.
Lo ! on the Temple's roof, on Moriah's slope
Appears at length that clear and crimson ray
Which I so wished for when shut in by night.
Oh, opening skies, I hail, I bless your light !
Part, clouds and shadows ! Glorious sun, appear !
Part, mental gloom ! Come, insight from on high !
Dusk dawn in heaven still strives with daylight clear,
The longing soul doth still uncertain sigh.
Oh ! to behold the truth, that sun divine.
How doth my bosom pant, my spirit pine !
This day Time travails with a mighty birth ;
This day Truth stoops from heaven and visits earth.
Ere night descends I shall more surely know
What guide to follow, in what path to go.
I wait in hope, I wait in solemn fear,
The oracle of God — the sole, true God — VoV^-ax:.^^
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
MEMENTOS.
Arranging long-locked drawers and shelves'
Of cabinets, shut up for years,
What a strange task we've set ourselves !
How still the lonely room appears !
How strange this mass of ancient treasures.
Mementos of past pains and pleasures ;
These volumes, clasped with costly stone.
With print all faded, gilding gone ;
These fans of leaves, from Indian trees ;
These crimson shells, from Indian seas ;
These tiny portraits, set in rings,
Once, doubtless, deemed such precious things —
Keepsakes bestowed by Love on Faith,
And worn till the receiver's death,
Now stored with cameos, china, shells.
In this old closet's dusty cells.
I scarcely think, for ten long years,
A hand has touched these relics old ;
And, coating each, slow-formed, appears
The growth of green and antique mould.
All in this house is mossing over ;
All is unused, and dim, and damp ;
Nor light nor warmth the rooms discover.
Bereft for years of fire and lamp.
The Sim sometimes in summer enters
The casements with reviving ray.
But the long rains of many winters
Moulder the very walls away.
And outside al\ is ivy, diw^tv^
To chinmey, lattice, ^^b\e ^^^ \
Scarcely one little xed xo^ s^xm^^
Through the green moea CMCLioxcfc\\s.^^^,
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Unscared the daw and starling nestle
Where the tall turret rises high,
And winds alone come near to rustle
The thick leaves where their cradles lie.
I sometimes think when, late at even,
I climb the stair reluctantly.
Some shape that should be well in heaven,
Or ill elsewhere, will pass by me*
I fear to see the very faces,
Familiar thirty years ago.
Even in the old accustomed places
Which look so cold and gloomy now.
I've come to close the window hither
At twilight, when the sun was down,
And fear my very soul would wither,
Lest something should be dimly shown.
Too much the buried form resembling
Of her who once was mistress here ;
Lest doubtful shade, or moonbeam trembling.
Might take her aspect, once so dear.
Hers was this chamber ; in her time
It seemed to me a pleasant room,
For then no cloud of grief or crime
Had cursed it with a settled gloom.
I had not seen death's image laid
In shroud and sheet, on yonder bed.
Before she married, she was blest —
Blest in her youth, blest in her worth ;
Her mind was calm, its sunny rest
Shone in her eyes more clear than mirth.
And when attired in rich array.
Light, lustrous hair about her " btow.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
She yonder sat, a kind of day
Lit up what seems so gloomy now.
These grim oak walls even then were grim ;
That old carved chair was. then antique ;
But what around looked dusk and dim
Served as a foil to her fresh cheek ;
Her neck and arms, of hue so fair, .
Eyes of unclouded, smihng hght ;
Her soft, and curled, and floating hair.
Gems and attire, as rainbow bright.
Reclined in yonder deep recess,
Ofttimes she would, at evening, lie
Watching the sun ; she seemed to bless
With happy glance the glorious sky.
She loved such scenes, and as she gazed
Her face evinced her spirit's mood ;
Beauty or grandeur ever raised
In her a deep-felt gratitude.
But of all lovely things she loved
A cloudless moon, on summer night.
Full oft have I impatience proved
To see how long her still delight
Would find a theme in reverie.
Out on the lawn, or where the trees
Let in the lustre fitfully,
As their boughs parted momently
To the soft, languid, summer breeze.
Alas that she should e'er have flung
Those pure though lonely joys away!
Deceived by false and guileful tongue,
She gave her hand, then suffered wrong ;
Oppressed, ill-used, she faded young,
And died of grief by slow decay.
Open that casket — ^look how bright
Those jewels flash upon the sight ;
The brilliants have not lost a i^.'^
Of lustre since her wedding da.;^.
But see, upon that pearly cbain.,
POEMS BY CURRER BELLl
How dim lies Time's discolouring stain !
I've seen that by her daughter worn ;
For, ere she died, a child was bom —
A child that ne'er its= mother knew,
That lone and almost friendless grew';
For, ever, when its step drew nigh.
Averted was the father's eye;
And then a life impure and wild
Made him a stranger to his child.
Absorbed in vice, he ^ little cared'■
On what she did or how she fared.
The love withheld she never sought ;
She grew uncherished, learnt untaught ;
To her the inward life of thought
Full soon was open laid.
I know not if her friendlessneiss • ■ ■ ■ .
Did sometimes; oh her spirit press.
But piadnt she never made. . . • ,
The booksshelves wer^ her darling treasure ;
She rarely seemed the tune to measure
While she could /read alone.
And she too loved the twihght wood,
And often, in her mother's mood,
Away to yonder hill would hie.
Like her, to watch the setting sun,
Or see the stars bom, one by one,
Out of the darkening sky.
Nor would she leave thit hill till night
Trembled from pde to pole with Hght
Even then, upon her homeward way,
Long, long her wandering steps delayed
To quit the sombre forest shadev
Through which her eerie pathWay lay.
You ask if she had beauty's grace h
I know not, but a nobler face
My eyes have seldom seen ;
A keen and fine intelligence^
And, better still, the'truest ^tvsft
Were in her speiaking mi^n.'-
ro POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
But bloom or lustre was there none ;
Only at moments fitful shone
An ardour in her eye
That kindled on her cheek a flush,
Warm as a red sky's passing blush.
And quick with energy.
Her speech, too, was not common speech :
No wish to shine, or aim to teach,
Was in. her. words displayed. =
She stil began with quiet sense,
But of t the force of^ eloquence
Catne to her lips in aid ;
Language and voice imconscious changed.
And thoughts,, in other words arranged,
Her fervid soul transfused
Into the hearts of those who heard,
And transient strength and ardour stirred
In minds to strength unused.
Yet in gay crowd or festal glare
Grave and retiring was her air ;
'Twas seldom, save with me alone.
That fire of feeling freely shone.
She loved. not awe's nor wonder's gaze.
Nor eveii iexaggerated praise.
Nor even notice, if too keen
The curious gazer searched her mien.
•Nature's own green expanse revealed
The world, the pleasures, she could prize.
On free hillside, in smmy field.
In quiet spots by woods concealed.
Grew wild and fresh her chosen joys ;
Yet Nature's feeUngs deeply lay
i.. In that endowed and youthful frame ;
Shrinedin her heart and hid from day.
They burned unseen with silent flame.
In youth's first isearch for mental light.
She Jived but to reflect .and featix ;
But soon her miad's loatxiie;!: ica^V
For strongec ^ask d^^ pwvt ai^dv^^^2ctv\
POEMS BY CURRER BELI* II
And stronger task did fate assign— :
Task that a giant's strength might strain —
To suffer long and ne'er repine,
Be cahn in frenzy, smile at pain.
Pale with the secret war of feeling,
Sustained with courage, mute,. yet high —
The wounds at which she bled revealing
Only by altered cheek and eye —
She bore in silence ; but when passicm
Surged in her soul with ceaseless foam.
The storm at last brought desolation.
And drove her exiled from her home.
And silent still, she straight assembled
The wrecks of strength her soul retained ;
For though the wasted body trembled,
The imconquered mind to quail disdained.
She crossed the sea ; now lone she wanders
By Seine's, or Rhine's, or Amo's flow :
Fain would I know if distance renders
ReHef or comfort to her woe.
Fain would I know if, henceforth, ever
These eyes shall read in hers again
That hght of love which faded never,'
Though dimmed so long with secret pain.
She will return, but cold and altered.
Like all whose hopes too soon depsii, ;
Like all on whom have beat, unsheltered.
The bitter blasts that blight the heart.
No more shall I behold her lying
Cahn on a pillow, smooth^ b^ Tftfe \ .
Vo more that sjririt, woro NVitYv ^^^C£a^ >
Will know the rest of inlancv.
12 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
If still the paths of lore she follow,
Twill be with tired and goaded will ;
She'll only toil the aching hollow,
The joyless blank of life to fiH.
And, oh ! full oft, quite spent and weary,
JHier hand will pause, heir head decline ;
That labour seems so hard ahd dreary
On which no ray of hope may shine.
Thus the pale blight of time and sorrow
Win shade with gray her soft, dark hair;
'J^hen comes the day that knows ho morrow,
And death succeeds to long despair.
§0 speaks experience, sage and hoary ;
I see it plairily, kndw it we|l,
J-ike one who, having redd a story,
pach incident therdn can tell. *
Toiich not that ring ;'twas his, the sire
Of that forsaken child ;
And nought his relict can inspire
S^ve memories, sin-defiied.'
I, whb sat by his wife's death-bed,
I, who his daughter lov^,
Cpuld almost curse thei guilty dead,
•'For woes tl^ - guiltless proved.
And hedy^n did curse : they found him laid,
Wheri crime f6r wrath " was ripe,
Cold,'with the suicidal blade
atitfehed in his desperate gripe:
Twas near- that long-^'defeerted hut
Whith in the wood ded^i^ \
Deati^^ tee, 9elf-wie\dedV " ^Aim < ^\ia^TO'Q.\.,
And lopped his d^ap»exAte da > js.
POEMS BY GURRER BELL.: IJ
You know the spot, where three black trees
Lift up their branches fell,
And moaning, ceaseless as the seas,
Still seem, in every passing breeze,
The deed of Wood to tell. / , ,
They named him mad, and laid his b0ne$
Where holier ashes lie ; . [i
Yet doubt not that his spirit groaro. ■..
In hell's eternity.
But, lo ! {night, closing o'er the earth,
Iniects our thoughts with gloom ;
Come, let us strive to rally mirth ,
Where glows a clear and traiiquaJ, hearth
In some more cheerful room. •
THE WIPE'S WILL.
Sit still ;. a word, a breath may break
(As light airs stir a sleeping lake).
The glassy calm that soothes my woe^ —
The sweet, the deep,'the full repose.
Oh, leave me not ! For ever be
Thus-^more than life itself to me !
'1 •
Yes, close beside thee let me kneel.
Give me thy hand, thlt'I may feel. "
The friend so true, so tried, so dear—
My heart's dfwn chosen-^indeed is heaf ;
And check me not ; this hour divine
Belongs to me — is. fully mine; ■-.. ■]
'Tis thy own hearth thob sitt'st beside^
After long absence, wandetmg^^m^'e.^
Ti$ thy own wife reldft'm ttma «;^^
A promise cleiaw of'stottrdess s^e & %'
14 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
For faith and true love light the rays
Which shine responsive to her gaze.
Ay, well that single tear niay fall ;
Ten thousand might mine eyes recall.
Which from their lids ran blinding fast,
In hours of grief, yet scarcely past ;
Well mayest thou speak of love to me,
For, oh, most truly I love thee !
Yet smile, for we are happy now.
Whence, then, that sadness On thy brow ?
What sayest thott >'* We must once again.
Ere long, be severed by the main ! "
I knew not this ; I deemed no tnore
Thy step would en* from Britain's'shore.
" Duty commands ! "'Tis true,'tis just ;
Thy slightest word I. wholly trust,
Nor by request, nor faintest sigh.
Would I to turn thy purpose try ;
But, William, hear my solemn vow-
Hear and confirm ! With thee I go. ;
" Distance and suffering, " didst thou. say ?
'* Danger by night and toil by day ? "
Oh, idle words and vain are these !
Hear me ! I cross with thee the seas.
Such risk as thou must meet and dare,
I, thy true wife, will duly share.
Passive at home I will not pine ;
Thy toils, thy perils shall be mine.
Grant thiis, and be Yvete^ilet p^\^
By a warm heart's devoled ^\^^
Tis granted. V/iav'tiQalY^e\e^^?^ > ^^^
Entered my soul \mmm^\eA.\ > ^asy^-
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. IS
Thanks, William, thanks ! Thy love has joy,
Pure, undefiled with base alloy.
'Tis not a passion false and blind
Inspires, enchains, absorb? my mind ;
Worthy, I feel, art thou to be ^
Loved with my perfect energy. " .
This evening now shall sweetly flow,
Lit by our clear fire's happy glow ; . >
And parting's peace-embittenng fear
Is warned our hearts to come not^pfear ;
For faith admits my souVs decree,'
In bliss or bale, to go with thee *!
THE WOOD.
But two mile^ more, and then We rest !
Well, there'is still an hour of day,
And long the brightness of the. west
Will light us on our devious way.
Sit then awhile here in this wood;
So total is the solitude, .'..''
We safely may delay.
These massive roots aiford a iseat
Which seems for weary travellers made.
There rest. Thfe mr is soft and S\(^et
In this sequestered forest glade,- •
And there are scents of Howers around,
The evening dew dr & ws from the gr6tind.
How soothingly they spread !
Yes ; I was tired, but not at heart. ,:
No ; that beats full of sweet content ;
For now I, have my hat^iral part
Of action with adventure biqnt — .
Cast lorih on the wide v/oi\^ ^\Xx ^!«^%
And all my once waste ,enecg^ . .
To weighty purpose \)exk\.,
l6 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
. Yet, sayst thou spies around us roam.
Our aims are termed conspiracy ;
Haply:, no more our English home
An anchorage for us may be ;
That there is risk our mutual blood
May redden in some lonely wood
The knife of treachery ?
Sayst thou that where we lodge each night,
In each lone farm, or lonelier hall
Of Norman peer, ere morning light
Suspicion must ss duly fall
As day returns — such vigilance
Presides and watches over France,
Such rigour governs all ?
I fear iiot, William. Dost thou fear ?
So that the knife does, not divide,
It may be ever hovering near.
I could not. tremble at thy side ; .
And strenuous love — like mine for thee —
Is buckler strong Against treachery.
And turns its stab aside.
I am resolved that thou shalt learn
To trust my strength as I trust thine ;
I am resolveid our souls shall bum
With equal, steady, mingling, shine.
Part of the fidd is conquered now—
Our lives in the sanpie channel flow.
Along the self-same line :
And while no groaning storm is heard,
Thou seem'st content it should be so ;
But soon as cotnes a wariiing word
Of danger, stiaigYvt ttim^ ^xi^\QV5s > \i > ^Qw
Bends ovet me a trvb\rrtv\ > d\ ^^^t.
As doubting ii my ^Nvets ate pa.^^
To ford ttie ft66ai & * > t^^-
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 1/
Know, then it is my spirit swells,
And drinks, with eager joy, the air •
Of freedom ; where at last it dwells
Chartered, a common task to share
With thee ; and then it stirs alert.
And pants to learn what menaced hurt
Demands for thee its care.
Remember, I have crossed the deep.
And stood with thee oi^ deck to gaze
On waves that rose in threatening heap,
While stagnant lay a heavy haze,
Dimly confusing sea with sky, •'
And baffling even the pilot's eye.
Intent to thread tiie maze
Of rocks on Bretagne's dangerous coast,
And find a. way to steer bur band
To the one point obscujre, which, lost, :
Flung us, as victims, otn the strand.
All elsewhere gleamed the Gallic sword,
And not a wherry could be moored
Along the guarded land. .
I feared not then, I fear not now!
The interest of fcach stirring scene
Wakes a new sense, a welcome glow
In every nerve and bounding veiil.
Alike on turbid Channel sea,
Or in still wood of Normandy,
I feel as bom again.
The rain descended that wild mom
When, anchoring in the cove at last.
Our band, all weary and forlorn,
Ashore, like wave-worn sailor^, .east,
Sought for a) sheltering ro6t iav^m.
And scarce could scanty food c?D\aM\
To break their^ monmig ia & t;
1 8 POEMS BY GURRER BELL.
Thou didst thy crust with me divide,
Thou didst thy cloak around me fold ;
And, sitting silent by thy side,
I ate the bread in peace untold.
Given kindly from thy hand,'twas sweet
As costly fare or princely treat
On royal plate of gold.
Sharp blew! the sleet upon my face,
/And, rising, wild, the gusty wind
iDrbve on those thundering waves apace
Our crew so late had left behind ;
But, spite M frozen shower and storm.
So close to thee, my heart beat warm.
And tranquil slept my mind.
So now, nor. foot-sore nor opprest
With'walking all this Au^t day,.
I taste k. hieaven in this brief rest,
This gip & y halt beside the way.
& igland's wild flowers are fair to view ;
Like balm is England's summer dew.
Like gold her sunset ray.
But the white violets growing here
Are sweeter than I yet have seen,
And ne'er did dew sa pure'and dear
Distil on forest mosses green.
As now, called forth by summer heat.
Perfumes our cool and fresh retreat.
These fragrant limes between.
That sunset ! Look beneath the boughs,
Over the copse, beyond the hills.
How soft yet deep and warm it glows.
And heaven with rich suffusion fills.
With hues where still the opal's tint
Its gleam of prisoned fere is b\eis\:, ;
Where feime thtotagh. ataut^ \!brK\s > \
POEMS BV«€URRER BELL.
Depart we now, for fast will fade
That solemn splendour of decline ;
And deep must be the after-shade,
As stars alone to-night will shine.
No moon is destined, pale, to gaze
On such a day's vast Phoenix blaze,
A day in fires decayed I
There, hand in hand, we tread again
The mazes of this varying wood,
And soon, amid a cultured plain.
Girt in with fertile solitude,
We shall our resting-place descry,
Marked by one roof-tree, towering high
Above a farmstead rude.
Refreshed, ere long, with rustic fare.
We'll seek a couch of dreamless ease.
Courage will guard thy heart from fear,
And love give mine divinest peace.
To-morrow brings more dangerous toil,
And through its confdct and turmoil
We'll pass as God shall please.
i preceding composition refers, doubtless, to the scenes acted in
: during the last year of the Consulate.]
FRANCES.
She will not sleep for fear of dreams, .
But, rising, quits her restless beid,
And walks where some beclouded beams
Of moonlight through the hall are shed.
Obedient to the goad of grief,
Her steps, now fast, now & ig|e?\xv% ^^^n ^
In varying motion seek reUfti
From the Eumenides oi vjoe.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Wringing her hands at intervals,
But long as mute as phantom dim,
She glides along the dusky walls,
Under the black ^ak rafters grim.'
The close ear .oi the grated tower
Stifles a heart that scarce can beat,
And, though so late and lone the hour.
Forth pass her wan^ering^ faltering feet ;
And on the pavement sp^read tefore
The long front of the mansion gray
Her steps imprint the night-frpst hoar >
Wbicn pale on grass and gr^ite lay.
Not long ^he stayed where misty moon
And shinmiering stars could on her look.
But through the garden arqhway soon
Her stristnge atid gloomy path she took.
Some firs, coevil with the towet,
'Their straight bkck boughs stretched o'ei
h6ad;
Unseen, beneath this sable bower,
. Rustled her dress and rapid tread.
There was an alcove in that shade,
Screening a rustic seat and stand ;
Weary she sat her down, and laid
Her hot brow on her burning hand.
Tb'sdHtude and to the liight'
Some words, she noW in murmurs said ;
And trickling through het fingers whii:e
Some tears of niisery she shedi
" God help me in my grievous need,
God help me in my Vtywatd p^m,
Which caiinbt ask ior-j^it^f^^ mee^,
Which has no Ho^mfj^o cotn^^^Vcx,
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
" Which must be borne ; yet who can -bear
Hours long, daysi long, a constant weight —
The yoke of absolute despair,
A suffering wholly desolate ?
" Who can for ever crush the hedrt.
Restrain its throbbing, curb its life,
Dissemble truth. with ceaseless art.
With outward calm mask inward strife ? "
, Shd waited, as for some reply ;
The still and cloudy night gave libne.
Ere long, with deep > -drawn, trembling sigh.
Her heavy plaint again begun.
" Unloved, I love ; imwept, I weep ;
Grief I restrain, hope I repress, .
Vain is this anguish, fixed and deep ;
Vainer desires and dreams of bliss.
'* My love awakes no love agdn,
My tears collect and fall imlelt.
My sorrow touches none with pain.
My humble hopes to nothing melt.
**■ For me the imiverse is dumb,
Stone-deaf, and blank j and wholly blind ;
Life I must bound, existence sum
In the straight Umits of one mind —
" That mind my own. Oh ! narrowiic^ll—
Dark, imageless^ a living tombl .
There must I sleep, there wake and dwell
Content, with palsy, pain, and gbom. "
Again she paused ; a moan^ of piiiii'
A Stifled sob, alcme vias\veaaA.\ v
Long silence followed, ttieiv agalvw V;
Her voice the stagnant imSSai^^Bfc^^'^^^^
22 POEMS BY CURRER BELU
''Must it be so ? Is this jmy fate ?
Can I nor struggle, nor contend ?
And am I doomed for years to wait,
Watching death's lingering axe descend?
'* And when it falls, and when I die,
What follows ? ^ Vacant nothingness,
The blank of lost identity, :
: Erasure both of pain and bliss ? .
" Tve heard of heaven, I would believe ;
For if this earth indeed be all^
! Who longest lives may deepest grieve,
Most blest whom sorrows soonest call.
" Oh 1 leaving disappointment here.
Will map fihd hope on yonder coast —
Hope which on earth sinnes never clear,
And oft in clouds is wholly lost ?
" Will he hope's source; of light behold,
Fruition- s spring, where doubts expire,
And drink, in waves of Uving gold.
Contentment full for long desire ?
" Will he fihd bliss, which here he dreamed ;
Rest, which wa6 weariness on earth ;
Knowledge which, if o'er life it beamed.
Served but to prove it void of worth ?
*;'Will'he find love without lust's leaven.
Love fearless, tearless, perfect,, pure.
To ail with equal bounty given, -.
■ \ In all -unfeigned, unfaoHng, sure ?
" Will he, from penal sufferings free,
JfJeieased from shroud 8 > xid vjoiicoj clod^
All calm: and glorious,. xiSfeaiA^efc
^'< > eation's Sire,.$^
POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
" Then, glancing back on time's brief woes,
Will he behold them, fading, fly,
Swept from eternity's repose
Like sulljdng cloud from pure blue sky ?
*'If so, endure, my weary frame ;
And when thy anguish strikes too deep.
And when all troubled bums life's fiame,
Think of the quiet, final sleep ;
" Think of the glorious waking-hour.
Which will not dawn on grief and tears,
But on a ransomed spirit's power,
Certain, and free from mortal fears.
" Seek now thy couch, and lie till mom ;
Then from thy chamber calm descend.
With mind nor tossed, nor anguish-tom.
But tranquil, fixed, to wait the end.
" And when thy opening eyes shall se6
Mementos, on the chamber wall, :
Of one who has forgotten thee.
Shed not the tear of acrid gall —
'* The tear which, welling from the heart,
Bvuns where its drop corrosive falls,
And makes each nerve in torture start
At feelings it too well recalls ;
" When the sweet hope of being loved
Threw Eden sunshine on Hfe's way.
When every sense and f eeUng proved
Expectancy of brightest day :
" When thei hand trembled to receive
A thrilling clasp, whkXi seecofciaL ^*i wfeax^
And the heart ventured to \ > fe^ < 5N^
Another heart esteem^ \t Aftax \
24 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
" When words, half love, all tenderness,
Were hourly heard, as hourly spoken ;
When the long, sunny days of bliss
Only by moonlight nights werebroken ;
" Till, drop by drop, the cup of joy
: Filled full, with purple light was glowing.
And faith, which watched it, sparkUng high,
StiH never dreamt the overflowing.
" It fell not with a sudden d-ashing,
It poured not out like open sluice ;
No, SparkUng still, and redly flashing,
Drainedi < h:op by drop, the generous juice.
" I saw it sink^ and strove to taste it ;
-'My eager lips approached the brim :
'The movement only seemed to wafete it ;
• It sank to dregs, all harsh and dim.
" These I have drunk, and they for iever
EUtVe poisoned life and love for me ;
A draught frcan Sodom's lake could never
More fiery, salt, and bitter be.'
" Oh, love was all a thin illusion ;'
Jdy but the desert's fl3ang stt^ant ;
And- glancing back on long delusion
My memory grasps a hoUoW dream.
" Yet whence that wondrous change of feeling
I never knew, and cannot learn ;
Nor why my loven's eye, congealing,
Grew cold and clouded, proud and stem;
" Nor'ivhereforig, ftiendship's forms forgetting,
■■•• ile'careless left, aiid cooW\\\Atc^ %
I Nor spoke of giirfV " act iotiA te^^\^Tv%,
'Not < ev'ri one glawce M tbmtotl tVx^^ \
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 2^
" And neither word nor token sending
Of kindness, since the parting day,
His course for distant regions bending,
Went, self-contained aSd cahn, away.
" Oh, bitter, blighting, keen sensiition.
Which will not weaken, cannot die,
Hasten thy work of desolation.
And let my tortured spirit fly !
*'Visiin as! the passing gale my crying ;
Though lightning-struck, I must Uve on.
I know at heart there is no dying
Of love and ruined hope aldne,
*'Still strong and young, and warm with vigour,
. Though scathed, I long shall greenly grow ;
And m^iy a storm of wildest rigqur
Shall yet break o'er my shivered bough.
" Rebellious now to blant in^rtion,
My unused strength demand^ a t^sk ;
Travel, and toil, and full exertion ,
Are the la^i, only . toon I ask,
" Whence, tbien, this vain atid barren dreaming
Of death and dubious life to come ?
I see a nearer beacon gleaming'i
Over dejection's sea of gloom, :
*'The very wildness of tny sorrow -y
Tells me I yet have innate forde ;
My track of life has been too narrow —
Effort shall trace a broader course.
" The world is not in yonder tower,
JE:arfh is not piisoned m \3^^.i toOTv^
!Mid whose dark panete, Yvoxrc > d^ \ito«!t^
IVe sat, the Slave kStid pt^^ tA^^^ccs..
26 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
** One feeling, turned to utter anguish.
Is not my being's only aini ;
When, lorn and loveless, life will latiguish,
But cx)urage can revive the flame,
'* He, when he left me, went a-rcpving
To sunny climes beyond the sea ;
And I, the weight of woe removing.
Am free and fetterless as he. .
*'New scenes, new language, skies less clouded,
May once more wake the wish to live ;
Strange, foreign towns, astir and crowded.
New pictures to the mind may give,
" New forms and faces, passing ever,
May hide the one I still retain.
Defined, and fixed, and fading never,
; Stamped deep on vision, heart, and brain.
" And we might meet — time may have changd
him'I
Chance may refveal the mystery,
The secret influence which .estranged him ;
Love may restore him yet to me.
" False thought, false hope, in scorn be banished!
I am not loved, nor loved have been.
Recall not, then, the dreams scarce vanished ;
Traitors, mislead me not again i
" To words like yours I bid defiance —
'Tis such my mental wreck have made ;
Of God alone, and self-reliance,
I ask for solace, hope for aid.
" Mom comes ; and ere meridian glory
O'er these, my natal woods, sihall smile^
Both lonely wood and mai\^oxi\ic > ^x^^^
rU leave behind ivSi xnan^ ^ xcafcr
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 27
GILBERT.
I. — ^THE GARDEN.
Above the city hung the moon.
Right o'er a plot of ground
Where flowers and orchard trees were fenced
With lofty walls around.
'Twas Gilbert's garden : thereto-night
Awhile he walked alone ;
And, tired with sedentary toil.
Mused where the moonlight shone.
This garden, in a city-lieart.
Lay still as houseless wild,
Though many-windowed mansion fronts
Were round it closely piled ;
But thick their walls, and those within
Lived lives by noise unstirred ;
Like wafting of an angel's wjng ,
Time's flight by them was heard.
Some soft piano-notes alone
Were sweet as faintly given.
Where ladies, doubtless, cheered the hearth
With song that winter even.
The city's many-mingled soimds
Rose like the hum of ocean ;
They rather lulled the heart than roused
Its pulse to faster motion,
Gilbert has paced the single walk
An hour, yet is not weary ;
And, though it be a winter night,
He feels nor cold nor dreary.
The prime of life is in his veins^
And sends his blood last ftovrav^.
And fancy's fervoysac wamas lYw^ " Qtiow^^s*
Now in his bosom giovAivg*
ZS POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Those thoughts recur to early love,
Or what he love would name.
Though haply Gilbert's secret deeds
Might other title claim.
Such theme not oft his mind absorbs;
He to the world clings fast,
And too much for the present Hves
To linger o'er the past.
iBut now the evening's, deep repose
Has glided to his spul ;
That moonlight falls on Memory,
And shows her fading scroll.
One name appears on every line
The gentle rays shine o'er,
. i And still he sniiles and still repeats
That one aame-^Elinor.
There is no sorrow in his smile.
No kihidness in his tone ;
The triimiph of a selfish heart;
Speaks coldly there alone.
He says, !'She Ipved me more than Hfe ;
And truly it was sweei
To $ee so fair a woman kn|eel
In bondage at my feet. , ;
" There was a sort of c(tiiet bliss " -
T6'b6 SO'deeply lovedi''
To gaze oti tretnbKAg € < agerh6ss,
And sit myself unmoved. •
And when it pleased my pride to grant
At last some rar^ caress, =
To feel the fever of that hand
My fingers deigned tc press.
"'Twas sweet to see her strive to hide
What ^very. glance t^N^ak.^,
r ;;: .Endowed; the whiter ^^A^^^^^n^^x.
Her destiny to widdi • *
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 2$
I knew myself no perfect man,
Nor, as she deemed, divine ;
I knew that I was glorious but
By her reflected shine.
" Her youthi her native energy, .
Her powers; new-bomi and fresh —
'Twas these with Godhead sanctified
My sensual frame of flesh.
Yet, like a god did I descend ,
'At last to meet her love ; ,
And, hke a god, I then witJiidtew
To my own heaven above. .
'• And never more could she invoke
My presence to her sphere; ;
No prayer, no plaint, no cry of hers
Could win my awfiil ear. >'
I knew her blinded constancy
Would ;Qe*er my 4eeds betray^
And, cahn in coijisciehce, whole in heart,
I went my tranquil way. .
*'Yet sonietimes I'st|ll feel a wish^
• The'iond and flattering pain
Of passion's anguish to create
In het young breast again.
Bright was the Itistre of hfer e3^s
When they caught fire from mine ;
If I had power, this very hour
Again Td light their shine.
" But where sh6 is, or howsh6 lives,
I have ho clue td know ;'. .
IVe heard she long my ab^hce pined,
And left her home in woe.'
But busied thien in gathering gold.
As 1 am busied now,
I could not turn from sucYi. -^iVKRWJaX.
To wf^ep a broken v6v7;
30 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
" Nor could I give to fatal ri$k
The fame. I ever prized. .
Even now i fear that precious fame
Is too much compromised. "
An inward trouble dims his eye,
Some riddle he would solve ;
Some method to unloose a knot
His anxious thoughts revolve.
He, pensive, leans against a tree,
A leafy evergreen ;
The boughs the moonUght intercept,
And hide him Uke a screen.
He starts — ^the tree shakes with his tremor,
Y^t nothing near him passed ;
He hurries up the garden alley
In strangely sudden haste,
Wit^i shaking hand he lifts the latchet,
'Steps o'er the threshold stoi^e ;
The heavy door slips from his fingers —
It shuts, and hie is gone.
What touched, transfixed, appalled his soul ?
A nervous thought — no mpre ;
'Twill sink Uke $tQne in placid pool,
And palm close smoothly o'er.
.IL — ^THE PARLOUR,
Warm is the parlour atmosphere.
Serene the lamp's soft light ;
The vivid enibers, red and clear,
Proclaim a frosty night.
Books, yaried, on the table lie.
Three childxeiv o'et \ > cvfem\«2cA,
And all, witYi cuiiows, ^^^^c^-^^.
The turning leai attend.
POExMS BY CURRfiR BELL. 3 1
Picture and tale alternately
Their simple hearts delight,
And interest deep, and tempered glee,
Illume their aspects bright.
The parents, from their fireside place,
Behold that pleasant scene.
And joy is on the mother's face,
Pride in the father's mien.
As Gilbert sees his blooming wife,
Beholds his children fair.
No thought has he of transient strife.
Or past, though piercing fear.
The voice of happy infancy
Lisps Sweetly in his ear.
His wife, with pleased and peaceful eye,
Sits, landly smiling, near.'
The fire glows on her silken dress,
And shows its ample grace,
And warmly tints each hazel tress
Curled soft around her face.
The beauty that in youth he wooed
Is beauty still, unfaded ;
The brow of ever placid mood
No churlish grief has shaded.
Prosperity, in Gilbert's home,
Abides the guest of years ;
There Want or Discord never come,
And seldom Toil or Tears.
The carpets bear the peaceful print
Of comfort's velvet tread,
And golden gleams, from plenty sent,
In every nook are shed.
The very silken spaniel seems
Of quiet ease to teU,
As near its mistress* teet \t dieaxxss*.
Sunk in a cushion's sweW \
\2 POEMS BY CURRER BELL,
And smiles seem native to the eyes
Of those sweet children three ;
They have but looked on tranquil skies,
And know not misery.
Alas that Misery should come
Jn such an hour as this !
Why could she not so calm a home
A little longer miss ?
But she is now within the door.;
Her st^ps advancing glide ; .
Her .suilepi shade has crossed the floor;
She stands; at Gilbert's side.
She la}^ her band upon his heart —
It bounds with agony ;
His fire^id.e chair shakes with the start
That shook the garden tree.
His wife towards the children looks —
She does not mark his mien ;
The cluldren,. bending o'er their books,
His. terror have not seen.
In liis own home, by his own hearth,
He si.ts iif. solitude.
And circled^ i;Qund with light and mirth,
Cold horror chills his blood.
His mind would hold with; desperate clutcl
The scene that round him, Kes ;
': NoT--cl > anged as by some wizard's touch,
The -present prospect flies; ...
A tumi^t vague, a viewless strife,
His.iutile struggles crush ;
'Twixt him and hig an imknown Kfe
And unknown feelings rush. "
He sees* but scarce can language: paint
The tissue? fancy weaves, ^
forrwoirds oft give bnt eeYvb iaml
Of thoughts the »vmd < toDfc^we%.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 33
Noise, tumult strange, and darkness dim
Efface both light and quiet ;
No shape is in those shadows grim.
No voice in that wild riot.
Sustained and strong, a wondrous blast
Above and round him blows ;
A greenish gloom, dense ov^cast,
Each moment denser grbivs.
He nothing knows, nor clestfly sees;
Resistance checks his breath.
The high, impetuous, ceaseless breeze
Blows on him cold as death.:
And still the undulating gloom
Mocks sight with forr^ess motion.
Was such sensation Jonah's doom,
Gulphed in the depths of ocean ?
Streaking the air, the nameless vision,
Fast-chiven, deep-soimdihgj jflows ;
Oh 1 whence its source, and what its mission ?
. : How will its terrors dose ?
Long-sweeping, rushing, vast and void,
The universe it swallows ;
And still the dark, devouring tide
■ A t3ff)hoon tempest follows.
More slow it rolls ;'its furioug race
Sinks to its solemn ghding ; ;
The stunning roar, the windfs wild chase,
To stillness are subsiding.
And, slowly borne along, a form
The shapeless chaos varies ;
Poised in the eddy to the'storm.
Before the eye it tarries.
A woinan drowned — sunk in the deep.
On a long wave reG\m\TVig-\
The circling waters'crystaV^^ce^ >
Like glass, het Saiape ensYvraxai^-
34 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Her paJe dead face, to Gilbert turned,
Seems as in sleep reposing,
A feeble light, now first disceraed,
The features well disclosing.
No effort from the haunted air
The ghastly scene could banish ;
That hovering wave, arrested there,
Rolled, throbbed, but did not vanish.
If Gilbert upward turned his gaze.
He saw the ocean shadow ;
If he looked down, the endless seas
Lay green as simimer meadow.
And straight before the pale corpse lay.
Upborne by air or billow, ,
So near he could have touched the spray
That churned around its pillow.
The hollow anguish of the f^ce
. Had moved a fiend to sorrow ;
Not death's fixed calm could taze the trao
Of sufiering's deep-worn furrow.
All moved ; a strong returning blast,
The mass of waters raising.
Bore wave and passive carcass past,
While Gilbert yet was gazing.
Deep in her isle-conceiving womb
It seemed the ocean thundered,
. . And soon by realms of rushing gloom
Were seer and phantom sundered.
Then swept some timbers from a wreck.
On following surges riding ;
Then seaweed, in the turbid rack
Uptom, went slowly gliding.
Th^ horrid shade, by slow degrees,
A beam of light deie^XeA.,
-And then the roar ol x^vVkv^ > ^^^
Fast, far, and iaitvt telte^^ftd..
POEMS BY dtJRKEK BELL.
And aJl was gone — -gone Hke a mist —
Corse, billows, tempest, wreck ;
Three children close to Gilbert prest
And clung around his neck»
Good* night 1 good-night ! the prattlers said
And lassed their father's cheek ;
'Twas now the hour their qiiiet bed
And placid rest to seek.
'The mother with her offspring goes
To hear their evening prayer ;
She nought of Gilbert^s vision knows,
And nought of his despair.
Yet, pitying God, abridge the time
Of anguish, now his fate I
Thotigh, haply, great has been his crinie7
Tliy mercy, too, is great.
Gilbert at length uplifts his head,
Bent for some moments low,
And there is neither grief nor dread
Upon his subtle brow.
For well can he his feelings task,
And well his looks command ;
His features well his heart can mask,
With smiles and smoothness bland
Gilbert has reasoned with his mind —
He says *twas all a dream ;
He strives his inward sight to bhnd
Against truth's inward beam.
He pitied not that shadowy things
When it was flesh and blood ;
Nor now can pity's balmy sprii
Refresh his arid mood.
" And if that dream has spoke-
Thus musingly he s^L^/^*
''// Elmor be dead, in soo^
Such chance the 5\iocl«

36 POEMS BY CURRER BELU
A net was woven round my feet,
I scarce could further go ;
Ere shame had. forced a fast retreat
Dishonour brought me low.
" Conceal her, then, deep, silent sea ;
Give her a secret grave.
She sleeps in peace, and I am free —
No longer terror's slave ;
And homage still, from all the world.
Shall greet my spotless name,
Since surges break and waves are curled
Above its threatened shame.^'
III.— THE WELCOME HOME.
Above the city hangs the moon.
Some clouds are boding rain ;
Gilbert, erewhile on journey gone,
To-night comes home again.
Ten years have passed above his, head —
Each year has brought him gain ;
His prosperous life has smoothly sped
Without or tear or stain.
Tis somewhat late ; the city clocks
Twelve deep vibrations toll,
As Gilbert at the portal knocks, .
Which is his journey's goal.,
The street is still and desolate.
The moon hid by a cloud ;
Gilbert, impatient, will not wait —
His second knock peals loud.
The clocks are hushed ; there's not a Hght
In any window nigh,
And not a single pVaiv^t bd^Vvl
Looks from the dox^d^^ %V > j.
I The air is raw, tVie lam de«:^T^.e^:v
f A, bittep »iOTt\i wad\)\o > N^%
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 37
His cloak the traveller scarce defends.
Will not the doOT imclose ?
He knocks the third time, arid the last :
His summons now they heai: ;
Within, a focitstep, hurrying f^t.
Is heard approaching near. .
The bolt is'drawn, the clanking chain
Falls to the floor of stone,
And Gilbert to his heart will sttain
His wife and children Soon.';'
The haiad that lifts the latchet holds
A candle to- his sight,';..
And Gilbert, on the st^p,. beholds
A woman, clad in white.'', .
Lo ! Water from her dripping aress
. Runs, on the streaming floor ;
From * every \dark arid clmjging'tress
The drops incessant pour.'', ,.
There's, none but her to welcome him 5
She holds the caudle high, .
Amcjl, motipnle^s in form and limb^
Stands cold; arid silent pigh.
There's sand and seaweed oii her robe.
Her hollow eyes are blind ;
No pulse in such a frame can throb,
No Ufe is there; defined.
Gilbert turned ^hy- white, but still
His lips vouchsafed no cry ;
He spurred his strength and mitster-will
To pass the figutie by : .''
But, ipoving slow, it kcedliim straight;
It would not ilincTa t«it cjvii^^
Thetr first did Gilbert'fe ^lt^ivt > (!tv«Qa^^
His stony fiirones^ < \ > i^v ^'
SB POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
He sank upon his knees and prayed—
The shape stood rigid there ;
He called aloud for human aid —
No human aid was near.
An accent strange did thus repeat
Heaven's stern but just decree :
" The measure thou to her didst mete,
To thee shall measured be ! "
Gilbert sprang from his bended knees,
By the pale spectre pushed,
And, wild as one whom demons seize.
Up the hall staircase rushed,
Entered his chamber. Near the bed
Sheathed ?teel and firearms hung.
Impelled by maniac purpose dread
He chose those stores among.
Across ;hji3 throat a keen-edged knife
With vigorous hand he drew ;
The woima was wide — ^his outraged life
Rushed rash and redly through.
And thus died, by a shameful death,
A wise and worldly man.
Who never drew but selfish breath
Since first his life began.'.
LIFE.
Life, believe, is not a dream
So dark as sages say.
Oft a Jittle morning rain
Foretells a pleasstnt day.
Sometimes tiiere axe clouds of gloom.
But these are traxvsieal 22L
If the ^ower wiU ma\i.e \3Di5 tQse^\ > ViCPK\
Oh, whylanaentitalaXV. " ^..
tonus BY Ctrkl^Ell BELL, 3^]
Rapidly, merrily,
Life's sunny hours flit by.
Grate hilly, cheerily,
Enjoy them as they fly.
What though Death at times steps in,
And calls our best away ?
What though Sorrow seems to win,
0*er Hope, a heavy sway ?
Yet Hope again elastic springs,
Unconquered, though she fell ■
Still buoyant are her golden wings,
StiU strong to bear us well.
Manfully, fearlessly.
The day of trial bear,
For gloriously, victoriously.
Can courage quell despair.
THE LETTER,
What is she writing ? Watch her now.
How fast her fingers move !
How eagerly her youthful brow
Is bent in thought above !
Her long curls, drooping, shade the light ;
She puts them quick aside,
Nor knows that hand of crystals bright
Her hasty touch untied.
It slips adown her silken dress,
Falls glittering at her feet ;
Unmarked it falls, for she no less
Pursues her labour sweet.
The ver^^ loveliest hour
Is in that deep blue si
The golden sut:'T .ue del
Jt has not t:
Tb(^ che^^rfyj lav
The white i

40 POEMS BY CURRER BELL,
In vain for her light footsteps wait ;
She comes not forth to-day.
There is an open door of glass
Close by that lady's chair ;
From thence, to slopes of mossy grass,
Desdehds a marble stair:
Tall plants of bright and Spicy bloom
Aroimd the threshold grow;
Their leaves and blossoms shade the room
From that sun's deepening glow.
Why does she not a moment glance-
Between the clustering flowers,
And mark in heaven, the radiant dance
Of evening's rosy hours ? *^'
Oh, look again ! Still fixefd her eye,
Unsmilihg, earnest still,'''
And fast her pen and fingers fly,
Urged by her eager will.
Her soul is in th* absorbing: tas}c.^ . . • •
To whom, then, does, she yfijile ?
Nay, watch her still more closejy ; ask
Her own eyes'serious iligbt;.. ,
Wh^e do they turr^, as now Her pen
Hangs o'er th'unfinished line ?,
Whence fell the tesirful glejam that then
Did in their dark spheres sjiin^ ?
The summer-parlour., looks'so . dark, :
When from that. sky you tjurn,
And from, th'expanse of that green park
You scarce may, aught, discern. .,
Yet & et the^iles of porcelain rare, :
O'er flower^stand, couch, aiid.vasie,
Sloped) as if leaning bn !the air; v
One picture m^ts the gaze, v,''\
'Tis there she tmms ; yoMttvacv+Lot fe^
Distinct > vhat formdefaie^^^'> ^'
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 41
The clouded mass of mystery
Yon broad gold frame confines.
But look again ; inured to shade
Your eyes now faintly trace
A stalwart form, a massive; head,
A firm, determined. face.
Black Spanish locks, a sunburnt cheek,
A brow high, broad; and white,
Where every furrow seems to speak
Of mind and moral might.
Is that her god ? I cannot tell.
Her eye a moment met
Th* impending picture, then it feO
Darkened and dimmed and wet.
A moment more, her task is done,
And sealed the letter lies ;
And now, towards the setting sun-
She turns her tearful eyes.
Those tears flow over ; wonder not.
For by the inscription see
In what a strange and distant spot
Her heart of hearts must be ! .
Three seas aiid many a league of land
That letter must pass o'er.
Ere read by him to whose loved hand
'Tis sent from England's shore.
Remote colonial wilds detain
Her husband, loved though stem ;
She,'mid that smDing English scene,
Weeps for his wished return. .
42 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
REGRET.
Long ago I wished to leave
" The house where I was bom ;'*
Long ago I used to grieve, :•
My home seemed so forlorn.
In other years .its silent ijooms
Were filled with haunting ;fc^J:s;
Now their very memory comes
Overcharged with tenider tears,'•
Life and marrip-ge I hctye knownrn-
Things CHQice deemed so bright :;
Now, hpw utterly is jBown
Every ray of Ught I
'Mid the uidpiown sea of life
I no blest isle Jiave found ; :
At last, through all its wild wayes'strife,
My bark is homeward bound.
Farewell, dark and rolling dj^^p I
Farewellj foreign sHore ! .
Opeii, in uncloudi^d sweep,
Thou glorioiis realm before !
Yet, though I had safely passed »-
That w^ary, vexed main^ .
Oiie loved voice, through surge jand blast
Could call me back again.
Though the soul's bright morning rose
O'er paradise for me,;
William, even from heaven's repose
I'd turn, invoked by thee !
Storm nor surge should e'er arrest
My soul, exulting then.
All my heaven was once thy breast —
Would it were mine a & aLm\
POEMS BY CURRER BELL 43
PRESENTIMENT,
" Sister, youVe sat there all the day ;
Come to the hearth awhile.
The wind so wildly sweeps away,
The clouds so dfuJkly pile.
That open book has lain, unread, j
For hours upon your knee ;
You've never smiled nor turned your head.
What can you, sister, see ? *'
*'Come hither, Jane ; look down the field.
How dense a mist creeps on !
The path, the hedge, are both concealed —
Ev'n the white gate is gone ;
No landscajje through the fog I trace,
No hill with pastures green ;
All featureless is Nature's face.
All masked in clouds her mien,
" Scarce is the ni§tle of a leaf
Heard- in out garden now ;
The year grows old, its daiys wax bjief ,
The tresses. leave its brow.
The rain driyes fast before the wind,
The sky is blank and gray ;
O Jane, what sadness fills the mind
On such a dreary day ! "
" You think too much, my sister dear ;
You sit too lotig alone.
What though November days be drear ?
FuH soon will they be gone.
I've swept the hearth, and placed your chair ;
Come,, Enuna, sit by me.
Our ovm fireside is never diceax,
Though .late and wintry waive > 3cv & ^^«i >
Though /rpugh the lught xaa-^ \^i'
44 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
" The peaceful glow of our fireside
Imparts no peace to me.
My thoughts would rather wander wide
Than rest, dear- Jane, with thee.
I'm on a distant journey boimd,
And if , about my heart,
Too closely kindred ties wearfe bound,
'Twould brea;k when forced to part.
" * Soon will Noyenxter days be o'eir.'
Well have you spoken, Jaiiei .
My own forebodings tell me more':
For pie, I know, by presage sure, .
They'll ne'er return again.
Ere long, npr'sun nor storm tp jne
Will bring pr joy or gloom ;
They reach noi.that eternity'.
Which soon will be my hoipe.'!'
Eight months are gone : the summer ^n
Sets in a glotiou^ sky ;'-
A quiet field, all green and lone^
Receives its rosy dye.
Jane sits upon a shaded stile — ■
Aloiie she sits there now;
Her head re^ts on her hand th6 while.
And thought o'ercastsi her brow.
She's thinking of one winter's, dayr i
A few short months ago,. ,. ,.
When Emma's bier was borne away
O'er wastes of frp^n §;^c > w; ;. . ,
She's thinking bow that dnfted si;ipw
Dissolved in spring's fir^ ^eaiq, , , /
And how her sister*s memory now..
Fades, even as fades a dfeam.,
The snow will whiten. earth again,
But Emma comes no mote.
SfieJeft,'mid winters *s\eetaxidx?Cm.
This wbrld for hekverf^iax %\iot^.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL 45
On Beulah's hills she wanders now,
On Eden's tranquil plain ;
To her shall Jane hereafter go — > ■
She ne'er shall come to Jane.
THE TE^CHE^R'S MONOLOGUE.
The room is quiet ; thoughts alone
People its mute tranqmllity.
The yoke put off, the long task done,
I am, as it is bliss to be,
Still and untroubled. Now I see.
For the first time, how soft, the day
O'er waveless water, stirless tree,
Silent and sunny, wings its way. :
Now, as I watch tiiat distant hill,
So faint, so blue, so far removed^
Sweet dreams of home my heart may fill —
That hom,e whejre I am known and loved.
It lies beyond. Yon azure brow
Parts me from all earth holds for me ;
And, mom and eve, my yearnings flow
Thitherward tending, chaugelessly.
My happiest hours— ay, all the tinie —
I love to keep in memory,.
Lapsed among moors, ere fife's first prime
Decayed to dark anxiety.
Sometimes I think a narrow heart
Makes me thus mourn those far away.
And keeps my love so far apart
From friends and friend^ps pf to-day.
Sometimes I think'tis but a dream
I treasure up so jealously;
All the sweet Noughts; I live on seem
To vanish into vacancy.
And then this strange, coaise v^ox\3l «xo > osn.^
Seems all that's palpable ayvSi to^fc %
46 POEMS BY CURRER BELL
And every sight and every soond
Combines my spirit to subdue
To aching grief, so void and lone
Is life and earth, so worse than vain
The hopes that, in my own heart sown.
And cherished by such sun and rain
As joy and transient sorrow shed.
Have ripened to a harvest there.
Alas ! methinks I hear it said,
" Thy golden sheaves are empty air. "
All fades away. My very home
I think will soon be desolate.
I hear, at times, a warning come
Of bitter partings at its gate ;
And if I should return and see
The hearth-fire quenched, the vacant chai
And hear it whispered mournfully
That farewells have been spoken there.
What shall I do, and whither turn ?
Where look for peace ? When cease to mou
* * « «
Tis not the air I wished to play.
The strain I wished to sing ;
My wilful spirit slipped away
And struck another strii^.
I neither wanted smile nor tear,
Bright joy nor bitter woe.
But just a song that, sweet and clear.
Though haply sad, might flow —
A quiet song, to solace me
When sleep refused to come ;
A strain to chase despondency
When sorrowful for home.
In vain I try; I casmot sin^.
All feels so coAd and deaA —
No wild distress, no g > i^ttn% s^c^v^
Of tears in ang\3i & ^ ^eA.\
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 47
But all the impatient gloom of one
Who waits a distant day,
When, some great task of suffering done,
Repose shali toil repay.
For youth departs, and pleasure flies,
And life consumes away.
And youth's rejoicing ardour dies
Beneath this drear delay ;
And Patience, weary with her yoke,
Is yielding to despair,
And Health*s elastic spring is broke
Beneath the strain of care.
Life will be gone ere I have lived.
Where now is life's first prime ?
I've worked and studied, longed and grieved,
Through all that rosy time.
To toil, to think, to long, to grieve —
, Is such my futmre fate ?
The mom was dreary ; must the eve
Be also desolate ?
Well, such a life at least makes Death
A welcome, wished- for friend.
Then aid me. Reason, Patience, Faith,
To suffer to the end !
PASSION.
Some have won a wild delight
By daring wilder sorrow ;
Could I gain thy love to-night,
I'd hazard death to-morrow.
Could the battle-struggle earn
One kind gl3.nce from \lim^ e^^.
How this withering heail Nvo\i^4 > D\vrpL
The ieady fight to tr^ \
48 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Welcome nights of broken sleep,
And days of carnage cold,
Gould I deem that thou wouldst weep
To hear my perils told.
Tell me, if with wandering bands
I roam full far away, :
Wilt thou to those distant lancis
In spirit ever stray ?
Wild, long, a trumpet sounds aiar ;
Bid me? — ^bid me go ^ ;
Where S^k and Briton amieet in war,
On Indian Sutlej's flow. .
,'Bipod has. dyed t^e Sutlej's waves
With scarlet stain, - 1 Jmpw ;
Indus'borders yawn with'graves,
Yet, conmiand mp go !
Though rank and high the holocaust
Of nations steams to heaven,
Glad I'd join the death-doomed host,
Were but the mandate given.
Passion's strength should nerve my arm.
Its ardour stir my life.
Till human force to that dread charm
Should yield and sink in wild alarm.
Like trees to tempest-strife.
If, hot from war, I seek thy love.
Barest thou turn aside ?
Barest thou then my fire reprove
By Scorn and maddening pride ?
No ; my will shall yet control
Thy will, so \vvgYi ^ii^d fe^e,
• Arid love shall tame t\v^\.\v«vi^V^ ^o^-
Yes, tenderest \o^e Aot tc\ft^
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 49
I'll read my triumph in thine ey^,
Behold and prove the change,
Then leave, perchance, my noble prize,
Once more in arms to range.
I'd die when all the foam is up.
The bright wine sparkling high,
Nor wait till in the exhausted cup
Life's dull dregs only lie.
Then love thus crowned with sweet reward,
Hope blest with fullness large,
I'd moimt the saddle, draw the sword.
And perish in the charge.
PREFERENCE.
Not m scdirn do I reprove thee.
Not in pride thy vows I waive,
But, believe, I could not love thee .
Wert thoU prince and I a slave.
These, then, are thine oaths of passion ?
This thy tenderness for m^ ?
Judged even by thine own confessiop
Thou art steeped in perfidy.
Having vanquished, thou wouldst leave me —
Thus I read thee long a^o ;
Therefore dared I riot deceive thee,.
Even with friendship's gentle sh6w.
Therefore, with impassive coldness
Have I ever met thy gaze.
Though, full oft, with daring boldness.
Thou thine eyes to mine didst raise.
Why that smile ? Thou now art deeming
This my coldness all lintrue —
But a mask of frozen seeming
Hiding secret fires from vievj.
Touch my hand, thou seU-decewfex,
Nay; be calm, for I am so.
50 POEMS BY CUHRER BEUL
Does.it bum ? Does my lip quiv^ ?
Has mine eye a troubled glow ?
Cajist thou ciBLll a moment's colour
To my forehead, to my cheek ?
, Canst thou tinge their tranquil pallpr
With pne flattering,. feverish streak ?
Am J ma-rbie ? What I no woman
Could so calm before thee stand ?
Nothing HVing, sentient, human,
Could so coldly take thy band ? .
Yes, a sister might, a mother, : •
. My good'will is sisterly. :
bream not, then^ I strive to .smother
Fires that inly bum for thee.
I^ave not, rage not ; wrath is fruitless,
, Fury cannot change my mind.
I but deem the feeUng rootless
Which SQ whirls, in passion's wind.
Can I love ? Oh, deeply., tmly.
Warmly, fondly— i?Uit not tliee ; .
And my love is answered duly
With an equal energy.
Wouldst thou see thy riyal ? Hasten,
l)raw that curtain soft aside.
Look where yon thick branches chasten
Noon with shades of eventide.
In that glade, where fohage blending
Forms a green arch overhead,
Sits thy rival, thoughtful bendipg
O'er a stanci with papers spread.
Motionless, his fingers plying
That untired, unresting pen ;
Time and tide imnoticed fljdng, ,:
There he sits, the first of men,-^
Man of conscience, man of reason.
Stem, perchap.ce, but ever just ;
Foe to falsehoodi wrong, atvd \ieaj5«tt,
Hononr'^ shield, and.vVict\x^'s. tro & \.\
POEMS BY CURRER BELI^ $1
Worker, thinker, firm defender
Of Heaven's truth — man's hberty ;
Soul of iron, proof to slander.
Rock where founders tyranny.
Fame he seeks not ; but full surely
She will seek him, in his home.
This I know, and wait securely
For the atoning hour to come.
To that man my faith is given ;
Therefore, soldier, cease to sue.
While God rdgns in earth and heaven
I to him will still be true.
EVENING SOLACE.
The human hejaxt has hidden treasures.
In secret kept, in silence sealed —
The thoughts, the hopes, the dreams, the pleasures.
Whose charms were broken if revealed.
And days may pass, in gay coniusion,
And nights iii rosy riot fly,
While, lost in fame's or wealth's illusion.
The mempty of the past may die.
But there are hours of lonely musing,
Such as in evening silence come.,
When, soft ;^ birds their pinions closing,
The heart'3 best feelings gather home.
Then in our soi^ls tiiere seems to languji^h
A tender grief that is not woe,
And thoughts that once wrung groans of anguish
Now cause but some mild tears to flow.
And feeUngs, once as strong as passions,
Float softly back — a faded dieaia \
Our own sharp griefs and wild sens^lvsas
The tale of others'sufferihga seem.
$Z POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Oh ! when the heart is freshly bleeding.
How longs it for that time to be
When, through the mist of years receding,
Its woes but live in reverie !
And it can dwell on moonlight glimmer,
On evening shade and loneliness.
And, while the sky grows dim and dinuner,
Feel no imtold and strange distress —
Only a deeper impulse given
By lonely hour and darkened room
To solenm thoughts that soar to heaven,
Seeking a Hfe and worid to come.
STANZAS.
If thou be in a lonely place,
If one hour's calm be thine.
As Evehing bends her placid face
O'er this sweet day's decline ;
If all the earth and all the heaven
Now look serene to thee,
As o'er them shuts the sunuher eyen.
One moment— think of me !
Pause, in the lane, returning home ;
Tis dusk, it will be still.
Pause near the elm ; a sacred gloom
Its breezeless boughs will fill.
Look at that soft and golden light,
High in the unclouded sky ;
Watch the last bird's belated flight
As it flits silent by.
Hark for a sound \150Ti \3tifc ^wvnd—
A step, a voice, a si^^v.
If all be still, tYien yvAd V\i^ xxxm^^L,
Unchecked, to memotv.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 53
If thy love were like mine, how blest
That twilight hour would seem,
When, back from the regretted past
Returned our early dream !
If thy love were like mine, how wild
Thy longings, even to pain.
For sunset soft, and moonlight mild,
To bring that hour again !
But oft when, in thine arms I lay,
I've seen thy dark eyes shine,
And deeply .'felt thieir changeful ray;
Spoke other love than mine.
My love is almost anguish now,
It beats so strong and true ;
'Twere rapture could I deem that thou
Such anguish ever knew.
I have been but thy transient flower ;
Thou wert my god divine.
Till checked by death's congealing power,
This heart must throb for thine.
And well my dying hour were blest
If life's expiring breath
Should pass as thy lips gently prest
•My forehead cold in death ;
And sound my sleep would be, and sweet.
Beneath the churchyard tree.
If sometimes in thy heart should beat
One pulse still true to me.
WATCHING AND WISHING.
Oh, would I werfe the golden Vii^at
That shines around tliee xvcw »
As siumber shades the spoWess vftjite
Of that unclouded brow \
54 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
It watches through each changeful dream
Thy features'varied play ;
It meets thy waking eyes'soft gleam
By dawn, by op'ning day.
Oh, would I were the crimson veil ■
Above thy couch of snow, ^
To dye that cheek so soft, so pale.
With my reflected glow I
Oh„ would I were the cord of gold • !
Whose tassel, set with pearls,
Just meets the silken covering's fold
And rests upon thy curls^
Dishevelled in thy rosy'sleep,
And shading soft thy dreams !
Acrosfe their bright and raven sweep
The golden tassel gleams:
I woiild be anything for thee,
My love, my radiant love-*^
A flower, a bird, for sympathy,
A watchful star above.
WHEN THOU SLEEPEST. ;
When thou sleepest, lulled in night,
Art thou lost in vacancy ?
Does no silent inward light,
Softly breakings fall on thee ? - :
Does no dream on qUiet wing
Float a moment'mid that ray,
Touch some answering mental string.
Wake a note, and pass away ?
When thou watchest, as the hours
Mute and blind are speedm^. ou
O'er that rayless path, wheie Vywers
Afuffled midnightv blajcik MLd^Xooa,
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 55
Comes there nothing hovering near,
Thought or half reahty.
Whispering marvels in tnine ear.
Every word a mystery,
Chanting low an ancient lay,.
Every plaintive note a spell,
Clearing memory's clouds away,
Showing scenes thy heart loves well ?
Songs forgot, in childhood sung,
Airs, in youth beloved ^ipd known,
Whispered by that airy tonguq,
Once again are made thine own.
Be it dream in haunted sleep.
Be it thought in vigil lone,
Drink'St thou not a rapture deep
From the feeling,'tis thine own ?
All thine own ; thou need'st not tell
What bright form thy slumber blest :
All tliine own ; rememoer well
Night and shade were roimd thy rest.
Nothing looked upon thy bed
Save the lonely watch-light's gleam ;
Not a whisper, not a tread
Scared thy spirit's glorious dream.
Sometimes, when the midnight gale
Breathed a moan and then. was still,
Seemed the spell of thought to fail.
Checked by one ecstatic thrill-
Felt as all external things,
Robed in moonlight, smote thine eye ;
Then thy spirit's waiting wings
Quivered, trembled, spread to fly ;
Then th'aspirer, wildly swelling,
Looked where'mid transceiv & iic^
Star to star was mutely teOiivg
Heaven's resolve and fate's dectee.
56 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Oh ! it longed for holier Ore :
Than this spark in earthly shrine ;
Oh ! it soared, and higher, higher,
Sought to reach a home divine.
Hopeless quest ! Soon weak and weary
Flagged the pinion, drooped the plume :
And again in sadness dreary
. Came the baffled wanderer home.
And again it turned for soothing
To th* unfinished, broken dream ;
While, the ruffled current smoothing.
Thought rolled on her startled stream.
I have felt this cherished feeling,
Sweet and knovm to nonte but me ;
Still I felt it nightly healing'
Each dark day's despondency.
PARTING.
There's no use in weeping,
Though we are condemned to part :
There's such a thing as keeping
A remembrance in one's heart ;
There's such a thing as dwelling
On the thought ourselves have nursed.
And with scorn aiid Courage telling
The world to do its worst.
We'll not let its follies grieve us —
We'll just take them as they c6me ;
And then every day will leave vis
A merry laugh for home.
When we've left each friend and brother,
When weVe parted vAde ^tvdte.
We will think of one aiiotViet
As even better thati wfe ace.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. $7
Every glorious sight above us,
Every pleasant sight beneath,
We'll connect with those that love us,
> yhom we truly love till death. .
In the evening, when we're sitting .
By the fire, perchance alone,
Then shall heart with warm heart meeting
Give responsive tone for tone.
We can burst the bonds which chain us,
Which; cold human hands haye wrought.
And where none. shall dare restrain us
We cto meet again in thought.
So there's no use in weeping; .
Bear a cheerful spirit still ; .
Never doubt that Fate is keeping
Future good for present ill.
APOSTASY.
This last denial of my faith.
Thou, solemn priest, hast heard ;
And though upon my bed of death,
I call not back a word.
Point not to thy Madonna, priest —
Thy sightless saint of stone *
She cannot, from this burning breast;
Wring one repentant moan.
Thou say'st that when a sinless child
I duly bent the knee,
And prayed to what in marble smiled
Cold, lifeless, mute on me.
I did. But listen. Children sptm^
Full soon to riper youth ;
And for love's vow and wedHods^s''^
Isold my early truth. *^'
S8 POEMS BY CURRER BELU
'Twas not a gray, bare head like thine
Bent o'er me when I said,
" That land and God and faith are mine
For which thy fathers bled. "
I see thee not — my eyes are dim —
But well I hear thee say,'
" daughter, cease to think of him'
Who led thy soul astra^y.
" Between you Ues both space and time ;
'Let leiatgues and years prevail
To turn thee from the path of cmne
Back to the €hurch*s palei*'- ;
And did I need that th6u shouldst tell
What mighty barriers rise
To part me from thai; duiigeon-cell
Where my loved Walter lies ?
And did I need that thou shouMfet taunt
My dying hour at last
By bidding this worn spirit pant
No more for what is past ?
Priest, must I cease to think of him ?
How hollow rings that word I
Can time, can tears, can distance dim
The memory of my lord ?
I said before, I saw not thee, = :
Because, an hour agone,
Over my eyeb^Us, heavily, .
The lids fell down like stpne.
But still my spirit's inward sight
Beholds his image beam
As fixed, as clear, aJs burning bright.
As some red planet's gleam.
Talk not of thy last sacrament.
Tell not thy beads lot m^ \
Both rite and prayer are " vaVnV^ s^xvl
As dews upon the sea.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 59
Speak not one word of heaven above,
Rave not of hell's alarms ;
Give me but back my Walter's love,
Restore me to his arms.
Then will the bliss of heaven be won ;
Then will hell shrink away,
As I have seen night's terrors shun
The conquering steps of day.
'Tis my religion thus to love.
My creed thus ,fixed to be ;
Not death shall shake nor priestcraft break
My rodc-Uke constancy.
Now go ; for at the door there waits
Anothei: stranger guest.
He calls — I oome ; my pulse scarce beats,
My heart f ailk in my breast.
Again that voice ; how far away^
How dreary sounds that tone !
And I, methinks, am gone astray
In trackless wastes and lone.
I fain would rest a Httle while.
Where can I find a stay
Till dawn upon the hills shall smile
And show some trodden way ?
I come I I come ! " in haste she said;
"'Twas Walter's voice I heard ! "
Then up she sprang, but fell back dead —
His name her latest word.
WINTER STORES.
We take from life one little share^
And say that this shall be. :.
A spax:e redeemed frcMH toil and caxe, .
From tears amd sadjiess free;
60 POEMS BY CURRER BELU
And, haply, Death unstrings his bow,
And Sorrow stands apart,
And, for a little while, we know
The sunshine of the heart.
Existence seems a summer eve,'
Warm, soft, and full of peace ;
Our free, unfettered feelings give ;
The soul its full release.
.1
A moment, then, it takes the power
< To call up thoughts that throw
Around that charmed and hallowed hour
This life's divinest glow.
But time, though viewlessly it flies,
, . And slowly, will not stay.
Alike through clear and clouded skies
It cleaves its silent way.
Alike the bitterxup of grief,
Alike the draught of bliss ;
Its progress leaves but moment brief
For baffled lips to kiss.
The sparkling draught is dried away,
The hour of rest is gone, :
And urgent voices roiind us say,
" Ho,'lingerer, hasten on ! "
And has the soul, then, only gained
From this brief time of ease
A moment's rest, when overstrained,
One hurried glimpse of peace ?
No ; while the sun shone kindly o'er us,
And flowers bloomed toxoid ova iee.^.,
WbMe riiany a bad oi \oj beioxe xss.
Unclosed its petals swfeet,
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 6f
An unseen work within was plying ;
Like honey-seeking bee
From flower to flower unwearied flying,
Laboured one faculty.
Thoughtful for winter's future sorrow.
Its gloom and scarcity ;
Prescient fo-day of want to-morrow,
Toiled quiet Memory.
'Tis she that from each transient pleasure
Extracts a lasting good ;
*Tis she that finds, in summer, treasure
To serve for winter's food.
And when youth's summer day is vanished,
And age brings winter's stress,
Her stores, with hoarded sweets replenished,
Life's evening hours will bless.
THE MISSIONARY.
PlolgHj vessel, plough the British main,
Seek the free ocean's wider plain i
Leave English scenes and English skies^
Unbind, dissever English ties j
Bear me to climes remote and strange.
Where altered life, fast- following change,
Hot action, never-ceasing toil.
Shall stir, turn, dig the spirit'i^^U^
Fresh roots shall plant, freskiflPIIlP sow,
TiU a new garden thep'■
Cleared of the weeds 11 ;
Mere human I r-^-^rnktr^
Which, cher
^^^Igrasp the ph
^^Let me, th^
62 POEMS BY CURRER BELt*
But England's shores axe yet m view.
And England's skies pf tender, blue
Are arched above h^r guardieua sea.
I cannot yet remembrance flee. ; ,
I must again, then, firmly face
That task of anguish, to reljirace. . . •
Wedded to home, I honae f pr?^^ ;
Fearful of change, I changp^ make.;.;
Tdo ifond of ease, I plunge ;in tpil;
Lover of calm, I seek turmoil.
.Nature and hostile destiny
Stir in my heart a conflict* wild ;
And long and fierce the war^ill fee
'Ere duty both, has reconciled.
■ , ,■ iWhatother tie yet holds me fast.
To the divorced, abandoned pas;t ?.
Smouldering, on my heart's altar lies
The fire of ^ome great sacrifice.
Not yet half quenched. The sacred steel
But lately struck my carnal will,
My hfe-long hope, first joy and last,
What I Iqved weU, and clung to fast ;
What I wished wildly to retain ;
What I renounced with soul-felt pain ;
What, when I saw it, axe-struck, perish,
Left me no joy on earth to cherish —
A man bereft ; yet sternly now
I do confirm that Jephtba vpw.
Shall I tetract, or fear, or flee ?
Did. Christ, when rose the fatal tree
Before Him on Mount Calvary ?
Twa^s a long fight, hard-fotight, but won.
And what I did was justly done.
Yet, Helen, from thy love \ tvvttv^.
Whew my heart jnpst iot ti^s Y^fe^X. Xiuxtv^e!
I dared thy tears, 1 dated t\vv acorn—
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. $3
Easier the death-pang had been borne.
Helen, thou mightst not go with me ;
I could not, dared not stay for thee.
I heard afar in bonds complain
The savage from beyond the main ;
ijind that wild sound rose o'er the cry
Wrung out by passion's agony ;
And even when, with the bitterest tear
I ever shed, mine eyes were dim,
Still, with the spirit's vision clear,
I saw hell's einpire; vast arid grim»
Spread on each Indian river's shore*
Each realm of Asia covering o'er.
There the weak, trampled by the strong,
Live but to suffer, hopeless die ;
There pagan priests, whose creed is wrong,
Extortion, lust, and cruelty,
Crush our lost race^ and brimming fill
The bitter cup of human ill. :
And I, who have the heaUng creed,
The faith benign of Mary's Son,
Shall I behold my brother's need,
And, selfishly, to aid him shun ?
I, who, upon my mother's knees
In childhood, read Christ's written word.
Received His legacy of peace.
His holy rule of action heard ;
I, in whose heart the sacred sense
Of Jesus'love was early felt.
Of His pure, full benevolence.
His pitying tenderness for guilt.
His shepherd care for wandering sheep,
For all weak, sorrowing, trembling things.
His mercy vast. His passion deep
Of anguish for man's sufferings ;
I, schooled from childhood in such lore,
Dared I draw back or hesitaiG
When called to heal the sickrve^a ^ < ixe, .
Of those far off and desolate*^ ..AL
64 POEMS BY CURRER BELL.
Dark, in the realm and shades of death,
Nations, and tribes, and empires lie ;
But even to them the Hght of faith
Is breaking on their sombre sky.
And be it mine to bid them raise
Their drooped heads to the kindling scene,
And know and hail the sunrise blaze
Which heralds Christ the Nazarene.
I know how hell the veil Will spread
Over their brows and filmy eyes,
And earthward crush the lifted head
That would look up and seek the skies.
I know what war the fiend will wage
Against that soldier of the Gross
Who comes to dare his demon rage
And work his kingdom shame and loss.
Yes, hard and terrible the toil
Of him who steps on foreign soil,
Resolved to plant the gospel vine,
Where tyrants rule and slaves repine ;
Eager to hft religion's hght
Where thickest shades of mental night
Screen the false god and fiendish rite ;
Reckless that missionary blood.
Shed in wild wilderness and wood, ;
Has left, upon the imblest air,
The man's deep moan, the martyr's prayer.
I know my lot ; I only ask
Power to ftilfil the glorious task.
Willing the spirit, may the flesh
Strength for. the day receive afresh.
May burning sun or deadly wind
Prevail not o'er an earnest mind ;
May torments strange or direst death
Nor trample truth, nor baffle faith.
Though such blood-drops should fall from me
As feU in old Gethsemane,
Welcome the anguish, so it g?cve
More strength to work, mote dcSX \ii saN^.
POEMS BY CURRER BELL. 65
And, oh ! if brief must be my time,
If hostile hand or fatal clime
Cut short my course, still o'er my grave.
Lord, may Thy harvest whitening wave.
So I the culture may begin.
Let others thrust the sickle in ;
If but the seed will faster grow,
May my blood water what I sow !
What ! have I ever trembling stood,
And feared to give to God that blood ?
What I has the coward love of life
Made me shrink from the righteous strife ?
Have human passions, human fears
Severed me from those pioneers
Whose task is to march first, and trace
Paths for the progress of our race ?
It has been so ; but grant me. Lord,
Now to stand steadfast by Thy word,
Protected by salvation's helm,
Shielded by faith, with truth begirt,
To smile when trials seek to whelm.
And stand'mid testing fires unhurt.
Hurling hell's strongest bulwarks down,
Even when the last pang thrills my breast.
When death bestows the martyr's crown.
And calls me into Jesus'rest.
Then for my ultimate reward.
Then for the world-rejoicing word.
The voice from Father, Spirit, Son —
* Servant of God, well hast thou done ! "
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL
FAITH AND DESPONDJENCY.
" The winter wind is loud and wild;.
Come Qlose to me, my daxling child.
Forsake thy books and mateless play,
And, while the night is gathering gray,
We'll talk its pensive hours away.
" leme, rpund our sheltered hall
Nbvertiber's gusts unheeded call ;
Not one faint breath can enter here
Enough to wave my daughter's hair ;
And I am glad to watch the blaze
Glance from her eyes with niimic rays —
To feel her cheek, so softly pressed
In happy quiet oh my breast.
** But yet even this tranquillity
Brings bitter, restless thoughts to me ;
And in the red fire's cheerful glow
I think of deep glens blocked with snow ;
I dream of moor, and misty hill.
Where evening closes dark and chill ;
For lone among the mountains cold
Lie those that I have loved of old.
And my heart aches, m \iopd^^ ^^mv,
Exhausted with repinings vaixv,
That I shall greet them tve'et 2^^tv\^'
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 67
'* Father, in early infancy,
When you were far beyond the sea,
Such thoughts were tyrant$ over me:
I often sat, for hours togethef, "
ItMTOugh the long nights of angry weather,
Raised on my piUow, to descry ;
The dim moon struggling In^thfe sky; "
Or, with strained ear, to catch the ishock
Of rock with wave, and wave with rock.
So would I fearful vigil keep,
And, all for listening,-/never sleep.
But this world's life has much to dread.
Not so, my father, with the dead. * =
" Oh ! not for them should \^e despair.
The grave is drear, but they : are i;iot there.
Their dust is mingled with the sod.
Their happy souls ar6 gone to God.
You told me this, and yet you sigh.
And murmur that your friends must die.
Ah ! my dear father, tell me why ?
For, if your former words were true,
How useless would such sorrow be !
As wise to mourn the seed which grew
Unnoticed on its parent tree,
Because it fell in fertile earth.
And sprang up to a ^orious birtt^,
Struck deep its root, and lifted high
Its green boughs in the breezy sky.
" But ril not fear* I will not weep
For those whose bodies rest in sleep.
I know there is a blessed shore
Opening its ports for me and mine.
And, gazing time's wide waters o'er,
I weary for that land divine,
Where we were bom, where you and I
Sha\\ meet our dearest wlien > we difc^
jprom suffering and comiptiotv feefc.
Restored into the Deity.
6S POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
" Well hast thou spoken, sweet, trustful child,
And wiser than thy sire ;
And worldly tempests, raging wild,
Shall strengthen thy desire,
Thy fervent hope, through storm and ifoam,
Through wind and ocean's roar, ; .•
To reach at last the eternsd home, ^
The steadfast, changeless ^or^. "
STARS.
Ah ! why, because the dazzling sun
Restored our earth to joy.
Have you departed, (every one.
And left a desert sky ?
All through the night your glorious eyes
Were gazing down in mine,
And with a f\dl heart's thankful sighs
I blessed that watch divine.
I. was at peace, and drank your beains
As they were life to me.
And revelled in my changeful dreams,
Like petrel on the isea.
Thought followed thought, star followed star,
Thrbugh boundless regions, on ;
While one sweiet influence, near and far.
Thrilled through, and proved us one. •
Why did the morning dawn to break
So great, so pure a spell,
And scorch with fire the tranquil cheek
Where your cool radiance fell ?
Blood-red he rose, and, arrow-straight,
His fierce beams struck ion \iTQw \
The sovl of nature sptatig, m.\ft >
But mine sank sad andVow. .
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 69
My lids closed down, yet through their veil
I saw him, blazing still,
And steep in gold the misty dale,
And flash upon the hill.
I turned me to the pillow then,
To call back night j and see
Your worlds of solemn light again
Throb with my heart and me.
It would not do ; the pillow glowed,
And glowed both roof and floor.
And birds sang loudly in the wood,
And fresh winds shook thfe door.
The curtains waved, the wakened flies
Were murmuring round my rootn.
Imprisoned there till I should rise
And give them leave to roam.
O stars, and dreams, and gentle night—
O night and stars, return.
And hide me frcMh the hostile light
That does not warm, but bum ;
That drains the blood of suffering men.
Drinks tears iristead of dew !''■'•
Let nie sleep through his blinding reign,
And only wake with ypU !
THE PHILOSOPHER.
" Enough of thought, philosopher !
Too long hast thou been dreaming
Unlightened, in this chamber drear ^
While summer's sun is'beaioM\^\
Space-sweeping Soul, w\vat saA it^^^^^x
Concludes thy musings otice ^g^ " ^^^
70 POEMS BY ELLIS; BELL,
" Oh, for the time when I shall sleep
Without identity,
And never care how rain may steep.
Or snow may ;coVer me !
No promised heaven these wild desires
Could all or half fulfil;
No threatened hell, Vrith quenchless fires,
Subdue this quenchless willl.''
" So said I, and still say the same —
Still, to my: death, will say, ,
Three gods within this little frtoie .
Are warring night and day.
Heaven could not hold them all, and yet
They all are held in me,
Arid ija^st be mine till I forgi$t
My present entity.
Oh for the time when in my breast
Their struggle^ will be o'er J , . .
Oh for the day when I shall rest
And never suffer more I "
" I saw a spirit ,standing, man,
Where thou dost stan^,, an hour ago,
And roimd his feet three rivers ran.
Of equal depth and equal flow— r
A golden stream, and opie Ul^e blood,
. And one like sapphire ge^m < ?d tp be ;
But where they joined their tjjiple fipod
It tumbled in an inky sea.
The spirit sent his dazzling gaze
Down through that ocean's gloomy night.
Then, kindling all with sudden blaze,
The glad deqp sparkjpd wide ^d bright,
White as the aun, f ^ir, far more fair
Than its divided .sources were. "
7 And jef^n for that spirit^ se«x >
''I\evrQidhed and souglit n > :v " ^^^^^^^sst
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 71
Sought him in heaven, hell, earth, and air.
An endless search, and alvi'ays wrong.
Had I but seen his glorious eye
Once light the clouds that'wilder me,
I ne'er had raised this coward cry
To cease to think, and cease to be ;
I ne'er had called obhvion blest.
Nor, stretching eager hands to death.
Implored to change for senseless rest
This sentient soul, this living breath.
Oh, let me die, that power and wilt
Their cruel strife may close,
And conquered good and conquering ill
Be lost in one repose ! "
REMEMBRANCE.
[x)LD in the earth, and the deep snow piled above thee ;
Far, far removed, cold in the dreary grave !
Have I forgot, my only loye, to love thee.
Severed at last by time's all-severing wave ?
Now, when alone, do my thoughts no longer hover
Over the mountains, on that northern shore.
Resting their wings where heath and fern-leaves cover
Thy noble heart for ever, ever more ?
3old in the earth, and fifteen wild Decembers
From those brown hiUs have melted into spring: ;
Faithful indeed is the spirit that remembers
After such yeais of change and suffering.
Sweet love of youth, forgive if I forget thee
While the world's tide is bearing me along ;
Dther desires and other hopes beset me —
Hopes which obscure, but cannot do thee wrong.
Vo later light has lightened up my Yveavexx^
No second morn has ever shone iox rafc'»
72 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
All my life's bliss from thy dear life was given.
All my life's bliss is in the grave with tiiee.
But when the days of golden dreams had perished,
And even despair was powerless to destroy,
Then did I learn how existence could be cherished,
Strengthened, and fed without the aid of joy.
Then did I check the tears of useless passion,
Weaned my yoimg soul from yearning jafter thine,
Sternly denied its burning wish to hasten
Down to that tomb already more than mine.
And even yet I dare not let it languish,
Dare not indulge in memory's rapturous pain ;
Once drinking deep of that divinest anguish,
How could I seek the empty world again ?
THE OUTCAST MOTHER.
I've seen this dell in July's shine.
As lovely as an angel's dream :
Above, heaven's depth of blue divine ;
Around, the evening's golden beam.
I've seen the purple heather-bell
Look out by many a storm-worn stone ;
And, oh ! I've known such music swell,
Such wild notes wake these passes lone.
So soft, yet so intensely felt.
So low, yet so distinctly heard,
My breath would pause, my eyes would melt.
And tears would dew the green heath-sward.
I'd linger here a summer day,
Nor care how fast the1io\iis fl.ew by.
Nor mark the sun's depaitm^t^N
Smile sadly from tive dai^L'miv^^V^.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 73
Then, then I might have laid me down
And dreamed my sleep would gentle be ;
I might have left thee, darling one,
And thought thy God was guarding thee.
But now there is no wandering glow,
No gleam to say that God is nigh ;
And coldly spreads the couch of snow,
And harshly sounds thy lullaby.
Forests of heather, dark and long,
Wave their brown branching arms above ;
And they must soothe thee with their song,
And they must shield my child of love.
Alas ! the flakes are heavily falling ;
They cover fast each guardian crest ;
And chilly white their shroud is palling
Thy frozen limbs and freezing breast.
Wakes up the storm more madly wild^
The mountain drifts are tossed on high.
Farewell, unblessed, unfriended child ;
I cannot bear to watch thee die.
A DEATH-SCENE.
'O DAY, he cannot die'
When thou so fair art shining !
O sun, in such a glorious sky,
So tranquilly dedining,
" He cannot leave thee now.
While fresh west winds are blowing,
And all around his youthful brow
Thy cheerful light is glowing \
'Edward ! awake, awake \
The golden evening gleams
74 POEMS BV ELLIS BELU
Wapn and bright on Arden's lake —
; Arouse thee from thy dreams !
" Besidq thee, on.my knee,
My dearest friend, I pray
That thou, to cross the eternal sea,
; Wouldst yet one hour delay. *
*• i laeair its biljows roar,
] j[ see them foaming high ;
But no glimpse of a farther shore
. Has blest my straining eye.
" Believe not what they urge
Of Eden isles beyond ;
Turn back from that tempestuous sturge
:To thy own native land
** It is not death, bfutpain,;;
That struggles in thy breast.
Nay, rally, Edward ; rouse again. -
I cannot let thee rest ! "
Ope long look, that sore reproved me
For th^ woe I could not bear.
One mute look of suffering moved me
To repent my useless prayer ;
Apd, with sudden check, the heaving
Of distraction passed away ;
Not a sign of further grieving
Stirred my soul that awful day,
f aled at length, the sweet sun setting,
• §unk to peace the twilight breeze ;
Summer dews fell softly, wetting
Glen, and glade, and silent trees.
Thkn his eyes began to wearvj.
Weighed beneath a moital ^ee^.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 75
And their orbs grew strangely dreary,
Clouded, even as they would weep.
But they wept not, but they changed not,
Never moved, and never closed ;
Troubled still, and still they ranged liot ;
Wandered not, nor yet reposed.
So I knew that he was dying ;
Stooped, and raised his languid head ;
Felt no breath, and heard no sighing.
So I knew that he was dead.
SONG.
The linnet in the rocky dells,
The moor-lark in the air,
The bee among the heather-bells
That hide my lady fair :
The wild deer browse above her breast,
The wild birds raise their brood ;
And they, her smiles of love caressed,
Have left her soUtude.
I ween that when the grave's dark wall
Did first her form retain,
They thought their hearts could ne'er recall
The hght of joy again.
They thought the tide of grief would flow
Unchecked through future years ;
But where is all t^**'** aneuish now,
And where ^^ars ?
WeU, let thP th.
Orr
TbB
i
76 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL;
And if theit eyes should watch atid'weep
Till sorrow's source were dry, =
She would not, in her tranquil sleep,
'Returti a single sigh.
Blow, west wind, by the lonely mbund,
And murmur, summer streariis :•
There is no need of other sound
To soothe my lady's* 4reams.
ANTICIPATION.
How beautiful the earth is still
To thee, how full pf happiness I
How little fraught with real ill.
Or unreal phantoms of distress \ ; .^
How spring can bring thee glory yet,
And sumriier win thee to forget
December's sullen time !
Why dost thou hold the treasure f ast .
Of youth^s delight, when yputh is past',
And thou art near thy prime ?
When those who were thy own coinf)eer§|
Equals in fortune and in years, . i
Have seen their morning melt iii tears
To clouded, smileless day ; ;
Blest had they died untried and young.
Before their hearts went wandering wrong-
Pdor slaves, subdued by passions strong,
A weak and helpless prey !
" Because I hoped while they enjoyed,
And by fulfilment hope destroyed ;
As children hope, with ttustful breast,
I waited bliss, iand cVierisYved xeJsX.'^
A thoughtful spirit teMg\\V^ me sooxv
That we must long tiW Vd^ ^^e d^tv^ >
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 7/
That every phase of earthly joy
Must always fade, and always cloy.
" This I foresaw, and would not chase
The fleeting treacheries ;
But, with firm foot and tranquil face^ :
Held backward from that tempting race,
Gazed o'er the sands the waves efface .
To the enduring seas ;
There cast my anchor of desire ;
Deep in imknown eternity ;
.. Nor ever let my spirit tire
With looking for what is* to he.
'* It is hope's spell that glorifies,
. Like youth, to my maturer eyes,
All nature's million mysteries.
The fearful and the fair.
Hope soothes me in the. grief? I know, .
S]ie lulls my pain for others'woe, , -
And makes me strong to undergo
What I am bom to bear^
Glad comforter ! will I not brave,
Unawed, ithe darkness of the grave —
Nay, smile to hear death's billows rave,
. . Sustained, my guide, by thee ?
The more unjust seems present fate,
The more my spirit swells elate,
Strong in thy strength to anticips^te
Rewarding destiny. "
THE PRISONER.
A FRAGMENT.
r the dungeon crypts idly did I stray,
eckless of the lives wasting tViere awa.'^ .
aw the ponderous bars I Open, Nvai^fiX tJi*« "
dared not say me nay ; the Yangjes " toflK
78 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
" Our guests are darkly lodged, " I whispered, gazini
through
The vault, whose grated eye showed heaven more gra
than blue.
(This was when glad spring laughed in awaking pride
" Ay, darkly lodged enough !''returned my sullen guid
Then — God forgive my youth, forgive my carele
tongue —
I scoffed, as the chill chains oil the damp flagston
rung:
" Confined in triple walls, art thou " so much to fear
That we must bind thee down and clench thy fette
here ? "
The captive raised her face. It was as soft jand mild
As sculptured marble saint, or slumbering unwean
child ; . .
It was so soft and mild, it > yas so sweet and fair.
Pain could not trace a line, nor grief a shadow there
The captive raised heir hand and pressed it to her brc
" I have been struck, " she said, *'an4 I am sufferi
now.
Yet these are little worth — your bolts and irons stror
And were they forged in steel they could not h
me long. "
Hoarse laughed the jailor grim. " Shall I be won
hear ?
Dost think, fond, dreaming wretch, that I shall gn
thy prayer,
Or, better still, wilt melt my master's heart w
groans ?
Ah ! sooner might the sim thaw down these gran
stones.
''My master's voice is low, his aspect \A^xvd ^xv^Vxxv^
-But hard as hardest flint the so\al that \Txt^ > Qfc > cM
POEMS BY EtLIS BELL. 7^
id I am rough and rude, yet not more rough to see
lan is the hidden ghost that has its home in me. "
bout her Hps there played a smile of almost scorn.
y friend/'she gently said, " you have npt heard me
mourn. :c j
" hen you my kindred's Hves, my lost Ufe, ci^n restore,
bien may I weep and sue, but never, friend, " befote.
till, let my tyrants know I am not doomed to wear
ear after year in gloom and desolate despair. .
messenger of hope comes every night to me, •
tid offers for short life eternal hberty.
e comes with western winds, with evening's wander-
ing airs,
ith that clear dusk of heaven that brings the thickest
stars.
inds take a pensive tone, and stars a tender fite,
id visions rise and change that kill me with dfesire —
esire for nothing known in my maturer years,
hen joy grew mad with awe at counting futijlte tears ;
hen, if my spirit*s sky was full of flashes warm,
knew not whence they came, from sun. or thunder-
storm.
ut first a hush of peace — ia soundless calm descends ;
le struggle of distress, and fierce impatience finds ;
ute miisic soothes my breast — unuttered harmony,
lat I could never dream till earth was lost to iti^.
hen dawns the invisible ; the unseen its truth reveals ;
y outward sense is gone, my inward essence fdpls.
s wings are almost free, its home, its harbour found :
easuring the gulf, it stoops and dares the final bounq.
2 / dreadful is the check, intenae lYie ^:^oxc^ ,
ten the ear begins to hear and the eve > oe^x > A " ^^'
8o POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
When the pulse begins to throb, the brain to thin
again,
The soul to feel the flesh, and the flesh to feel the chaii
" Yet I would lose no sting, would wish no torture lets
The more that anguish racks, the earlier it will bless;
And robed in fires of hell, or bright with heavenl;
shine,'
If it but herald death, the vision is divine. "
She ceased to speak, and we, unanswering, turned to go
We had no further power to work the captive woe.
Her cheek, her gleaming eye, declared that man hi
given
A sentence unapproved and overruled by Heaven.
HOPE.
Hope was but a timid friend ;
She sat without the grated den,
Watching how my fate would tend.
Even as selfish-hearted mien.
Shie was cruel in her fear.
Through the bars one dreary day
I looked out to see her there,
And she turned her face away.
Like a false guard, false watch keeping.
Still in strife she whispered peace.
She would sing while I was weeping ;
If I listened, she would cease:
. False she was, and unrelenting.
When my last ^oys stiewed \.\ie ^ound.
Even Sorrow saw, repentm^s
Those sad relics scattered tovix^d.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 8t
Hope, whose whisper would have given
Balm to all my frenzied pain,
Stretched her wings, and soared to heaven —
Went, and ne'er returned again:
A DAY DREAM.
On a sunny brae alone I lay
One svmimer afternoon ;
It was the marriage-time of May
With her young lover June.
From her mother's heart seemed loath to part
That queen of bridal charms, ,
But her father smiled on. the fairest child
He ever held in his arms.
The trees did wave their plumy crests,
The glad birds carolled clear ;
And I, of all the wedding-guests,
Was only sullen there.
There was not one but wished to shun
My aspect void of cheer ;
The very gray rocks, looking on,
Asked, " What do you here ? "
And I could utter no reply ;
In sooth, I did not know
Why I had brought a clouded eye
To greet the general glow.
So, resting on a heathy bank,
I took my heart to me ;'
And we together sadly sank
Into a reverie.
$S POEMS BY ELLIS BELL;
We tjiought,''When winter comes again,
Where will these bright things be ?
AlF vanished, like a vision vain, ^
An unreal mockery.'
'^ The birds that now so blithely sing,
Through deserts, frozen dry,
Poor spectres of the perished spring,
In famished -troops will fly. .
" And why should we be glad at all ?
The leaf is hardly green
Before ^ token of its fall
.Is on the surface seen/'
Now, whether it were really so,
I never couM be sure ;
But as in fit of peevish woe,
I stretched me on the moor.
A i:housand thousand gleaming fires'
Seemed kindling in the air ;
A thousand thousand silvery lyres
Resounded far and near,
Methbught the very breath I breathed
Was full of sparks divine.
And ail my heather-couch was wreathed
By that celestial shine.
And, while the wide earth echoing rung
To that strange minstrelsy.
The little glittering spirits sung.
Or seemed to sing, to me :
'* mortal, mortal I let them die ;
tet time and teats desitoy ,
That we may ovetRow t\\e sV:^
With universal ipy- •
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 83
" Let grief distract the suiiferer's breast,
And night obscure his way ;
They hasten him to endless rest,
And everlasting day.
" To thee the world is like a tomb, ;
A desert's naked shore ;
To us, in unimagined bloom,
It brightens more and more.
" And, could we lift the veil, and give
One brief glimpse to thine eye,
Thou wouldst rejoice for those that live.
Because they Uve to die. "
The music ceased ; the noonday dream,
Like dream of night, withdrew ;
But Fancy still will sometimes deem
Her fond creation true.
TO IMAGINATION,
When weary with the long day's care,
And earthly change from pain to pain,
And lost, and ready to despair.
Thy kind voice calls me back again.
Oh, my true friend, I am not lone.
While thou canst speak with such a tone !
So hopeless is the world without ;
The world within I doubly prize—*
Thy world, where guile, and hate, and doubt,
And cold suspicion never rise ;
Where thou, and I, and liberty
Have undisputed sovereignty.
What matters it that a\\ atoMTvAL
Danger, and p^uilt, and daxVive^'^e*
94 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL;
If but within our bosom's bound
We hold a bright, untroubled sky,
Warm with ten thousand mingled rays
Of suns that know no winter days ?/
Reason, indeed, may oft complain'
For nature's sad reality,
And tell the suffering heart how ysdn
Its cherished dreams must alwaiyis be ;
And truth may rudely trample do^yn
The flowers of fancy, newly-blbvvli':
But thou art ever there, to bring
The hovering vision back, and breathe
New glories o'er the blighted spring,.^
And call a lovelier life from deatl:^
And whisper, with a voice divine,
Of real worlds, as bright as tjiihe.
I trust not to thy phantom bliss,
Yet, stilj, in, evening's quiet. hour,
With never-fiailing thankfulness,
I welcome thee^ ^benignant powerr*-
Sure solacer of human cares,
Arid sweeter hope, when hope despairs.
HOW CLEAR SHE SHINES.
How clear she shines 1 How quietly
■ I lie beneath her guardian light.
While heaven and earth are whispering me,
" To-morrow wake, but dream to*night. "
Yes, Fancy, come, my fairy love ;
These throbbing tempVes s^olW-^ V\^\
And bend my lonely couc\\ ^ov^,
-And bring me le^t, arvdbim«.m^\3\\^.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 8$
The world is going ; dark world, adieu !
Grim world, conceal thee till the day.
The heart thou canst not all subdue
Must still resist, if thou delay. .
Thy love I will not, Avill not share ;
Thy hatred only wakes a smile ;
Thy griefs may wound, thy wrongs may tear,
But oh, thy lies shall ne'er beguile !
While gazing on the stars that glow
Above me, in that stormless sea,
I long to hope that all the woe
Creation knows is held in thee.
And this shall be my dream to-night :
rU think the heaven of glorious spheres
Is rolling on its course of light
In endless bliss through endless years ;
ril think, there's not one world above,
Far as these straining eyes can see,
Where wisdom ever laughed at love,
Or virtue crouched to infamy, —
Where, writhing'neath the strokes of fate.
The mangled wretch was forqed to smile,
To match his patience'gainst her hate.
His heart rebellious all the while, —
Where pleasure still will lead to wrong.
And helpless reason warn in vain ;
And truth is weak, and treachery strong ;
And joy the surest path to pain ;
And p)eace, the lethargy of grief ;
And hope, a phantom of the soul ;
And life, a labour, void and brief ;
And death, the despot of the whole.
S6 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
SYMPATHY.
There should be no despair for you.
While nightly stars are btirning ;
While evening pours its silent dew,
And sunshine gilds the morning.
*rhere should be no despair, though tears
May flow down like a river.
Are riot the best beloved of years
Around your heart for evet ?
They weep, you weep — it must be so ;
Winds sigh as you are sighing.
And winter sheds its grief in snoiw
Where autumn's leaves are lying.
Yet these revive, and froin their fate
Your fate cannot be parted.
Then journey on, if not elate,
Still, never broken-hearted.
PLEAD FOR ME.
Oh, thiy bright eyes must answer now.
When reason, with a scornful brow,
Is mocking at my overthrow !
Oh, thy'sweet tongue must plead for me
And tell why I have chosen th6e !
Stem Reason is to judgment come,
Arrayed in all her forms of gloom.
Wilt thou, my advocate, be dumb ?
No, radiajat angel ; speak and say .
Why I did cast the world away;
Why I have persevered to shun
The common paths that others run,
And on a strange road \oMrj\e^^d oxv.
Heedless alike oi wea\t\v and pcswex.
Of giory's wreath and p\easox^'^ ^osn^x^.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. %f
These once, indeed, seemed beings divine ;
And they, perchance, heard vows of mine,
And saw my offerings on their shrine ;
But careless gifts are seldom prized,
And mine were worthily despised.
So, with a ready heart, I swore
To seek their altar-stone no more,
And gave my spirit to adore
Thee, ever-present, phantom thing,
My slave, my comrade, and my king, —
A slave, because I rule thee still,
Incline thee to my changeful will,
And make thy influence good or ill, —
A comrade, for by day and night
Thou art my intimate delight,
My darling pain that wounds and sears.
And wrings a blessing out from tear &
By deadening me to earthly cares ;
And yet a kmg, though Prudence well
Have taught thy subject to rebel.
And am I wrong to worship where
Faith cannot doubt, nor hope despair.
Since my own soul can grant my prayer ?
Speak, God of visions, plead for me,
Aiid tell why I have chosen Thee !
SELF-INTERROGATION.
'The evening passes fast away ;
Tis aJmost time to rest.
What thoughts hsis left the vamsYv^^ ^^^ .
What feelings in thy breast " ^
99 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
" The vanished day ? It leaves a sense
Of labour hardly done,
Of little gained with vast expense—^
A sense of grief alone. :
" Time stands before the door of death,
Upbraiding bitterly ; .
And conscience, with exhaustless. breath,
Pours black reproach on me :
" And though Fve said that conscience lies,
And time should fate condemn,
Still, sad repentance clouds my eyes,
And makes me yield to thetn.
" Then aji: thou glad to seek repose ?
Art glad to leave the sea,
And anchor all thy weary woes
In calm eternity ?
" Nothing regrets to see thee go-
Not one Voice sobs'farewell • *
And where thy heart has suffered so,
Canst thou desire to dwell ? "
" Alas ! the countjess links are strong
That bind us to our clay ;
The loving spirit lingers long,
And would not pass away.
*'And rest is sweet, when laurelled fame
Will crown the soldier's crest ;
But a brave heart, with a tarnished name,
Would rather fight than rest.. .
" Well thou hast fought for many a year,
H£^t fought thy Vlio\e\\ie\Vxc > Ni^,
''Hast- humbled falsehood, ttaixv^X^^^^^x \
What is there leit to do >
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 89
*'Tis true this arm has hotly striven,
Has dared what few would dare ;
Much have I done, and freely given,
But little learnt to bear.
'Look, on the grave where thou must sleep,
Thy last and strongest foe ;
It is endurance not to weep,
If that repose seem woe.
* The long war closing in defeat —
Defeat serenely borne —
Thy midnight rest may still be sweet,
And break in glorious mom.'*
DEATH.
Death ! that struck when I was most confiding
In my certain faith of joy to be,
Strike again, time's withered branch dividing
From the fresh root of eternity !
Leaves upon time's branch were growing brightly.
Full of sap, and full of silver dew ;
Birds beneath its shelter gathered nightly ;
Daily round its flowers the wild bees flew.
Sorrow passed, and plucked the golden blossom ;
Guilt stripped off the foliage in its pridQ ;
But within its parent's kindly bosom
Flowed for ever life's restoring tide. .
Little mourned I for the parted gladness,
For the vacant nest and silent song ;
Hope was there, and laughed me out of sadness.
Whispering, " Winter will not linger lotu^ I "
And, behold! with tenfold increase \Aesisv»%,
Spring adorned the beauty -bur dctifiA %V^vg \
90 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
Wind and rain and fervent heat, caressing,
Lavished glory on that second May. .
High it rose — no winged grief could sweep it ;
Sin was scared to distance with its shine ;
Love, and its own life, had power to keep it
From all wrong — from every blight but thine.
Cruel death ! The young leaves droop and languish
Evening's gentle air may still restore.
No ! the morning sunshine mocks my anguish ;
Time, fpr me, must never blossom more.
Strike it down, that other Troughs may flourish
Where that perished sapling used to be ;
Thus, at least, its mouldering corpse will nourish
That from which it sprang — eternity.
STANZAS TO
Well, some may hate, and some may scorn,
A^d spine may quite forget thy name ;
But tny sad heart must ever mourn
Thy ruined hopes, thy blighted fame.
'Twas thus I thought, an hour ago,
Even weeping o'er that wretch's woe.
One > yord turned back my gushing tears.
And lit my altered eye with sneers.'
Then *'Bless the friendly dust, " I said,
" That hides thy unlamented head !
Vain as thou wert, and weak as vain,
The slay^ of falsehood, pride, and pain.
My heart has nought akin to thine ;
Thy soul, is powerless ovpr mine. "
But: tbesfd were thaugUts t\vat vaT^'^^\.Q« > —
Unwisj^, ui^holy, and untrue.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 9I
Do I despise the timid deer,
Because his hmbs are fleet with fear ?
Or would I mock the wolfs death-howl,
Because his form is gaunt and foul ?
Or hear with joy the leveret's cry,
Because it cannot bravely die ?
No ! Then above his memory
Let pity's heart as tender be ;
Say, ** Earth, lie lightly on that breast ;
And, kind Heaven, grant that spirit rest ! "
HONOUR'S MARTYR.
The moon is full this winter night ;
The stars are clear, though few ;
And every window glistens bright
With leaves of frozen dew.
The sweet moon through your lattice gleams.
And lights your room like day ;
And there you pass, in happy (teams,
The peaceful hours away.
While I, with effort hardly quelling
The anguish in my breast,
Wander about the silent dwelling,
And cannot think of rest.
The old clock in the gloomy hall
Ticks on from hour to hour ;
And every time its measured call
Seems lingering slow and slowei:.
And oh ! how slow that keen-eyed stat
Has tracked the chilly gray \
What 1 watching yet ? How vety \at
The morning lies away \
9? POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
Without your chamber door I stand.
Love,, are you slumbering still ?
My cold heart, underneath my hand,
Has almost ceased to thrill.
Bleak, bleak the east wind sobs and ^hs^
And drowns the turret bell,
Whose sad note, undistinguished, dies
Unheard, like my farewell.
To-morrow, scorn will blight my name.
And hate will trample me,
Will load me with a coward's shame,
A traitor's perjury.
False friends will launch their covert sneers
True friends will wish me dead, .
And I shall cause thp bitterest tears
That you have ever ished.
The dark deeds of my outlawecj face
Will then like virtues shine ;
And nien will pardon their disgrace,
Beside the guilt of mine.
For, who forgives the accursed crime
Of dastard treachery ?
Rebellioii, in its chosen time,
May freedom's champion be ;
Revenjge may stain a righteous sword-
It may be just to slay ;
But, traitor, traitor ! — from that word
All true breasts shrink away.
Oh, I would give my heart to death,
To keep my hononr ia\t \
Yet, I'll not give my mw^TdA«i\ > a.
My honour's name to s^poc^.
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 93
Not even to keep your priceless love,
Dare I, beloved, deceive ;
This treason should the future prove,
Then, oiily then, believe.
I know the path I ought to go ;
I follow fearlessly,
Inquiring not what deeper woe
Stern duty stores for me.
So foes pursue, and cold allies
Mistrust me, every one.
Let me be false in others* eyes, .
If faithful in my own.
STANZAS.
Tll not weep that thou art going to leave me-
There's nothing lovely here ;
And doubly will the dark world grieve me,
While thy heart suffers there.
ril not weep, because the summer's gfory
Must always end in gloom ;
And, follow out the happiest story —
It closes with a tomb !
And I am weaty of the anguish
Increasing winters bear —
Weary to watch the spirit languish
Through years of dead despair.
So, if a tear, when thou art dying,
Should haply fall from me.
It is but that my soul is sighing
To go and rest with thee.
94 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
MY COMFORTER.
Well hast thou spoken, and yet not taught
A feeUng strange or new ;
Thou hast but roused a latent thought,
A cloud-closed beam of sunshine brought
Tq gleam in open view.
Deep down, concealed within my soul,
That light lies hid from men ;
Yet glows unqufehched— though shadows roll.
Its gentle ray cannot control —
About the stillen den.
Was I not vexed in these gloomy ways
To walk alone so long ?
Around me, wretches uttering praise,
Or howling o*er their hopeless days,
And each with frenzy's tongue —
A brotherhood of misery,
Their smiles as sad as sighs.
Whose madness daily maddened me.
Distorting into agony
The bliss before my eyes.
So stood I, in heaven's glorious sun,
And in the glare of hell ;
My spirit drank a mingled tone,
Of seraph's song, and demon's moan.
What my soul bore, my soul alone .
Within itself may teU.
Like a soft air above a sea,
Tossed by the tempest's stir ;
A thaw- wind, niel ting quietly
The snow-drift on some w\ix\i > / \e^. \
No ; what sweet thing iesem\ > \e^ \}j\^^.
My thoughtfxil comioTtet " ^
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL. 9j
And yet a little longer speak,
: Calm this resentfiil mood ;
And while the savage heart grows meek,
For other token dp not seek,
But let the tear upon my cheek
Evince my gratitude.
THE OLD STOIC.
Riches I hold in Hght esteem,
And love I laugh to scorn,
And lust of fame was but a dream
That vanished with the morn ;
And if I pray, the only prayer
That moyes my lips for me
Is,'* Leave the heart that now I bear,
And give me liberty ! "
Yes, as my swift days hear th6ir goal,
*Tis all that I implore —
In hfe and deiath a chaiiiless soul.
With courage to endure.

POEMS BY ACTON BELL
A REMINISCENCE.
Yes, thou art gone, and never more
Thy sunny smile shall gladden me ;
But I may pass the old church door,
And pace (the floor, that covers thee —
May stand; upon the cold, damp stone,
And think that^ frozen, lies below
The lightest heart that I have known.
The kindest I shall ever know.
Yet, though I cannot see thee more,
Tis still a comfort to have seen ;
And though thy transient life is o'er,
Tis sweet to think that thou hast been-
To think a soul so near divine.
Within a form so angel fair.
United to a heart Uke thine,
Has gladdened once our humble sphere.
THE ARBOUR.
I'll rest me in this sheltered bower,
And look upon the c\eat \ > \m^ %V?g
That smiles upon me ttvK > u^\\ > iXv^ Vc^ " ^,
Which stand so tbick dublediv^Xi^j \
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. 97
And view their green and glossy leaves,
All glistening in the sunshine fair ;
And Ust the rustling of their boughs,
So softly whispering through the air.
And while my ear drinks in the sound.
My winged soul shall fly away.
Reviewing long departed years
As one mild, beaming, autumn day ;
And soaring on to future scenes,
Like hills, and woods, and valleys green.
All basking in the summer's sun,
But distant still, and dimly seen.
Oh, list !'tis summer's very breath
That gently shakes the rustling trees.
But look ! the snow is on the ground.
How can I thiiik 5f scenes like these ?
'Tis but the frost that clears the air.
And gives the sky that Ibvely blue.
Thej^re smiling in a winter* s sun,
Those evergreens of sombre hue.
And winter's chill is on my heart :
How can I dream of future bhss ?
How can my spirit soar away,
Confined by such a chain as this ?
HOME.
How brightly glistening in the sun
The woodland ivy plays ! -'■ >
While yonder beeches from their bar'
Reflect his silver rayS. "'^ •'^ " ^ » I > ^
■ ■'...■■«.■■. IU*v»^
That sun surveys a lovohP*
Fpojn softly smiling isS
98 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
And wildly through unnumbered trees
The wind of winter sighs.
Now loud, it thunders o'er my head.
And now in distance dies.
But give me back my barren hills.
Where colder breezes rise ;
Where scarce the scattered, stunted trees
Can yield an answering swell,
But where a wilderness of heath
Returns the sound as well.
For yonder garden, fair and wide,
With groves of evergreen,
Long winding walks, and borders trim.
And velvet lawns between.
Restore to me that Httle spot.
With gray walls compassed round,
Where Imotted grass neglected lies,
And weeds usurp the ground.
Though all around this mansion high
Invites the foot to roam,
And though its halls are fair within.
Oh, give me back my Home ! .
VANITAS VANITATUM, OMNIA VANITAS
In all we do, and hear, and see.
Is restless toil and vanity.
While yet the rolling earth abides,
Men come and go Uke ocean tides ;
And ere one geneia\ioT\ 6\^,
Another in its pVace s\i^\ iv5 > ^ \
That, sinking, soon *m^o \ > afc%t^N^ >
Others succeed. ^V^e > n^.v^ o\xvi^^^\
POEMS BY -ACTON BELL. QQ
And as they rise they pass away.
The sun arises every day,
And hastening onward to the west,
He nightly sinks, but not to rest ;
Returning to the eastern skies,
Again to Hght us, he must rise.
And still the restleiss wind comes forth —
Now blowing keenly from the north ;
Now from the south, the east, the west —
For ever changing, ne'er at rest.
The fountains, gushing from the hills,
Supply the ever-rimning rills ;
The thirsty rivers drink their store.
And bear it rolling to the shore,..
But still the ocean craves for more!
'Tis endless labour everywhere ;
Soimd cannot satisfy the ear,
Light cannot fill the craving eye.
Nor riches half our wants supply ;
Pleasure but doubles future pain.
And joy brings sorrow in her train ;
Laughter is mad, and reckless mirth —
What does she in this weary earth ?
Should wealth or fame our life employ.
Death comes, our labour to destroy ;
To snatch the untasted cup away.
For which we toiled so many a day.
What, then, remains for wretched man ?
To use life's comforts while he can,
Enjoy the blessings Heaven bestows^
Assist his friends, forgive his io^ \
Trust God, and keep His statute^s s^i^.
Upright and firm, through, good ^jcASSSl \
lOO POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
Thankful for all that God has given,
Fixing his firmest hopes on heaven ;
Knowing that earthly joys decay,
But hoping through the darkest day.
THE PENITENT.
I MOURN with thee, and yet rejoice
That thou shouldst sorrow so ;
With angel choirs I join my^vtSice "
To bless the sinner's woe.
Though friends and kindred turn away,
And laugh thy grief to scorn,
I hear the great Redeenier say,
* * Blessed, dre ye that mourn.''.
Hold on thy course, nor deem it strange
That earthly cords are riven.
Man may lament the wondrous change.
But " th^re is joy in heaven.*'
MUSIC ON CHRISTMAS MORNING.
MusicI love; but never strain
Could kindle raptures so divine.
So grief, assuage, , so conquer pain,
And rouse this pensive heart of mine.
As that we hear. on Christmas morn.
Upon the wintry breezes borne.
Though darkness still her empire keep,
And hours must pass ere morning; break,
From troubled dreiams or slumbers deep
That music kindly bids ws v^r^V^.
It calls us, with an angd* s vo\c^;
To wake^ and worship, aM te\o\cfc \
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. IQI
To greet with joy the glorious morn
Which angels welcomed long ago,
When our redeeming Lord was bom
To bring the light of heaven below,
The powers of darkness to dispel,
And rescue earth from death and hell.
While hstening to 1:hat sacred strain,
My raptured spirit soars on high ;
I seem to hear those songs again
Resoimding through the open sky,
That kindled such divine dehght
In those who watched their flocks by night.
With them I celebrate His birth.
Glory to God in highest heaven,
Good- will to men, and peace on earth ;
To us a Saviour-king is given ;
Our God is come to claim His owp,.
And Satan's power is overthrown.
A sinless God, for sinful men,
Descends to suffer and to bleed :
Hell must renounce its empire then.
The price is paid, the world, is freed,
And Satan's self must now confess
That Christ has earned a right to bless.
Now holy peace may smile from heaven,
And heavenly truth from earth shall spring :
The captive's galling bonds are riven.
For our Redeemer is our king ;
And He that gave His blood for men
Will lead us home to God. again.
I02 POEMS BY'ACTON BELL.
STANZAS.
Oh, weep not, love ! Each tear that spring:
In those dear eyes of thine,
To me a keener suffering brings
Than if they flowed from mine.
And do not droop, hbwever drear
The fate awaiting thee ;
For my sake combat pain and care.
And cherish life f6r me.
I do not fear thy love will fail ;
Thy faith is true, I know ;
But oh, my love, thy strength is frail
For such a life of woe !
Were't not for this, I well could trace
(Thbtigh banished long from thfee)
Life's rugged path, and boldly face
The storms that threaten me.
Fear not for me : IVe steeled my mind
Sorrow and strife to greet ;
Joy with my love I leave behind,
Care with my friends I meet.
A mpther's sad, reproachful eye,
A fatlier's scowling brow —
But he may frown and she may sigh ;
I will not break my vow.
I love my mother, I revere
My sire, but fear not me :'
Believe that death alone can tear
This faithful heart from thee.
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. IO3
IF THIS BE ALL.
O God ! if this indeed be all
That life can show to me ;
If on my aching brow may fall
No freshening dew from Thee ;
If with no brighter Ught than this
The lamp of hope may grow,
And I may only dream of bliss,
And wake to weary woe ;
If friendship's solace must decay
When other joys are gone,
And love must keep so far away.
While I go wandering on-
Wandering and toiling without gain,
The slave of others'will,
With constant care, and frequent pain,
Despised, forgotten still ;
Grieving to Took on vice and sin,
Yet powerless to quell
The silent current from within,
The outward torrent's swell ;
While all the good I would impart.
The feehngs I would share.
Are drivfen backward to my heart,
And turned to wormwood there ;
If clouds must ever keep from sight
The glories of the sun,
And I must suffer Avinter's blight
Ere summer is begim ;
If Hf e must be so full of care,
Then call me soon to TYv^e,
Or give me strength enou%\v to > o^ax
My load of misery.
r04 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
MEMORY.
Brightly the sun of summer shone
Green fields arid waving wobds upon.
And soft winds wandered by ;
Above, at sky of purest blue,
Around, bright flowers of loveliest hue,
Alluted the gazeir*^ eye.
But what were all thelse chartns to me.
When one sweet breath of memory
C^me gently wafting by ?
I closed my eyes against the day,
And called my willing soul away
From earth, and, air, and sky,
That J. might simply fancy there
6ne little flower, a primrose fa|r,
Just opening into sight, . . ;
As in the days of infancy .
An opening primrose seemed to me
A source of strange delight.
Sweet memory ! ever smile on me ;
Nature's chief beauties spring from thee ;
Oh, still thy tribute bring !
Still mak6 the golden crocus shine ■
Among the flowers the most divine,
The glory of the spring.
Still in the wallflower's fragrance dwell.
And hover round the slight bluebell,
My childhood's darUng flower.
Smile on the littlfe daisy still,
The buttercup's bright goblet fill
With al.l thy former power.
For ever hang th'y dreamy ?»p^^^
Round itiountain star aIld\l^^^^iet\i^,
And do not pass away
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. IO5
From sparkling frost, or wreathed snow,
And whisper when the wild winds blow,
Or rippling waters play.
Is childhood, then, so all divine ?
Or, memory, is the glory thine
That haloes. thus the past ?
Not all divine ; its pangs of grief •
(Although, perchance, ^eir stay be brief)
Are bitter while they last.
Nor is the glory all fltdne own,
For on our earliest joys alone
That holy light is cast.
With such a ray, no spell of thine
Can make our lat^r pleasures shine,
Though long ago they passed,.
TO COWPER.
Sweet are thy strains,, celestial bard ;
And oft in childhood's years
I've read them o'er and o'er again,
With floods of silent tears.
The language of my inmost heart
I traced in every line ;
My sins, my sorrows, hopes, and fears.
Were there — and only mine.
AH for myself the sigh would swell.
The tear of anguish start ;
I little knew what wilder woe
Had filled the poet's heart.
I did not know the nights of gloom.
The days of misery,
The long, long years of dark despavc.
That crushed and tortuted \ivefe.
IQ(5 POEMS BY ACTON BE|;.L.
But they are gone ; from earth at length
Thy gentle soul is passed^
And in the bosom of its God
Has found its home at last.
It must be so, if God is love,
'And answers fervent prayer. :
Then surely thou shalt dwell on highv
. ^And J may meet thee there. ^
Is He the source pf every good.
The spring of purity ?'
Then in tliine hours. o^ deepest woe •
Thy God wais still with thee.
How else, when eJvery hopd was fled,
Couldst thou so fondly cling "
To holy things and holy men ?
And how so sweetly sing
0( things that God alone could teach ?
'And whence that purity,
That hatred of all sinful wayis^
That gentle charity ?
Are these the symptoms of a heart
Of heavenly grace bereft,
For ev^r banished from its God, . .
To Satan's fury left ?
Yetj should thy darkest fears be true^
If Heaven be so severe
That such a soul as, thine is lost—
Oh, how shall / appear ?
POEMS • BY ACTON BELU'107
THE DOUBTER'S PRAYER.
Eternal Power of earth and air.
Unseen, yet seen in all around,
Remote, but dwelling everywhere.
Though silent, heard in every sound,
If e*er Thine ear in mercy bent -
When wretched mortals cried to Thee,
And if, indeed, Thy Son was sent
To save lost sinners such as me.
Then hear me now while, kneehng here,
I lift to Thee my heart and eye,
And all my soul ascends in prayer —
Oh, give me, give me faith I I cry.
Without some glimmering in my heart,
I could not raise this fervent prayer
But oh I a stronger light impart.
And in Thy mercy fix it there.
While faith is with me, I am blest ;
It turns my darkest night to day ;
But while I clasp it to my breast
I often feel it slide away.
Then, cold and dark, my spirit sinks
To see my light of life depart ;
And every fiend of hell, methinks,
Enjoys the anguish of my heart
What shall I do if all my love.
My hopes, my toil, are cast away.
And if there be no God above
To hear and bless me when I pray ?
// this be vain delusion a\\,
// death be an eternal s\eep, N
I08 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
And none can hear my secret call,
Or see the silent tears I weep, .
Oh, help rn^, God, for Thou alone
Canst my distracted soul relieve.
Forsake it riot ; it is Thine own —
Though weak, yet loiiging to believe.
Oh, drive these ctnel doubts away,
And make me know that thou art God !
A faith that shines by night and dky
Will lighten every earthly loAd.
If I believe that Jesus died.
And,. waking, rose to reign above,
Then surely sorrow, sin, and pride
Must yield to peace, and hope, and love.
And all the l^lessed words He said
Will strength and holy joy impart —
A shield of safety o'er my head,
A spring of comfort in my he^irt.
A WORD TO THE " ELECT. "
You may rejoice to think yourselves sfecure ;
You may be grateful for the gift divine —
That grace unsou^t, which made your black hearts pui
And fits your earth-bom souls in heaven to shine.
But is it sweet to look around, and view
Thousands excluded from that happiness
Which they deserved, at least, as niuchas you —
Their faults- not greater, nor their virtues less ?
And wherefore should you love your God the more
Because to you alone His smiles axe | > .veii—
Because He chose to pass the many o* ei,
^donly bring the favoured fern to\\ea.Ne.ti " ^
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. IO9
And wherefore should your hearts more grateful prove
Because for all the Saviour did not die ?
Is yours the God of justice and of love ?
And are your bosoms warm with charity ?
Say, does your heart expand to all mankind ?
And would you ever to your neighbour do —
The weak, the strong, the enlighttoed, and the blind —
As you would have your neighbour do to you ?
And when you, looking on your feflow-nieia, , ;
Behold them doomed to endless misery, ,
How can you talk of joy and rapture then ? ,
May God withhold such cruel joy from m6 I
That none deserve eternal bliss I know —
Unnierited the grace in mercy givei^ ;
But none shall sink to everlasting woe
That have not Well deserved the wrath of Heaven.
And oh ! there lives within my heart
A hope, long nursed tiy me
(And should its cheering ray depart.
How dark my soul wotlld be 1),
That as in Adam all have died,'*
In Christ shall all men live.
And ever round His throne abide,'
Eternal praise to give.
That even the wicked shall at last
Be fitted for the skies,
And when their dreadfiil doom is past,
To life and light arise.
I ask not how remote the day,''''
Nor what the sinners'woe
Before their dross is purged aNWj V ■
Enough for me to knovr ^
lO POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
That when the cup of wrath is drained.
The metal purified,
They'll cling to what they once disdained,
And hve by Him. that died.
PAST DAYS.
Tis strange to think there was a time
When mirth was not an empty name,
Wheri laughter really cheered the heart,
And frequent sriiiles unbidden came,
And tears of grief would only flow
In sjmipathy for others'woe ;
When .speech expressed the inward thought.
And heart to kindred heart was bare,
, And summer days were far too short
For all the pleasures crowded there ;
And silence, solitude, and rest, ,
Now welcome to the weary breast.
Were ^1 unprized, uncourted then,
And " all the joy one spirit showed
The other deeply felt again ;
And friendship like a river flowed,
Constant and strong its silent course,
For nought withstood its gentle force ;
When night, the holy time of peace,
Was dreaded as the parting hour ;
When speech and mirth at once must cease,
And silence mu?t resume her power ;
Though ever free from pains and woes,
She only brought us calm repose.
And when the blessed dawn ag^m
Brought daylight to the \)\\v^teML^ > s\»
POEMS BY ACTON BELL: III
We woke, and not reltictant -then,
To joyless labour did we rise ;
But full of hope, and glad and gay.
We welcomed the returning day.'-
THE CONSOLATION.
TkouGH bleak these woods, and damp the ground
WitU fallen leaves so thickly. ^tro\yny -, . .
And cold the wiijid that wanders round
With wild and melancholy moan,
There is a friendly roof, I'knp\y, .
Might shield me from the wintry blast.; ^ .
There is a fire, whose ruddy glow , .'
Will cheer me for my wanderings past.
An4 so, though 9till, where'er I go,'./.
Cold stranger- glances meet my eye ; r
Though, when my spirit sinks in; woe^ . .
Unheeded swells the unbidden sigh ;'
Though solitude, endured too long,''
Bids youthful joys too soon decay^ * . .'
Makes mirth a stranger to my tongue, ^':'
Arid overclouds my noon of day;
When kindly thoughts that would have way,
Flow back discouraged to my breast,
I know there ts, though far away,
A home where heart and soul may res't.
Warm hands are there, that, clasped in tnine.
The warmer heart will not belie ;
While mirth, and truth, and friendship shine
In smiling lip and earnest eye.
The ice that gathers round irvy Yv^axX..
v,;,^ May there be thawed ; and swee > ic^ > \^«s..
112 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
The joys of youth, that now depart,
Will come to cheer my soul again.
Though far I roam, that thought shall be
My hope, my comfort, everywhere ;
While such a home remains to me,
My heart shall never know despair.
LINES COMPOSED Iff A WOOD ON A
WINDV day. :
My soul is awakeneci, my spirit is soaring.
And carried alof t 6n the wings of the breeze ;
For above and around me the'wild wind isT roaring,
Arousing to rapture the earth arid the iseas.
The long withered grass in the sunshine is glancing,
The bare trees are tossing their branches bnhigh ;
The dead leaves beneath them are merrily dancing,
The whi^e clouds are scudding across the. blue skj
I wish I could see how the ocean is lashing
The foam of its billows to whirlwinds of spray ;
I wish I could see how its proud waves are dashing,
And hear the wild roar of their thunder to-day !
VIEWS OF LIFE.'
When sinks my heart in hopeless gloom,
And life can show no joy for me,
And I behold a yawning tomb,
Where bowers and palaces should be.
In vain you talk of morbid dreams,
In vain you gaily smWmg, s^^
That what to me so dteaxy si^OTva,
5/i The healthy mind deems Xiri^'icvt axi^ ?,^-3 .
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. XI3
I too have smiled and thought like you,
But madly smiled, and falsely deemed,
Tridh led me to the present view.
Tm waking now ;'twas then I dreamed.
I lately saw a sunset sky,
And stood enraptured to behold >
Its varied hues of glorious dye :
First, fleecy clouds of shining gold ;
These, blushingj took a rosy hue ;
Beneath them shone a flood of green ;
Nor less divine the glorious blue
That smiled above them and between.
I cannot name each lovely shade ;
I cannot say how bright they shone ;
But one by one I saw them fade ; :
And what remained when they were gone ?
Dull clouds remained^ of sombre hue ;.
And when their borrowed charm was o'er,
The azure sky had faded too, ^
That smiled so softly bright before.
So, gilded by the glow of youth,
Our varied Ufe looks fair and gay ;
And so remains the naked truth
When that false Ught is past away.
Why blame ye, then, my keener sight,'
That clearly sees a world of woes
Through all the haze of golden light
That flattering falsehood round it throws ?
When the young mother smiles above
The £rst-bom darling oi Yiftt " h«ax\..
Her bosom glows with earnest \ovei»
While teats of silent ttaaaspott st-^V.
114 PDEMS BY ACTON BELL;
Fond dreamer ! little does she knoW
The anxious toil, the suffering,
The blasted hopes, the burning woe,
The object of her joy will bring.
Her blinded eyes behold not now
What, soon or late, must be his doom —
The anguish that will eloud his brow,
; The bed of death, the dreary tomb.
As little know the youthful pair,
''In mutual love supremely blest, :
What wearine^ ind cold despair
: Ere long will seize the aching breast,
Andeven should love and faith remain
;'^The greatest blessings hfe can show)
Amid adversity and pain
:, : iTo shine throughout with cheering glow.
They do not see how cruel death''
• - -^^ Comes on, their loving hearts to part.
One feels not now the gasping breath,.
• The rending of the earth-bound heart.
The souVs and body's agony,-
•Ere she may sink to her repose.
The sad survivor caniiot see
• The grav^ above his darling close ;
Nor how, despairing and alone,
He then must wear his'life away.
And linger, feebly toiling on,
'And fainting, sink into decay.
« « « *
Oh, Youth may listen patiently'
. While sad Expenence td\s. Vv^x tak;.
But Doubt sits smilmg \tL\v^ ev^, ;'
. For ardent Hn.iN- ^'^^^ ^?*VA\ r^T«sf^^
jPOEMS BY ACTON BELL. 11$
He hears how feeble Pleasure dies.
By guilt destroyed, and pain and w6e ;
He turns to Hope, and she replies,
" Believe it not ; it is not so I "
" Oh, heed her not ! *'Experience says ;
" For thus she whispered once to me.
She told ipe in my youthful days
How glorious manhood's prime would be.
" When, in the time of early spring,
Too chill the winds that o'er me pa$sed,
She said each coming day would bring
A fairer heaven, a gentler blast.
''And when the sun too seldom beamed,
The sky, o'ercast, too darkly frowned.
The soaking rain too constant streamed.
And mists too dreary gathered round,
" She told me summer's glorious ray
Would chase those vapours all away,
And scatter glories round ;
With sweetest music fill the trees.
Load with rich scent the gentle breeze.
And strew with flowers the grouiid.
" But when, beneath that scorching ray,
I languished, weary thrdiigh the oay.
While birds refused to singj
Verdure decayed from field and tree,
And panting nature mourned with me
The freshness of the spring^^
"'Wait but a Uttle while,'she said,
'Till summer's burning days are fled,
And autumn shall restore,
With golden riches of her ov^iv..
And summer's glories meWov/ed diovrcw.
The freshness you deplotfe.'
116 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
" And long I waited, but in vain :
That freshness never came again,
Though summer passed away,
Though autumn's mists hung cold and chill,
And drooping nature languished still,
And sank into decay;
" Till wintry blasts forebotjirig'bfew .
Through leafless trees ; and then I knew
That Hope was all a dreanu
But thus,, fond youth, she cheated me ;
A^d she will prove as false to thee,.,
Thougn sweet her words, m^y seem. "
Stem prophet, cease thy bodings dir^ ;'
Thou canst not quench the ardent fire
That warms the breast of youth.
. Oh, let it cheer him while it may,
And gently, gently die away.
Chilled by the damps of truth !
Tell him that earth is not our rest ; .
Its joys are empty, frail at best^
'" Arid point beyond the sky.',
But gleams of light may reach us here,
And hope the roughest path can cheer ;.
Then do not bid it fly.
Though hope may pronjiise joys that ^till
Unkindly time will ne'er fulfil ; .
Or, if they come at all.
We never find them unalloyed —
Hurtful, perchance; or soon destroyed,
They vanish or they pall ;
Fet hope'iVse// a \)rig\vttift?»^ IVvtQw^
O'er aflt i)U:t labours aiid out ^o^^ \
While dark foTebod\Ti«^ < ^^
POEMS, BY ACTON BELL. I17
A thousand ills will oft portend
That Providence may? ne'er intend
The trembling he^rt to befir.
Or if they come, . it oft appears .
Our woes .are lighter than our fears,
And far more bravely borne.
Then let us not enhance. our doom^
But e'en in midnight's black^t g^oom
Expect the rising mom. ;
Because the road is rough and long,
Shall we despise the skylark's; song,
That cheers the wanderer's way ;
Or trample down, with reckless feet,
The. smilxng. flowerets, bright, and sweet,
Because they soon decay ;
Pass pleasant scenes unnoticed by.
Because thie next is bleak and diear;
Or not enjoy a smiling sky
Because a tempest may be near ?
No. While we journey on.oiur way
We'll smile on every lovely thing ;
And ever,. as they pass away.
To memory and hope we'll cling.
And though that awful riy^r flows
Before us, when the journey's past.
Perchance of all the pilgrim's woes
Most dreadful — shrink not ;'tis the last.
Though icy cold, and dark, and deep.
Beyond it smiles that blessed shore
Where none shall suffer, iK)ne'sha.llvj^^'^^
And bliss shall reign iot evetxaot^\
II8 POEMS BY ACTON BELL,
APPEAL.
Oh, I am very we'slry,
Though tears no. longer flow ;
My eyes ar^ tired Of weeping,
My heart is sick of woe ;
My life is very lohiely ,
My days pass heavily,
I'm weary of repining.
Wilt thou not come to me ?
Oh, didst thou know my I6nging$
For thee, from day to day,
My hopes, so often- blighted,
Thou wouldst not thus delay 1
THE STUDENT'S SERENADE.
I HAVE slept upon my couch,
But my spirit did not rest,
For the labours of the day
Yet my weary soul opprest ;
And before my dreaming eyes'*
Still the learned volumes lay v
And I could not close their leaves,
And I could not turn away.
But I oped my eyes at last, •
And I heard a muffled sound v
Twas the night-breeze, come to say
That the siiow was on the ground.
Then I knew that lihere was rest
On the mountain's bosom itea \
" ► I Jeft my fevered couch.,
And I flew to waken tJiee.
POEMS BY ACTQN BELI^ dig
I have flown to waken thee ;
For if thou wilt not arise,
Then my soul can drink no peace
From these holy moonlight skies.
And this waste of virgin snow
To my sight will not be fair,
Unless thou wilt smiling come,
Love, to wander with me there*
Then, awake I Maria, wake !
r For if thou couldst only know
How the quiet moonlight sleeps
On this wilderness, of snow,
And the grove? of anqient trees,
In their snowy garb arrayed,
Till they stretch into the gloom
Of the distant valley's shade —
I know thou wouldst rejoice'
To inhale this bracing air ;
Thou wouldst break thy sweeteit sleep
To behold a scene so fair.
O'er these wintry wilds, alone,
Thou wouldst joy to wander free ;
And it will not please thee less: .
Though that bliss be shared with me.
THE CAPTIVE DOVE.
Poor restless dove, I pity thee ;
And when I hear thy plaintive moan
I mourn for thy captivity,
: And in thy woes forget
To see th^ stai
And fli^p.tji
IfiO POEMS BY ACTOl^ BELU
And ga^e into the distant sky,
Would melt a harder heart than mine.
In vain ! in vain ! i Thou canst not rise ;
Thy prison roof confines thee there.
Its slender wires delude'thine eyes,
And quench thy lodgings with* despair.
Oh,'thou wert made to wander free
In suimy mead and shady grove^,.
And far beyond the rolling sea^ \
In distant climes, at* will io irov^ !
Yet, hadst th6u but 6he gentle mate
Thy little dropping heart to cheer,
And share with thee thy captive state.
Thou couldst be happy even there.
Yes, even there, if, listening by,
One faithful dear con^panion stood ;
While gazing on her fujl bright eye,
. Thou mightst iforget thy native wood.
But thou, poor soUtary dove,
Must make, uiiheard, " thy joyless moan ;
The heart that natiire formed to love
Must pine, neglected,, and alone.
SELF-CONGRATULATION.
Ellen, you were thoughtless once
Of beauty or of grace,'
. .Simple and tomely in attire,
Careless of form and face.
Then whence this change ? and wherefore nc
So often smooth yout \vaii " ^
Andwhereibre deck youi y6%t\vM^ Vycta.
Witiii such uhwfeatied ca3^^ ^
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. 121
Tell us, and cease to tire our ears
With that familiar strain.
Why will you play those simple tunes
So often o'er again ?
" Indeed, dear friends, I can but say
That childhood's thoughts are gone ;
Each year its own new feeHngs brings,
And years move swiftly on.
" And for these little simple airs,.
I love to play them o'er
So much, I dare not promise now
To play them never more. " ^
I answered, and it was enough ;'
They turned them to depart.
They could not read my secret thoughts,
Nor see my throbbing heart.
I've noticed many a youthful form,
Upon whose changeful face
The inmost workings of the soul
The gazer well might trace :
The speaking eye, the changing lip.
The ready blushing cheek.
The smiUng or beclouded brow, .
Their different feelings speak.
But, thank God ! you might gaze on mine
For hours, and never know
The secret changes of my soul =
From joy to keenest woe.
Last night, as we sat round the fire
Conversing merrily,
We heard, without, approaching steps
Of one well kno^yn to me.
There was no trembling in my vovc^v •
No blush upon my cheek.
IZZ POEMS BY. ACTON BELL.
No lustrous sparkle in my eyes,
Of hope or joy to speak ;
But oh! my spirit burned within,
My heart beat full and fast.
He came not nigh — he went away ;
And then my joy was past
And yet my, comrades ma,rked it not —
My voice was still the same ;
They saw me smile, and o'er m,y face
No signs of sg.dness came.
They Uttle knew my hidden thoughts ;
And they will never know
The aching anguish of my heart.
The titter, burning woe.
: FLUCTUATIONS.
What though the sun had left my sky ?
To save me from despair
The blessed moon arose on high.
And shone serenely there.
I watched her with a tearful gaze
Rise slowly o'er the hill,
While through the dim horizon's haze
• Her light gleamed faint and chill.
I thought such wan and lifeless beams
Could ne'er my heart repay
For the bright sun's most transient gleams
That cheered me thix)ugh the day.
But as above that mist's control
She rose, and brightei sYioue,
I felt her light upoil my som ;
But now — that light \s g^oue.
POEMS BY ACTON BELL. 1 23
Thick vapours snatched her from my sight,
And I was darkling left,
All in the cold and gloomy night.
Of light and hope bereft,
Until, methought, a little star
Shone forth with trembling ray,
To cheer me with its light afar ;
But that, too, passed away.
Anon, an earthly meteor blazed
The gloomy darkness through :
I smiled, yet trembled while I gazed ;
But that soon vanished too.
And darker, drearier fell the night
Upon my spirit then.
But what is that faint, struggling light ?
Is it the moon again ?
Kind Heaven, increase that silvery gleam.
And bid these clouds depart.
And let her soft celestial beam
Restore my fainting heart !
SELECTIONS
FROM
POEMS BY ELLIS BELL,
BY CURRER BELL.
IT would not have been difficult to compile a volume
out of the papers left by my sisters, had I, in making
the selection, dismissed from my consideration the scruples
and the wishes of those whose written thoughts these
papers held. But this was impossible. An influence
stronger than could be exercised by any motive of ex-
pediency necessarily regulated the selection. I have,
then, culled from the mass only a little poem here and
there. The whole makes but a tiny nosegay, and the
colour and perfume of the flowers are not such as fit them
for festal uses.
It has been already said that my sisters wrote much
in childhood and girlhood. Usually it seems a sort of
injustice to expose in print the crude thoughts of the
unripe mind — the rude efforts of the unpractised hand ;
yet I venture to give three little poems of my sister
Emily's, written in her sixteenth year, because they
illustrate a point in her character.
At that period she was sent to school. Her previous
life, with the exception of a single half-year, had been
passed in the absolute retirement of a village parsonage
amongst the hills bordering Yorkshire 2joA Vxsis:Si^i^s!iy,
The scenery of these hills is not giarvd; \\.*\? > tvd\.xotn»»^
j'tj's scarcely striking. Long low moots, da-xV^Hv^^^ " ^^
?hut in little valleys, where a stTesiTCv vj^Xets.X^^^^
126 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
there, a fringe of stunted copse. Mills and scattered
cottages chase romance from these valleys. It is only
higher up, deep in amongst the ridges of the moors, that
Imagination can find rest for the sole of her foot ; and
even if she finds it there, she must be a solitude-loving
raven — no gentle dove. If she demand beauty to in-
spire her, she must bring it inborn. These moors are
too stem to yield any product so delicate. The eye of
the gazer must itself brim with a " purple light, " intense
enough to perpetuate the brief flower-flush of August on
the heather, or the rare sunset-smile of Jime ; out of his
heart must well the freshness that in later spring and
early siunmer brightens the bracken, nurtures the moss,
and cherishes the starry flowers that spangle for a few
weeks the pasture of the moor-sheep. Unless that light
and freshness are innate and self-sustained, the drear
prospect of a Yorkshire moor will be found as barren of
poetic as of agricultural interest. Where the love of wild
nature is strong, the locality will perhaps be clung to
with the more passionate constancy, because from the
hill-lover's self comes half its charm.
My sister Emily loved the moors. Flowers brighter
than the rose bloomed in the blackest of the heath ft»
her. Out of a sullen hollow in a livid hillside her mind
could make an Eden. She found in the bleak solitude
many and dear delights, and not the least and best
loved was liberty.
Liberty was the breath of Emily's nostrils ; without it,
she perished. The change from her own home to a school,
and from her own very noiseless, very secluded, but
unrestricted and inartificial mode of hfe, to one of dis-
ciplined routine (though under the kindliest auspices),
was what she failed in enduring. Her nature proved here
too strong for her fortitude. Every morning when she
woke the vision of home and the moors rushed on her, and
darkened and saddened the day that lay before her.
Nobody knew what ailed her but me. \ Vxigw ^tJl'^ too
yeJI. In this struggle her liealt\i > wa?» < \mcV;\^ \yt^Vs».'
^ white face, attenuated form, aivd ^.ivAHw. s\xwv^
BY ELLIS BELL. 12/
threatened rapid decline. I felt in my heart she would
4ie if she did not go home, and with this conviction
iDbtained her recall. She had only been three months at
school, and it was some years before the experiment of
sending her from home was again ventured on. Aftpr
the age of twenty, having meantime studied a;lone with
diligence and perseverance, she went with me to a|i
eistabhshment on the Continent. The same suffering an4
conflict ensued, heightened by the strong i*ecoil of her
upright heretic and English spirit from the gentle Jesiiitry
of the foreign and Romish system. Once more ^he seemed
sinking; but this time she ralHed through the mere iorbe
of resolution. With inward remorse and shame she
jQoked back on her former failure, and resolved to con-
quer in this second ordeal. She did conquer, biit the
victory cost her dear. She was never hippy till she
carried her hard-won knowledge back to the remot^
English village, the old parsonages-house, and desolate^
Yorkshire bills. . A very few years more, and she looke^
her last on those hills, and breathed her last in tha;t house,
and under the aisle of that obscure village chUrch found
her last lowly^ resting-place. Merciful was the decree
that spared her when she was a stranger in a strange
land, and guarded her dying bed with kindred love arid
congenial constancy.
The following pieces were composed at twilight in the
schoolroom, when the leisure of the evening play-hour
brought back in full tide the thoughts of home.
I.
A LITTLE while, a little while,
The weary task is put away,
And I can sing and I can smile.
Alike, while I have holiday.
Where wilt thou go, my hara.? & ^d\vftax\ " >
What thought, what scene mV\\«s > " O^efc ^'^'^
What spot, or near or iar apa\l,
Has rest for thee, my v/eax\; \ > to^ " ^
128 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
There is a spot,'mid barren hills,
Where winter howls, and driving rain ;
But if the dreary tempest chills.
There is a light that warms again.
The house is old, the trees are bare,
Moonless above bends twilight's dome ;
But what on earth is half so dear.
So longed for, as the hearth of home ?
The mute bird sitting on the stone,
The dank moss dripping from the wall,
The thorn- trees gaunt, the walks o'ergrown,
I love them — ^how I love them all !
Still, as I mused, the naked room,
The alien firelight died away,
And from the midst of cheerless gloom
I passed to bright, unclouded day.
A little and a lone green lane
That opened on a common wide,
A'distant, dreamy, dim, blue chain
Of mountains circHng every side.
A heaven so clear, an earth so calm.
So sweet, so soft, so hushed an air ;
And, deepening still the dream-like charm.
Wild moor-sheep feeding everywhere.
That was the scene. I knew it well;
I knew the turfy pathway -s sweep.
That, winding o'er each billowy swell,
Marked out the tracks of wandering sheep.
Covld I have lingered but an hour,
It well had paid a week oi toW \
But truth has bamsYied iaxvcY^ ^^^^ •
Restraint and heavy task tecov\.
BY ELLIS BELL. r29
Even as I stood with raptured eye,
Absorbed in bliss so deep and dear,
My hour of rest had fleeted by;
And back came labour, bondage, care.
II.
THE BLUEBELL.
The bluebell is the sweetest flower
That waves in summer air.
Its blossoms have the mightiest power
To soothe my spirit's care.
There is a spell in purple heath
Too wildly, sadly dear ;
The violet has a fragrant breath,
But fragrance will not cheer.
The trees are bare, the sun is cold.
And seldom, seldom seen ;
The heavens have lost their zone of gold,
And earth her robe of green.
And ice upon the glancing stream
Has cast its sombre shade,
And distant hills and valleys seem
In frozen mist arrayed.
The bluebell cannot charm me now ;
The heath has lost its bloom ;
The violets in the glen below.
They yield no sweet perfume.
But though I mourn the sweet blv^efo^^
Tis better far away ; s
I know how fast my tears v/o\i\A. wp
To see it smile to-day. • • ^
JO SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
For, oh! when chill the sunbeams fall
Adown that dreary sky,
And gild yon dank and darkened w2ill .
With transient brilliancy,
How do I weep, how do I pine.
For the time of flowers to come,
And turn me from that fading shine
To mourn the fields of home !
III.
Loud without the wind was roaring
Through th* autumnal sky ;
Drenching wet, the cold rain ppuring,
Spoke pf winter nigh^
All too like that dreary eye
t)id my exiled spirit grieve —
Grieved at first, but grieved not long.
Sweet — how softly sweet !— it came—
Wild words of an ancient song, .
Undefined, without a name.
" It was spring, and the skylark was singing. "
Those words they awakened a spell ;
They unlocked a deep fountain, whose springir
Nor absence nor distance can quell.
In the gloom of a cloudy November
They uttered the music of May;
They kindled the perishing ember
Into fervour that could not decay.
Awaken, o'er all ray dear moorland,
West wind in thy gVory ati^pri^^X
Oh I call me from vaJley and YovAasi^v
To walk by the h\\l-totteiv.\:s^d^\
BY ELLIS BELL. I3I
It is swelled with the first snowy weather ;
The rocks they are icy and hoar,
And sullenly waves the long heather,
And the fern leaves are sunny no more.
There are no yellow stars on the mountain ;
The bluebells have long died away
From thie brink of the moss-bedded fountain,
From the side of the wintry brae.
But lovelier than corn-fields all waving
In emerald, and vermeil, and gold,
Are the heights where the north- wind is raving,
And the crags where I wandered of old.
It was morning ; the bright sun was beaming.
How sweetly it brought back to me , :
The time when nor labour nor dreaming
Broke the sleep of the happy and free !
But blithely we rose as the dawn-heaven .
Was melting to amber and blue,
And swift were the wings to our feet given,
As we traversed the meadows of dew.
For the moors ! — for the moors, where the, short grass
Like velvet beneath us should lie !
For the moors ! — ^for the moors, where each high pass
Rose sunny against the clear sky 1
For the moors, where the linnet was. trilling
Its song on the old granite stone ;
Where the lark, the wild skylark, was filling
Every breast wiUi delight like its own 1
What language can utter the feeling
Which rose when, in exile aiat,
On the brow of a lonely hill kneeVmg,
I saw the brown heath growing tlCiate'^
1^2 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
It ^yas scattered and stunted, and told me
That soon even that would be gone.
It whispered, " The grim walls enfold me ; .
I have bloomed in my last summer's sun. "
But not the loyed music, whose waking
Makes the soul of the Swiss die away,
Has a spell more adored and heartbreaking
Than, for me, in that blighted heath lay.
The spirit which bent'neath its ppwer^
How it longed, how it burned to be free !
If I could have wept in that hour,
Those tears had been heaven to me.
Well, well ! the sad minutes are moving.
Though loaded with trouble and pain,
And some time the lovied and the loving
Shall meet on the mountains again.
The following Uttl^ piece has no title, but in it the
genius of a solitary region seems to address his wander-
ing and wayward votary, and to recall within his influ-
ence the proud mind which rebelled at times even against'
what it most loved.
Shall earth no more inspire thee.
Thou lonely dreamer now ?
Since passion may not fire thee.
Shall nature cease to bow ?
Thy mind is ever moving.
In rqe^iOns dark to thee ;
Recall its useless roving ;
Come back, and dwell with me.
I know my mountain breezes
Enchant and sootYie tViee s\Si!i\
I know my sunshine p\eases >
Pespite thy wayward va\i.
BY ELLIS BELL. 1 33
When day, with evening blending,
Sinks from- the summer sky, .
Tve seen thy spirit bending
In fond idola-try.
I've watched thee every hour ;
I know my mighty sway ;
I know my magic power
To drive thy griefs away.
Few heisirts to mortals given,
Dn earth so wildly pine ;
Yet few would ask a heaven
More like this earth than thine.
Then let my winds caress thee;
Thy comrade let me be :
Since nought beside can bless thee.
Return, and dwell with me.
Here again is the same niind iii converse with a like
straction. " The Night- Wind, " breathing through an
en window, has visited an ear which discerned Ian-
age in its whispers.'
THE NI(iHT-^yIND.
In summer's mellow midiiight,
A cloudless moon shone .thi:ou§;h
Our open parlour window,''
And rose-trees wet with dew:
I sat in silent musing ;
The soft wind waved my hair.
It told me heaven was glorious,
And sleeping earth was iait.
/ needed not its breathing •**'
To bring such thoughts tOT3Qfe^ < A
;34 SELECTIONS; FROM POEMS
But Still it whispered lowly-
How dark the woods will be 1
" The thick leaves in my murmur
Are rustling like a dream,
And all their myriad voices
Instinct with spirit seem. "
I said, " Go, gentle singer;
Thv wooing voice is kind,
But do not think its music
Has power to reach my mind.
" Play with the scented flower,
The young tree's supple bough.
And leave my human feelings
In their own course to flow. "
The wanderer would not heed me ;
Its kiss grew warmer still.
" Oh, come ! " it sighed so sweetly ;
*'I'll win thee'gainst thy will,
" Were we not friends from childhood ?
Have I not loved thee long-
As lorig as thou the solemn night.
Whose silence wakes my song ?
" And when thy heart is resting
Beneath the church- aisle stone,
/ shall have time for mourning,
And thou ioT being alone. "
In these stanzas a louder ga\e\vasio\v3»^^^^'^^ft5aer <
r pillow. The wakened soul stiu^^^s* A.o \i\^\A ^
storm by which it is swayed'. —
BY ELLIS BELL.'1 3 J
Ay, there it is ! It wakes to-night
Deep feelings I thought dead ; .
Strong in the blast— quick gathering light —
The heart's flame kindles red.
" Now I can tell by thine altered chpek,
And by thine eyes'full gaze,
And by the words thou scarce dost speak
How wildly fancy plays.
'* Yes ; I could swear that glorious wind
Has swept the world aside,
Has dashed its memory from thy mind
Like foam-bells from the tide.
" And thou art now a spirit pouring
Thy presence " into all^-
The thunder of the tempest's roaring,
The whisper of its fall ;
" An universal infliietice,'
From thinfe own influence free ;
A principle of life — intense —
Lost to mortality.
" Thus truly, when that breast is cold,
Thy prisoned soul shall rise.
The dungeon mingle with the mould.
The captive with the skies.
Nature's deep being thine shall hold.
Her spirit all thy spirit fold,
Her breath absorb thy sighs.
Mortal ! though sOon life's tale is told.
Who once lives, never dies ! "
iS6 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP.
Love is like the wild rose-briar,
Friendship like the holly-tree.
The h9lly is dark when the ros^-briar blooms,
But which will bloom most constantly ?
The wild rose-briar is^weet in spring,
Its summer blossoms scent the air ;
Yet wait till winter comes again, .
And who will call the wild-briar fair ?
Then scorn the silly rose-wreath now,
And deck thee with the holly's sheen.
That, when December blights thy brow,
He still may leave thy garland green.
THE ELDER'S REBUKE.
" Listen ! When your hair, like mine,
Takes a tint of silver gray ;
When your eyes, with dimmer shine,
Watch life's bubbles float away ;
When you, young man, have borne, like me,
The weary weight of sixty- three.
Then shall penance sore be paid
For those hours so wildly squandered,
And the.words that now fadl dead
On your ear be deeply pondered —
Pondered and approved at last ;
But thdr virtue will be past;
" GJorious is the prize of Duty,
Though she be * a seno\3L? > pcyw^x \'
Treacherous all the lutes oi ^e^.w!t^ ,
Thorny bud and povsoivousfto^«t\
BY ELLIS BELL. I37 .
" Mirth is but a mad beguiling
Of the golden-gifted time ;
Love, a demon-meteor, wiling
Heedless feet to gulfs of crime.
" Those who follow earthly pleasure
Heavenly knowledge will not lead ;
Wisdom hides from them her treasure,
Virtue bids them evil-speed I
" Vainly may their hearts, repenting,
Seek for aid in future years :
Wisdom scorned knows no relenting ;
Virtue is not won by fears. "
Thus spake the ice-blooded elder gray.
The young man scoffed as he turned away —
Turned to the call of a sweet lute's measure.
Waked by the lightsome touch of pleasure.
Had he ne'er met a gentler teacher,
Woe had been wrought by that pitiless preacher.
THE WANDERER FROM THE FOLD.
How few, of all the hearts that loved,
Are grieving for thee now ?
And why should mine to-night be moved
With such a sense of woe ?
Too often thus, when left alone,
Where none my thoughts can see,
Comes back a word, a passing tone
From thy strange history.
Sometimes I seem to see thee rise,
A glorious child again,
AU virtues beaming from fhme e^^fe
That ever honoured men :
22
138 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
Courage and truth, a generous breast
Where sinless sunshine lay —
A being whose very presence blest
Like gladsome summer day.
Oh, fairly spread thy early sail,
And fresh, and pure^ and free,
Was the first impulse of the gale
Which urged hfe*s wave for thee I
Why did the pilot, too confiding, .
. Dream o'er that ocean's; foam.
And trust in pleasure's careless guiding
To bring hid vessel home ?
For well he knew what dangers frowtt^d,
- , : . What mists wotdd gather dim,
, What rocks and shelves and saAds lay rour
/ Between his port and him. ■
; The very brightness of the sun.
The splendour of the main,
The wind which bore him wildly on
Should not have warned in vain..
An anixious gazer irom the shore,
I marked the whi tening : wave,
And wept above thy fate the more
Because I could not save.
It recks not now,, when all is over ;
But yet my heart will be
A mourner still, though friend and lover
Have both forgotten thee.
BY ELLIS BELL. 1 39
WARNING AND REPLY.
In the eartli^the earth — thou shalt be laid,
A gray stone standing over thee,
Black mould beneath thee spread,
And black mould to cov^r thee.
'Well, there is r^t there ;
So fast come thy prophecy —
The tinxe when my sUnny hair
Shall with grass roots entwined be. "
But cold, cold is that resting-place,
Shut out from joy and liberty.
And all who loved thy living face
Will shrink from it shudderingly.
'Not so. Here the world is chill.
And sworn friends fall from me ;
But there they will own me still.
And prize my memory; "
Farewell, then, all that love.
All that deep sympathy.
Sleep on. Heaven laughs above ;
Earth never misses thee.
Turf-sod g^d tombstone drear
Part human company. .
One heart breaks only — here ;
But that heart was worthy thee^
LAST WORDS. V
I KNEW not'twas so dire a croxv^
To say the word ** Adieu''
But this shall be the otAy tVxsv^
My lips or heart sibaXi swe.
140 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
The wild hillside, the winter mom,
The gnarled and ancient tree,
If in your breast they waken scorn,
Shall wake the same in me.
I can forget black eyes and browSj
And lips of falsest charm,
If you forget the sacred vows
Those faithless lips c6uld form.
If hard commands can tame your love,
Or strongest walls can hold,
I would not wish to grieye above
A thing so false and cold.
And there are bosoms bound to mine
With links both tried and strong ;
And there are eyes whose lightning shine
Has warmed and blest me long.
Those eyes shall make my only day,
Shall set my spirit free.
And chase the foolish thoughts away
That mourn your memory.
THE LADY TO HER GUITAR.
For him who struck thy foreign string,
I ween this heartlias ceased to care ;
Then why dost thou'such feelings bring
To my sad spirit, old gtlitar >
It is as if the warm sunlight
In some deep glen shpuld lingering stay,
When clouds of storm, or shades of night,
Have wrapt the parent orb away.
It is as if the glassy \itook
Should image still its vnao^l* i^xx.
BY ELLIS BELL. li+i
Though years ago the woodman's stroke
Laid low in dust their dryad-hair.
Even so, guitar, thy magic tone
Hath moved the tear and waked the sigh ;
Hath bid the ancient torrent moan.
Although its very source is dry.
THE TWO CHILDREN.
Heavy hangs the rain-drop
From the burdened spray ;
Heavy broods the damp mist
On uplands far away.
Heavy looms the dull sky,
Heavy rolls the sea,
Aiid heavy throbs the young heart .
Beneath that lonely tree.
Never has a blue streak .
Cleft the clouds since mom ;
Never has his grim fate ;
Smiled since he was bom.
•Frowning on the infant,
Shadowing childhood's joy,
Gualrdian aiigel knows not
That melancholy boy.
Day is passing swiftly
Its sad and sombre prime ;
Boyhood sad is merging
In sadder manhood's time.
All the flowers are prajdng
For sun, before titi^y c\ose.
And he prays too — vmcoxi'scVou^^-^
That sunless human, xose.
142 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
Blossom, that the west wind
Has never wooed to blow,
Scentless are thy petals,
Thy dew iis cold as snow.
Soul, where kindred kindness.
No early promise woke.
Barren is thy beauty,
As weed upon a rock.
Wither, soul knd blossom !
You both were vainly given.
Earth reserves no blessing
Fox the unblest of heaven !
Child of delight, with sun-bright hair,
And sea-blue, sea- deep eyes !
Spirit of bliss ! what brings thee here
Beneath these sullen skies ?
Thou shouldst live in eternal spring.
Where endless day is never dim.
Why, seraph, has tWne erring wing
Wafted thee down to weep with him ?
" Ah 1 not from heaven am I descended.
Nor do I come to mingle tears ;
But sweet is day, though with shadows blen
And, though clouded, sweet are youthful
" I — the image of Ught and gladness^ —
Saw and pitied that mournful boy,
And I vowed, if need were, to share his sadn
And give to him my sunny joy;
" Heavy and dark the. night is closing ;
Heavy and dark may \\.^ b\^iv%b^.
Better for aU from gdei leposim^.
And better for al\ vjbo v/alOcvX^^^^—
BY ELLIS BELL. 14 J
" Watch in love by a fevered pillow,
Cooling, the fever with pity's balm ;
Safe as the petrel on tossing billow,,
Safe in mine own soul's g;olden calm.
'* Guardikh angel he lacks no longer,
Evil fortune he need not fear ;
•Fate is strong,- but love is stronger,
And my love is truer than angel-care. "
THE VISIONARY.
EENT is the house : all are laid asleep.
B alone looks out o'er the snow-wreaths deep,
hatching every cloud, dreading every breeze
bat whirls the wildering drift, and bends the groaning
trees.
beerful is the hearth^ soft the matted floor ;
ot one shivering gust creeps through pane or door.
he little lamp bums straight, its rays shoot strong and
far;
trim it well, to be the wanderer's guiding-star.
rown, my haughty sire ; chide, my angry dame ;
5t your slaves to spy ; threaten me with shame,
ut neither sire nor dame nor prying serf shall know
Tiat angel nightly tracks that waste of frozen snow.
Tiat I love shall come like visitant of air,
Lfe in secret power from lurking human snare ;
hat loves me, no word of mine shall e'er betray,
lough for faith unstained my life must forfeit pay.
iim then, little lamp ; glimmer straight and clear,
ush ! a rustling wing stirs, methinks, the air !
e for whom I wait thus ever comes \.o tt\».
range Power I I trust thy might; lT^^sX ^^^^ "
constancy. .'-
144 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
ENCOURAGEMENT.
I DO not weep ; I would not weep ;
Our mother needs no tears.
Dry thine eyes too ; His vain to keep
This causeless grief for years.
What though her brow be changed and cold,
Her sweet eyes closed for ever ?
What though the stone, the darksome mould
Our mortal bodies sever ?
What though her. hand smooth ne*er again
Those silken locks of thine,
Nor through long hours of future pain
Her kind face o'er thee shine ?
Remember still she is not dead ;
She sees us, sister, now,
Laid, where her angel spirit fled,.
'Mid heath and frozen snow.
And from that world of heavenly light
WiD she not alwkys bend
. To guide us in our lifetii;ne's night.
And guard us to the end ?
Thou knowest she will ; and thou mayst mour
That we are left below.
But not that she can ne'er return
To share our earthly woe.
STANZAS.
Often rebuked, yet always back returning
To those first feelings tlaat^etei\ > CiTxv > w\\i^ me.
And leaving busy chase oi weaN^i^ ^.u^\^arDL\»%
For i^e dreams oi things nvVacVi c^.xvx^a^.^i^•
BY ELLIS BELL. I4S
To-day I will seek not the Shadowy region ;
Its unsustaining vastness waxes drear ;'
And visions rising, legion after legion,
Bring the unreal world too strangely near.
I'll walk, but not in old heroic traces,
And not in paths of high morality,
And not among the half-distinguished faces.
The clouded forms of long-past history.
I'll walk where my own nature would be leading —
It vexes me to choose another guide —
Where the gray flocks in ferny glens are feeding.
Where the wild wind blows on the mountain side.
What have those lonely mountains worth revealing ?
More glory and more grief than I can tell.
The earth that wakes one human, heart to feeling
Can centre both the worlds of heaven and hell.
tie following are the last lines my sister Emily ever
:e : —
No coward soul is mine.
No trembler in the world's storm-troubled sphere.
I see heaven's glories shine,
And faith shines equal, arming me from fear.
O God within my breast,
Almighty, ever-present Deity !
Life, that in me has rest.
As I — und5dng Life — have power in Thee !
Vain are the thousand creeds
That move men's hearts — uim.tt.eiX^\iV9 N?ec£v\
Worthless as withered NVfe^^?»,
Or idlest froth amid the boun^ess YcvaL\xv^
146 POEMS BY ELLIS BELL.
To waken doubt in one
Holding so fast by Thine infinity,
So surely anchored on
The steadfast rock of immortality.
With widie-embracing love
Thy spirit animates eternal years,
Pervades and broods above, . : 1
Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates, and nears.
Though earth and. man were gpne, r
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And Thou were left alone,
, J^very existence would exist in Thee.
There is no rooin for Death,
Nor atom that his might could reinder void.
Thou— Thou art Being and Breath, .
And what Thou ai:t may jiever be destroyed.
SELECTIONS
FROM
POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
BY CURREIl BELU
IN looking over my sister Anne's papers, I find mourn-
ful evidence that religious feeling had been to her
but too much Uke what it was to Cowper — I mean, of
course, in a far milder form. Without rendering her a
Erey to those horrors that defy concealment, it subdued
er mood and bearing to a perpetual pensiveness ; the
pillar of a cloud glided constantly before her eyes; she
ever waited at the foot of a secret Sinai, listening in her
heart to the voice of a trumpet sounding long and wax-
ing louder. Some, perhaps, would rejoice over these
tokens of sincere though sorrowing piety in a deceased
relative. I own to me they seem sad, as if her whole
innocent life had been passied under the martyrdom of
an unconfessed physical pain. Their effect, indeed,
would be too distressing, were it not combated by the
certain knowledge that in her last moments this tyranny
of a too tender conscience was overcome; this pomp of
terrors broke up, and passing away, left her dying hour
unclouded. Her belief in God did not then bring to her
dread, as of a stem Judge, but hope, as in a Creator and
Saviour ; and no faltering hope was it, but a sure and
steadfast conviction, on which, in the rude passage from
time to eternity, she threw the we\^Vv\. ol V'st \xs«s > as\
weakness, and by which she was enaH^di \» Xi^'^x^ ^^*^
^as to be borne — Datientlv, serenelv, v\ctoTvo > a^'^ «
148 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
DESPONDENCY.
I HAVE gone backward in the work ;
The labour has not sped ;
Drowsy and dark my spirit lies,
Heavy and dull as lead.
How can I. rouse my sinking soul
From such a lethargy ?
How can I break these iron chains
And set my spirit free ?
There have been times when I have moum(
In anguish o*er the past,
And raised my suppliant hands on high.
While tears fell thick and fast ;
, And prayed to have my sins forgiven,
With such a fervent zeal,
An earnest grief, a strong desire,
As now I cannot feel.
And I have felt so full of love,
So strong in spirtt fhen,
As if my heart would never cool,
Or wander back again.
And yet, alas ! how many times
. My fieet have gone astray !
How oft have I forgot my God,
How greatly fallen away !
My sins increase, my love grows cold,
And hope within me dies ;
Even faith itself is wavering now.
Oh, how shall I isuise ?
I cannot weep, but I can ptay \
Then let me not despair.
BY ACTON BELL. I49
Lord Jesus, save me, lest I cUe !
Christ, hear my humble prayer !
A PRAYER.
My God (oh, let me call Thee mine,
'Weak, wretched simier though I be).
My trembling soul would fain be Thine,
My feeble faith still clings to Thee.
Not only for the past I grieve —
The future fills me with dismay.
Unless Thou hasten to relieve.
Thy suppliant is a castaway.
I cannot say my faith is strong,
I dare not hope my lovie is great :
But strength and love to Thee belong.
Oh, do not leave me desolate !
I know I owe my all .to Thee ;
Oh, take the heart I cannot give !
Do Thou my strength, my Saviour be.
And make me to Thy glory live.
IN MEMORY OF A HAPPY DAY IN
FEBRUARY.
Blessed be Thou for all the joy
My soul has felt to-day !
Oh, let its memory stay with me,'
And never pass away I
I was alone, for those I loved
Were far away from me \
The sun shone on tlxe NV\\3aftxedL ^^£ & >
The wind blew iresh. andfece^.
rSO SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
Was it the smile of early spring
That made my bosom glow ?
'Twas sweet ; but neither sun nor wind
Could cheer my spirit so.
Was it some feeling of delight
AH vague and undefined ?
. No ;:'twas a, rapture de^p and strong,
,, Expanding in the mind.
Was it a sanguine view of life,
And all its transient. bliss,
A hope of bright prosperity ?
Oh no I it was not this.
It was a glimpse of truth divine
Unto my spirit given,
Illumined by a ray of light
That shone direct from heaven.
I felt there was a God on high,
By whom all things were'made ;
I saw His wisdom and His power
In all His works displayed.
But most throughout the moral world
I saw His glory shine ;
I, saw His wisdom infinite,
His mercy all divine.
Deep secrets of His providence,'
In darkness long concealed,
Unto the vision of my soul
Were graciously revealed.
But while I wondered and adored
His Majesty divine,'
^ I (Hdnot tremble at His powei-—
J felt that God was ^xk^.
BY ACTON BELL. 151
I knew that my Redeemer lived ;
I did not fear to die —
Full sure that I should rise again
To immortality.
I longed to view that bliss divine
Which eye hath never seen ;
Like Moses, I would see His face
Without the veil between.
CONFIDENCE.
Oppressed with sin arid woe,
A burdened heart I bear.
Opposed by many a mighty foe ;
But I will not despair.
With this polluted heart
I dare to come t6 Thee,
Holy and mighty as Thou art,
For Thou wilt pardon me.
I feel that I am weakj
And prone to every sin ;
But Thou who giv'st to those who seek
Wilt give me strength within.
Far as this earth may be
From yonder starry skies.
Remoter still am I from Thee ;
Yet Thou wilt not despise.
I need not fear my foes,
I need not yield to caie \ . • v
I need not sii^ beneath. mv^ < :»«»-»
For Thou wilt atiswet pxa-^et.
1 52 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
In my Redeemer's name
I give myself to Thee ;
And, all unworthy as I am.
My God will cherish me.
My sister Anne had to taste the cup of life as
mixed for the class tanned " Governesses/'
The following are some of the thoughts that now
then solace a governess : —
LINES WRITTEN FROM HOME.
Though bleak these woods and damp the gro
With fallen leaves so thickly strewn,
And cold the wind that wanders round
With wild and melancholy moan,
There is a friendly roof, J know,
Might shield me from the wintry blast ;
There is a fire whose ruddy glow
Will cheer me for my wanderings past.
And so, though still, where'er I go,
Cold stranger glances meet my eye ;
Though, when, my. spirit sinks in woe.
Unheeded swells the unbidden sigh ;
Though solitude, endured too Jong,
Bids youthful joys too soon decay.
Makes mirth a stranger to my tongue,
And overclouds my noon of day ;
When kindly thotigTit & lYvai ^o\3id have way
Flow back, discoxiraged, \.o m^ Vt^^s^v,
I know there is, thoug\i iai a > N^;^ ,
A home where heart axid sox^ m^.^ ^^^
BY ACTON BELL. 1 53
Warm hands are there, that, clasped in mine,
The warmer heart will not belie ;
While mirth and truth and friendship shine
In smiling lip and earnest eye.
The ice that gathers round my heart.'
May there be thawed ; and sweetly, then,
The joys of youth, that now depart.
Will come to cheer my soul again.
Though far I roam, that thought shall be
My hope, my comfort everywhere ;
While such a home remains to me.
My heart shall never know despair.
THE NARROW WAY.
Believe not those who say
The upwaird path is smooth,
Le$t thou shouldst stumble in the way
And faint before the truth.
It is the only road
Unto the realms of joy ;
But he who seeks that blest abode
Must all his powers employ.
Bright hopes and pure delight
Upon his course may beam ;
And there, amid the sternest heights,
The sweetest flowerets gleam.'■
On all her breezes borne,
Earth yields no scents like those ;
But he that dares not grasp the thorn
Should never crave the rose.
ilnn— «rm thee for the fight •,
Cast useless loads away.
154 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
Watch through the darkest hours of night;
Toil through the hottest day*
Crush pride into the dust,
Or thou must needs be slack ;
And trample down rebellious lust,
. Or it will hold thee back.
Se^ not ;thy honour here ; ;
Waive pleasure and renown ;
The world's dread scoff undaunted bear,
And face its deadliest frown.
To labour and to love,
To pardon and endure,
To lift thy heart to God above.
And keep thy conscience piure —
Be this thy constant aim,
Thy hope, thy chief delight.
What matter who should whisper blame,
Or who should scorn or slight ?
What matter, if thy God approve.
And if, within thy breast,
, T^liou feel the comfort of His love,
The earnest of His rest ?
.. DOMESTIC PEACE.
Why should such gloomy silence reign.
And why is all the house so drear.
When neither danger, sicknessi, paiil,
Nor death, nor want, have entered here ?
We are as many as we were
That other night, v/Yien. a\\ vjet^ %^^g.
And full of hope, and ire^ tcom cax^ \
Yet is there soraetknng %oivft ai^^-^.
BY ACTON BELL. 1 55
The moon without as pure and calm
Is shining as that night she shone ;
But now to us she brings no balm,
For something from our hearts is gone-
Something whose absence leaves a void,
A cheerless want in every heart ;
Each feels the bliss of all destroyed.
And mourns the change — but each apart.
The fire is burning in the grate
As redly as it used to burn ;
But still the hearth is desolate.
Till mirth, and love, and peace return.
'Twas peace that flowed from heart to heart.
With looks and smiles that spoke of heaven,
And gave us language to impart
The blissful thoughts itself had given.
Domestic peace, best joy of earth,
When shall we all thy value learn ?
White angel, to our sorrowing hearth
Return— oh, graciously return !
THE THREE GUIDES.*
Spirit of Earth, thy hand is chill :
Fve felt its icy clasp ;
And, shuddering, I remember still
That stony-hearted grasp.
Thine eye bids love and joy depart.
Oh, turn its gaze from me !
It presses down my shrinking heart ;
I will not walk with thee.
'Wisdom is mine, " Tve beaid W\^^ ^a:^.
" Beneath my searching e^e
* First published in Frtua^s Maga & ifU.
156 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
All mist and darkness melt away,
Phantoms and fables fly.
Before me truth can stand alone —
The naked^ solid truth ;
And man matured by worth will own
If I am shunned by youth.
" Firm is my tread, and sure though slow;
My footsteps never slide ;
And he that follows me shall know
I am the surest guide. "
Thy boast is vain ; but were it true
That thou couldst safely steer
Life's rough and devious pathway through,
'Such guidance I should fear.
How could I bear to walk for aye,
With eyes to earthward prone.
O'er trampled; weeds and miry clay.
And sand and flinty stone,;
Never the glorious view to greet
Of hill, and dale, and sky,
To see that nature's charms are sweet.
Or feel that heaven is nigh ?
If in my heart arose a spring,
A gush of thought divine,
At once stagnation thou wouldst bring
With that cold touch of thine.
If, glancing up, I sought to snatch
But one glimpse of the sky,
My baffled gaze would only catch
Thy heartless, cold gray eye.
If to the breezes wandering near
I listened eagerly,
And deemed an angeVs lotv^^ ^.oV^ax
That whispered liope to infc,
BY ACTON BELL, 157
That heavenly music would be drowned
In thy harsh, droning voice ;
Nor inward thought, nor sight, nor sound,
Might my sad soul rejoice.
Dull is thine ear, unheard by thee
Th^ still, small voice of heaven ; .
Thine eyes are dani and cannot see
The helps that God has given.
There is a bridge o'er every flood
Which thou canst not perceive ;
A path through every tangled wood,
But thou wilt not believe.
Striving to make thy way by force,,;
Toil-spent and bramble- torn,
Thou'lt fell the tree that checks thy course.
And burst through briar and thorn ;
And, pausing by the river's side.
Poor reasoner ! thou wilt deem.
By casting pebbles in its tide.
To cross the swelling stream.
Right through the flinty rock thou'lt try
Thy toilsome way to bore.
Regardless of the pathway nigh . ,
That would conduct thee o'er.
Not only art thou, then, unkind,
And freezing cold to me.
But unbeUeving, deaf, and blind.
I will not walk with thee.
Spirit of Pride, thy wings are strong,
Thine eyes like lightning shine,
Ecstatic joys to thee belong.
And powers almost divine.
But'tis a false, destructive \Aaze
Within those eyes I see.
Turn hence their fascinating gaze.
/ will not follow thee.
158 SELECTIONS FROM POEMS
*'Coward and fool !'* thou mayst reply,
'* Walk on the common sod ;
Go, trace with timid foot and eye
The steps by others trod.
'Tis best the beaten path to keep.
The ancient faith to hold,
To pasture with thy fellow-sheep,
And lie within the fold.
*'Cling to the earth, poor grovelling worm;
'Tis not for thee to soar
Against the fury of the storm.
Amid the thunder's roar.
There's glory in that daring strife
Unknown, undreamt by thee ;
There's speechless rapture in the liffe
Of those who follow me. "
Yes, I have seen thy votaries oft,. .
Upheld by thee their guide,
In strength and courage mount aloft ;
The steepy mountain side.
I've seen them stand against the sky, •
And, gazing from below,
Beheld thy lightning in their eye,
Thy triumph on their brow.
Oh, I have felt what glory then.
What transport must be theirs —
So far above their fellow-men,
Above their toils and cares ;
Inhaling nature's purest breath,
Her riches round them spread,
The wide expanse of earth beneath,
Heaven's glories overhead !
But I have seen them helpless, dashed
Down to a bloody gtav^.
And still thy ruthless eyeYvas^^^^^.
Thy strong hand did DlO\. ?a.\rei.
BY ■ ACTON BELL. 1 59
I've seen some o'er the mountain's brow
Sustained awhile by thee,
O'er rocks of ice and hills of snow
Bound fearless, wild, and free^
»'.
Bold and exultant was their mien,
While thou didst cheer them on ;
But evening fell— and then, I ween,
Their faithless guide was gone.
Alas 1 how fared thy favourites then*—
Lone, helpless, weary, cold ?
Did ever wanderer find again
The path he left of old ?
Where is their glory, where the pride
That swelled their hearts before ?
Where now the courage that defied
The mightiest tempest's roar ?
What shall they do when night grows black,
When angry storms arise ?
Who now will lead them to the track
Thou taughtst them to despise ?
Spirit of Pride, it needs not this
To make me shun, thy wiles,
Renoimce thy triumph and thy bMss,
Thy honours and thy smiles.
Bright as thou art, and bold, and strong.
That fierce glance wins not me,
And I abhor thy scoffing tongue.
I will not follow thee.
Spirit of Faith, be thou my guide ;
Oh ! clasp my hand in thine,
And let me never quit thy side.
Thy comforts are divine.
Earth calls thee blind, misguided one ;
But who can show like tivee
Forgotten things that have been ^otl«!j..
And thin^ that are to be?
l6o SELECTIONS FROji POEMS
Secrets concealed from nature's ken
Who like thee can declare ?
Or wlio like thee to erring men
God's. holy will c^ bear ?.
Pride scorns thee for thy lowly mien ;
But who like thee can rise
Above this toilsome, sordid scene^
Beyond the holy skies ?
Meek is thine eye and soft thy voice.
But wondrous is thy might,
To make the wretched soul rejoice,
To give the simple light !
And still to all that seek thy way
This magic power is given,^-
E'en while their footsteps press the clay,
Their souls ascend to heaven.
Danger smroimxis them — ^pain and woe
Their portion here must be ; . •.
But only they that trust thee know
What comfort dwells with thee, —'■
Strength to sustain their drooping powers,
And vigour to defend —
Thou pole-star of my darkest hourSj
Affliction's firmest friend !
Day does not always mark our way.
Night's shadows oft appall :
But lead me, and I cannot stray;
Hold me, I shall not fall ;
Sustain me, I shall never faint,
How rough soe'er may be
My upward road ; nor moan, nor plaint
Shall mar my trust in thee.
Narrow the path by which we go.
And oft it turns aside
From pleasant meads vj^iete io?«^\i\aNN
And peaceful waters s\\d^\
BY ACTON BELL. l6l
Where flowery turf lies green and soft,
And gentle gales are sweet,
To where dark mountains frown aloft,
Hard rocks distress the feet,
Deserts beyond lie bleak and bare,
And keen winds round us blow ;
But if thy hand conducts me there.
The way is right, I know.
I have no wish to turn away ;
My spirit does not quail.
How can it while I hear thee say,
" Press forward and prevail " ?
Even above the tempest's swell
I hear thy voice of love ;
Of hope and peace I hear thee tell,
And that blest home above.
Through pain and death I can rejoice,
If but thy strength be mine ;
Earth hath no music like thy voice.
Life owns no joy like thine.
Spirit of Faith, Til go with thee !
Thou, if I hold thee fast,
Wilt guide, defend, and strengthen me.
And bear me home at last.
By thy help all things I can do.
In thy strength all things bear.
Teach me, for thou art just and true ;
Smile on me — thou art fair.
have given the last memento of my sister Emily.
5 is the last of my sister Anne : —
I HOPED. tRat with the brave and strow%
Myp(ktioned task migMUe —
To toil amid the busy throng.
With purpose pure and Mg\x.
l62 POEMS BY ACTON BELL.
But God has fixed another part,
And He has fixed it well.
I said so with my bleeding heart,
When first the anguish fell.
Thou, God, hast taken Our delight,
Our treasured hope away :
Thou bidd'st us now weep through the night,
And sorrow through the day.
These weary hours will not be lost.
These days of misery,
These nights of darkness, anguish- tost,
Can Ibut turn to Thee.
With secret labour to sustain
In humble patience every blow,
To gather fortitude from pain.
And hope and holiness from woe.
Thus let me serve Thee from my heart,
Whate'er may be my written fate —
Whether thus early to depart,
Or yet awhile to wait.
If Thou shouldst bring me back to life.
More humbled I should be,
More wise, more strengthened for the strife,
More apt to lean on Thee.
Should death be standing at the gate,
Thus should I keep my vow ;
But, Lord, whatever be my fate.
Oh, let me serve Thee now !
These lines written, the desk was closed, the pen h
ELside — for ever.
THE B^B.



The borrower must return this item on or before
the last date stamped below. If another user
places a recaU for this item, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return.
Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt
the borrower fivm overdue fines.
Harvard College Widener Library
Cambridge, MA 02138


canceuedJ

