t

It
LIBRARY OF
WELLES LEY COLLEGE

PRESENTED BY
istate of Susan Minns
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
AND
AGNES GREY
9550
POCKET EDITION
OF THE
LIFE AND WORKS
OF
CHARLOTTE BRONTE
(CuRRER Bell),
AND HER SISTERS,
EMILY AND ANNE BRONTE
(Ellis and Acton Bell).
In Seven Volumes, each containing a Frontispiece, bound in
Half Cloth, with cut or uncut edges.
Price IS. 6d. per Volume.
Thd Volumes will he issued at moyithly intervals in
thefollowifig order : —
1. JANE EYRE. By Charlotte Bronte.
2. SHIRLEY. By Charlotte Bronte.
3. VILLETTE. By Charlotte Bronte.
4. THE PROFESSOR and POEMS, by Charlotte Bronte; and
POEMS, by her Sisters and Father.
6. WUTHBRING HEIGHTS, by Emily Bronte. AGNES GREY,
by Anne Bronte. With a Preface and Memoir of both
Authors, by Charlotte Bronte.
6. THE TENANT OP " WILDFELL HALL. By Anne Bronte.
[April I.
7. THE LIFE OF CHARLOTTE BRONTE. By Mrs. Gaskell.
LONDON : SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE.

WuTHERiNG Heights
By EMILY BRONTE
AND
Agnes Grey
By ANNE BRONTE
WITH A PREFACE AXD MEMOIR OF BOTH AUTHORS
By charlotte BRONTE
LONDON
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE
1889
%o^^ 3-^b
Pre??'
Estcle n,'
9R
W7
CONTENTS.
PAGE
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF ELLIS AND ACTON BELL,
BY CURRER BELL vii
CURRER BELL'S PREFACE TO WUTHERING HEIGHTS . xiv
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, BY ELLIS BELL .... 19
AGNES GREY, BY ACTON BELL 3°!
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE
OF
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL.
T T has been thought that all the works published under the
•*■ names of Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell, were, in reality,
the production of one person. This mistake I endeavoured to
rectify by a few words of disclaimer prefixed to the third edition
of " Jane Eyre. " These, too, it appears, failed to gain general
credence, and now, on the occasion of a reprint of " Wuthering
Heights " and " Agnes Grey, " I am advised distinctly to state
how the case really stands.
Indeed, I feel myself that it is time the obscurity attending
those two names — Ellis and Acton — was done away. The little
mystery, which formerly yielded some harmless pleasure, has
lost its interest ; circumstances are changed. It becomes, then,
my duty to explain briefly the origin and authorship of the
books written by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell.
About five years ago, my two sisters and myself, after a some-
what prolonged period of separation, found ourselves reunited,
and at home. Resident in a remote district, where education
had made little progress, and where, consequently, there was no
inducement to seek social intercourse beyond our own domestic
circle, we were wholly dependent on ourselves and each other,
on books and study, for the enjoyments and occupations of life.
The highest stimulus, as well as the liveliest pleasure we had
known from childhood upwards, lay in attempts at literar)-
composition; formerly we used to show each other what we
wrote, but of late years this habit of communication and con-
VUl BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF
sultation had been discontinued ; hence it ensued, that we were
mutually ignorant of the progress wc might respectively have
made.
One day, in the autumn of 1845, ^ accidentally lighted on a
MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily's handwriting. Of
course, I was not surprised, knowing that she could and did
write verse : I looked it over, and something more than surprise
seized me, — a deep conviction that these were not common
effusions, nor at all like the poetry women generally write. I
thought them condensed and terse, vigorous and genuine. To
my ear, they had also a peculiar music — wild, melancholy, and
elevating.
My sister Emily was not a person of demonstrative character,
nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings, even those
nearest and dearest to her could, with impunity, intrude un-
licensed ; it took hours to reconcile her to the discovery I
had made, and days to persuade her that such poems merited
publication. I knew, however, that a mind like hers could not
be without some latent spark of honourable ambition, and refused
to be discouraged in my attempts to fan that spark to flame.
Meantime, my younger sister quietly produced some of her
own compositions, intimating that, since Emily's had given me
pleasure, I might like to look at hers. I could not but be a
partial judge, yet I thought that these verses, too, had a sweet
sincere pathos of their own.
We had very early cherished the dream of one day becoming
authors. This dream, never relinquished even when distance
divided and absorbing tasks occupied us, now suddenly acquired
strength and consistency : it took the character of a resolve.
We agreed to arrange a small selection of our poems, and, if
possible, get them printed. Averse to personal publicity, we
veiled our own names under those of Currer, Ellis, and Acton
Bell; the ambiguous choice being dictated by a sort of con-
scientious scruple at assuming Christian names positively mascu-
line, while we did not like to declare ourselves women, because
— without at that time suspecting that our mode of writing and
thinking was not what is called " feminine " — we had a vague
impression that authoresses are liable to be looked on with
prejudice ; we had noticed how critics sometimes use for their
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL. IX
chastisement the weapon of personality, and for their reward, a
flattery which is not true praise.
The bringing out of our little book was hard work. As was
to be expected, neither we nor our poems were at all wanted;
but for this we had been prepared at the outset ; though in-
experienced ourselves, we had read the experience of others.
The great puzzle lay in the difficulty of getting answers of any
kind from the publishers to whom we applied. Being greatly
harassed by this obstacle, I ventured to apply to the Messrs.
Chambers, of Edinburgh, for a word of advice ; they may have
forgotten the circumstance, but I have not, for from them I
received a brief and business-like, but civil and sensible reply,
on which we acted, and at last made a way.
The book was printed : it is scarcely known, and all of it that
merits to be known are the poems of Ellis Bell. The fixed con-
viction I held, and hold, of the worth of these poems has not
indeed received the confirmation of much favourable criticism ;
but I must retain it notwithstanding.
Ill-success failed to crush us : the mere effort to succeed had
given a wonderful zest to existence ; it must be pursued. We
each set to work on a prose tale : Ellis Bell produced " Wuthering
Heights, " Acton Bell " Agnes Grey, " and Currer Bell also wrote
a narrative in one volume. These MSS. were perseveringly ob-
truded upon various publishers for the space of a year and a half;
usually, their fate was an ignominious and abrupt dismissal.
At last " Wuthering Heights " and " Agnes Grey " were
accepted on terms somewhat impoverishing to the two authors ;
Currer Bell's book found acceptance nowhere, nor any acknow-
ledgment of merit, so that something like the chill of despair
began to invade his heart. As a forlorn hope, he tried one
publishing house more— Messrs. Smith, Elder, & ; Co. Ere
long, in a much shorter space than that on which experience
had taught him to calculate— there came a letter, which he
opened in the dreary expectation of finding two hard hopeless
lines, intimating that Messrs. Smith, Elder, & Co. " were not
disposed to publish the MS., " and, instead, he took out of the
envelope a letter of two pages. He read it trembling. It de-
clined, indeed, to publish that tale, for business reasons, but it
discussed its merits and demerits so courteously, so considerately,
A 2
X BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF
in a spirit so rational, v^ith a discrimination so enlightened, that
this very refusal cheered the author better than a vulgarl}^-
expressed acceptance would have done. It was added, that a
work in three volumes would meet with careful attention.
I was then just completing''Jane Eyre, " at which I had been
working while the one-volume tale was plodding its weary round
in London: in three weeks I sent it off; friendly and skilful
hands took it in. This was in the commencement of September
1847 ; it came out before the close of October following, while
" Wuthering Heights " and " Agnes Grey, " my sisters'works,
which had already been in the press for months, still lingered
under a different management.
They appeared at last. Critics failed to do them justice. The
immature but very real powers revealed in " Wuthering Heights "
were scarcely recognised ; its import and nature were misunder-
stood ; the identity of its author was misrepresented ; it was said
that this was an earlier and ruder attempt of the same pen which
had produced'■'Jane Eyre. " Unjust and grievous error ! We
laughed at it at first, but I deeply lament it now. Hence, I fear,
arose a prejudice against the book. That writer who could
attempt to palm off an inferior and immature production under
cover of one successful effort, must indeed be unduly eager after
the secondary and sordid result of authorship, and pitiably in-
different to its true and honourable meed. If reviewers and
the public truly believed this, no wonder that they looked
darkly on the cheat.
Yet I must not be understood to make these things subject for
reproach or complaint ; I dare not do so ; respect for my sister's
memory forbids me. By her any such querulous manifestation
would have been regarded as an unworthy and offensive weak-
ness.
It is my duty, as well as my pleasure, to acknowledge one
exception to the general rule of criticism. One writer,* en-
dowed with the keen vision and fine sympathies of genius, has
discerned the real nature of ** Wuthering Heights, " and has,
with equal accuracy, noted its beauties and touched on its faults.
Too often do reviewers remind us of the mob of Astrologers,
ChaJdeans, and Soothsayers gathered before the " writing on
* See the PaUadhun for September 1850.
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL. xi
the wall, " and unable to read the characters or make known the
interpretation. We have a right to rejoice when a true seer
comes at last, some man in whom is an excellent spirit, to whom
have been given light, wisdom, and understanding; who can
accurately read the " Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin " of an
original mind (however unripe, however inefficiently cultured
and partially expanded that mind may be) ; and who can say
with confidence, " This is the interpretation thereof. "
Yet even the writer to whom I allude shares the mistake about
the authorship, and does me the injustice to suppose that there
was equivoque in my former rejection of this honour (as an
honour I regard it). May I assure him that I would scorn in
this and in every other case to deal in equivoque ; I believe
language to have been given us to make our meaning clear,
and not to wrap it in dishonest doubt.
" The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, " by Acton Bell, had likewise an
unfavourable reception. At this I cannot wonder. The choice
of subject was an entire mistake. Nothing less congruous with
the writer's nature could be conceived. The motives which
dictated this choice were pure, but, I think, slightl}'morbid.
She had, in the course of her life, been called on to contemplate,
near at hand, and for a long time, the terrible effects of talents
misused and faculties abused ; hers was naturally a sensitive,
reserved, and dejected nature ; what she saw sank very deeply
into her mind ; it did her harm. She brooded over it till she
believed it to be a duty to reproduce every detail (of course with
fictitious characters, incidents, and situations), as a warning to
others. She hated her work, but would pursue it. When
reasoned with on the subject, she regarded such reasonings as a
temptation to self-indulgence. She must be honest : she must
not varnish, soften, or conceal. This well-meant resolution
brought on her misconstruction, and some abuse, which she
bore, as it was her custom to bear whatever was unpleasant,
with mild, steady patience. She was a very sincere and
practical Christian, but the tinge of religious melancholy com.'
municated a sad shade to her brief, blameless life.
Neither Ellis nor Acton allowed herself for one moment to
sink under want of encouragement ; energy nerved the one, and
endurance upheld the other. They were both prepared totcy
Xll BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF
again ; I would fain think that hope and the sense of power was
yet strong within them. But a great change approached : afflic-
tion came in that shape which to anticipate is dread : to look
back on, grief. In the very heat and burden of the day, the
labourers failed over their work.
My sister Emily first declined. The details of her illness are
deep-branded in my memory, but to dwell on them, either in
thought or narrative, is not in my power. Never in all her life
had she lingered over any task that lay before her, and she did
not linger now. She sank rapidly. She made haste to leave us.
Yet, while physically she perished, mentally she grew stronger
than we had yet known her. Day by day, when I saw with
what a front she met suffering, I looked on her with an anguish
of wonder and love. I have seen nothing like it ; but, indeed,
I have never seen her parallel in anything. Stronger than a
man, simpler than a child, her nature stood alone. The awful
point was, that while full of ruth for others, on herself she had
no pity ; the spirit was inexorable to the flesh ; from the
trembling hand, the unnerved limbs, the faded eyes, the same
service was exacted as they had rendered in health. To stand
by and witness this, and not dare to remonstrate, was a pain no
words can render.
Two cruel months of hope and fear passed painfully by, and
the day came at last when the terrors and pains of death were
to be undergone by this treasure, which had grown dearer and
dearer to our hearts as it wasted before our eyes. Towards the
decline of that day, we had nothing of Emily but her mortal re-
mains as consumption left them. She died December 19, 1848.
We thought this enough : but we were utterly and presump-
tuously wrong. She was not buried ere Anne fell ill. She had
not been committed to the grave a fortnight, before we received
distinct intimation that it was necessary to prepare our minds
to see the younger sister go after the elder. Accordingly, she
followed in the same path with slower step, and with a patience
that equalled the other's fortitude. I have said that she was
religious, and it was by leaning on those Christian doctrines in
which she firmly believed, that she found support through her
most painful journey. I witnessed their eflicacy in her latest
hour and greatest trial, and must bear my testimony to the calm
ELLIS AND ACTON BELL. Xlll
triumph with which they brought her through. She died
May 28, 1849.
What more shall I say about them ? I cannot and need not
say much more. In externals, they were two unobtrusive
women ; a perfectly secluded life gave them retiring manners and
habits. In Emily's nature the extremes of vigour and simplicity
seemed to meet. Under an unsophisticated culture, inartificial
tastes, and an unpretending outside, lay a secret power and tire
that might have informed the brain and kindled the veins of a
hero ; but she had no worldly wisdom ; her powers were un-
adapted to the practical business of life : she would fail to defend
her most manifest rights, to consult her most legitimate advantage.
An interpreter ought always to have stood between her and the
world. Her will was not very flexible, and it generally opposed
her interest. Her temper was magnanimous, but warm and
sudden ; her spirit altogether unbending.
Anne's character was milder and more subdued ; she wanted
the power, the fire, the originality of her sister, but was well
endowed with quiet virtues of her own. Long-suffering, self-
denying, reflective, and intelligent, a constitutional reserve and
taciturnity placed and kept her in the shade, and covered her
mind, and especially her feelings, with a sort of nun-like veil,
which was rarely lifted. Neither Emily nor Anne was learned ;
they had no thought of filling their pitchers at the well-spring
of other minds ; they alwaj'S wrote from the impulse of nature,
the dictates of intuition, and from such stores of observation as
their limited experience had enabled them to amass. I may sum
up all by saying, that for strangers they were nothing, for super-
ficial observers less than nothing ; but for those who had known
them all their lives in the intimacy of close relationship, they
were genuinely good and truly great.
This notice has been written, because I felt it a sacred duty
to wipe the dust off their gravestones, and leave their dear
names free from soil.
CURKER BELL.
September 19, 1850.
EDITOR'S PREFACE
TO THE NEW EDITION OF
WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
I HAVE just read over " Wuthering Heights, " and, for the
first time, have obtained a clear glimpse of what are termed
(and, perhaps, really are) its faults ; have gained a definite notion
of how it appears to other people — to strangers who knew
nothing of the author ; who are unacquainted with the locality
where the scenes of the story are laid ; to whom the inhabitants,
the customs, the natural characteristics of the outlying hills and
hamlets in the West Riding of Yorkshire are things alien and
unfamiliar.
To all such " Wuthering Heights " must appear a rude and
strange production. The wild moors of the north of England
can for them have no interest ; the language, the manners, the
very dwellings and household customs of the scattered inhabitants
of those districts, must be to such readers in a great measure
unintelligible, and — where intelligible — repulsive. Men and
women who, perhaps naturally very calm, and with feelings
moderate in degree, and little marked in kind, have been trained
from their cradle to observe the utmost evenness of manner and
guardedness of language, will hardly know what to make of the
rough, strong utterance, the harshly manifested passions, the
unbridled aversions, and headlong partialities of unlettered moor-
land hinds and rugged moorland squires, who have grown up
untaught and unchecked, except by mentors as harsh as them-
selves. A large class of readers, likewise, will suffer greatly
from the introduction into the pages of this work of words-
PREFACE. XV
printed with, all their letters, which it has become the custom
to represent by the initial and final letter only — a blank line
filling the interval. I may as well say at once that, for this
circumstance, it is out of my power to apologise ; deeming it,
myself, a rational plan to write words at full length. The
practice of hinting by single letters those expletives with which
profane and violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse,
strikes me as a proceeding which, however well meant, is weak
and futile. I cannot tell what good it does — what feeling it
spares — what horror it conceals.
With regard to the rusticity of " Wuthering Heights, " I
admit the charge, for I feel the quality. It is rustic all through.
It is moorish, and wild, and knotty as a root of heath. Nor
was it natural that it should be otherwise ; the author being
herself a native and nursling of the moors. Doubtless, had her
lot been cast in a town, her writings, if she had written at all,
would have possessed another character. Even had chance or
taste led her to choose a similar subject, she would have treated
it otherwise. Had Ellis Bell been a lady or a gentleman
accustomed to what is called " the world, " her view of a remote
and unreclaimed region, as well as of the dwellers therein, would
have differed greatly from that actuallj'taken by the homebred
country girl. Doubtless it would have been wider — more com-
prehensive : whether it would have been more original or more
truthful is not so certain- As far as the scenery and locality are
concerned, it could scarcely have been so sympathetic : Ellis Bell
did not describe as one whose e3'e and taste alone found pleasure
in the prospect ; her native hills were far more to her than a
spectacle ; they were what she lived in, and by, as much as the
wild birds, their tenants, or as the heather, their produce. Her
descriptions, then, of natural scenery, are what they should be,
and all they should be.
Where delineation of human character is concerned, the case
is different. I am bound to avow that she had scarcely more
practical knowledge of the peasantry amongst whom she lived,
than a nun has of the country people who sometimes pass her
convent gates. My sister's disposition was not naturally gre-
garious ; circumstances favoured and fostered her tendency to
seclusion ; except to go to church or take a walk on the liills.
XVI PREFACE.
she rarely crossed the threshold of home. Though her feeling
for the people round was benevolent, intercourse with them she
never sought ; nor, with very few exceptions, ever experienced.
And yet she knew them : knew their ways, their language, their
family histories ; she could hear of them with interest, and talk
of them with detail, minute, graphic, and accurate ; but with
them, she rarely exchanged a word. Hence it ensued that what
her mind had gathered of the real concerning them, was too
exclusively confined to those tragic and terrible traits of which,
in listening to the secret annals of every rude vicinage, the
memory is sometimes compelled to receive the impress. Her
imagination, which was a spirit more sombre than sunny, more
powerful than sportive, found in such traits material whence it
wrought creations like Heathcliff, like Earnshaw, like Catherine.
Having formed these beings, she did not know what she had
done. If the auditor of her work when read in manuscript,
shuddered under the grinding influence of natures so relentless and
implacable, of spirits so lost and fallen ; if it was complained that
the mere hearing of certain vivid and fearful scenes banished
sleep by night, and disturbed mental peace by day, Ellis Bell
■would wonder what was meant, and suspect the complainant
of affectation. Had she but lived, her mind would of itself have
grown like a strong tree, loftier, straighter, wider-spreading, and
its matured fruits would have attained a mellower ripeness and
sunnier bloom ; but on that mind time and experience alone
could work: to the influence of other intellects, it was not
amenable.
Having avowed that over much of " Wuthering Heights " there
broods " a horror of great darkness; " that, in its storm-heated
and electrical atmosphere, we seem at times to breathe lightning,
let me point to those spots where clouded daylight and the
eclipsed sun still attest their existence. For a specimen of true
benevolence and homely fidelity, look at the character of Nelly
Dean ; for an example of constancy and tenderness, remark that
of Edgar Linton. (Some people will think these qualities do not
shine so well incarnate in a man as they would do in a woman,
but Ellis Bell could never be brought to comprehend this notion :
nothing moved her more than any insinuation that the faithful-
ness and clemency, the long-suffering and loving-kindness which
PREFACE. Xvii
are esteemed virtues in the daughters of Eve, become foibles in
the sons of Adam. She held that mercy and forgiveness are the
divinest attributes of the Great Being who made both man and
Avoman, and that what clothes the Godhead in glorj', can dis-
grace no form of feeble humanity.) There is a dry saturnine
humour in the delineation of old Joseph, and some glimpses of
grace and gaiety animate the younger Catherine. Nor is even
the first heroine of the name destitute of a certain strange beauty
in her fierceness, or of honesty in the midst of perverted passion
and passionate perversity.
HeathclifF, indeed, stands unredeemed ; never once swers'ing
in his arrow-straight course to perdition, from the time when
*'the little black-haired swarthy thing, as dark as if it came from
the Devil, " was first unrolled out of the bundle and set on its
feet in the farm-house kitchen, to the hour when Nelly Dean
found the grim, stalwart corpse laid on its back in the panel-
enclosed bed, with wide-gazing eyes that seemed " to sneer at
her attempt to close them, and parted lips and sharp white teeth
that sneered too. "
Heathcliff " betrays one solitary human feeling, and that is not
hislove for Catherine ; which is a sentiment fierce and inhuman ;
a passion such as might boil and glow in the bad essence of
some evil genius ; a fire that might form the tormented centre —
the ever-suffering soul of a magnate of the infernal world : and.
by its quenchless and ceaseless ravage effect the execution of the
decree which dooms him to carry Hell with him wherever he
wanders. No ; the single link that connects Heathcliff " with
humanity is his rudely-confessed regard for Hareton Earnshaw —
the young man whom he has ruined ; and then his half-implied
esteem for Nelly Dean. These solitary traits omitted, we should
say he was child neither of Lascar nor gipsy, but a man's shape
animated by demon life — a Ghoul — an Afreet.
Whether it is right or advisable to create beings like Heathcliff,
I do not know: I scarcely think it is. But this I know: the
writer who possesses the creative gift owns something of which
he is not always master — something that, at times, strangely wills
and works for itself. He may lay down rules and devise prin-
ciples, and to rules and principles it will perhaps for years lie in
subjection ; and then, haply without any warning of revolt, there
XVllI PREFACE.
comes a time when it will no longer consent to " harrow the
valleys, or be bound with a band in the furrow " — when it
" laughs at the multitude of the city, and regards not the crying
of the driver " — when, refusing absolutely to make ropes out
of sea-sand any longer, it sets to work on statue-hewing, and
you have a Pluto or a Jove, a Tisiphone or a Psyche, a Mermaid
or a Madonna, as Fate or Inspiration direct. Be the work grim
or glorious, dread or divine, you have little choice left but
quiescent adoption. As for you — the nominal artist— your share
in it has been to work passively under dictates you neither
delivered nor could question — that would not be uttered at your
prayer, nor suppressed nor changed at 3'our caprice. If the
result be attractive, the World will praise you, who little deserve
praise; if it be repulsive, the same World will blame you, who
almost as little deserve blame.
" Wuthering Heights " was hewn in a wild workshop, with
simple tools, out of homely materials. The statuary found a
granite block on a solitary moor ; gazing thereon, he saw how
from the crag might be elicited a head, savage, swart, sinister;
a form moulded with at least one element of grandeur — power.
He wrought with a rude chisel, and from no model but the vision
of his meditations. With time and labour, the crag took human
shape ; and there it stands colossal, dark, and frowning, half
statue, half rock : in the former sense, terrible and goblin-like ;
in the latter, almost beautiful, for its colouring is of mellow
grey, and moorland moss clothes it ; and heath, with its bloom-
ing bells and balmy fragrance, grows faithfully close to the
giant's foot.
CURRER BELL.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
BY ELLIS BELL.
CHAPTER i.
1801. — I HAVE just returned from a visit to my landlord — the
solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled with. This is cer-
tainly " a beautiful country ! In all England, I do not believe
that I could have fixed on a situation so completely removed
from the stir of society. A perfect misanthropist's heaven : and
Mr. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable pair to divide the'
desolation between us. A capital fellow ! He little imagined
how my heart warmed towards him when I beheld his black
eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as I rode up,
and when his fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous reso-
lution, still further in his waistcoat, as I announced my name,
" Mr. Heathcliff! " I said.
A nod was the answer.
" Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir. I do myself the
honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to ex-
press the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my per-
severance in soliciting the occupation of Thrushcross Grange : I
heard yesterday you had had some thoughts "
" Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir, " he interrupted,
wincing.''I should not allow any one to inconvenience me,
if I could hinder it — ^walk in ! "
The " walk in " was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed
the sentiment, " Go to the deuce: " even the gate over which
he leant manifested no sympathising movement to the words ;
and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the
invitation : I felt interested in a man who seemed more exag-
geratedly reserved than myself.
When he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the barrier, he
20 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
did put out his hand to unclmin it, and then sullenly preceded
me up the causeway, calling, as we entered the court — " Joseph,
take Mr. Lockwood's horse ; and bring up some wine. "
" Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I sup-
pose, " was the reflection suggested by this compound order.
" No wonder the grass grows up between the flags, and cattle
are the only hedge-cutters. "
Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man : very old, perhaps,
though hale and sinewy. " The Lord help us ! " he soliloquised
in an undertone of peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my
horse : looking, meantime, in my face so sourly that I charitably
conjectured he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner,
and his pious ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected
advent.
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathcliffs dwelling.
" Wuthering " being a significant provincial adjective, descrip-
tive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in
stormy weather. Pure, bracing ventilation they must have up
there at all times, indeed : one may guess the power of the north
wind blowing over the edge, by the excessive slant of a few
stunted firs at the end of the house ; and by a range of gaunt
thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving alms of
the sun. Happily, the architect had foresight to build it strong :
the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the corners
defended with large jutting stones.
Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a quantity
of grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially
about the principal door ; above which, among a wilderness
of crumbling griffins and shameless little boys, I detected the
date " 1500, " and the name " Hareton Earnshaw. " I would
have made a few comments, and requested a short history of
the place from the surly owner ; but his attitude at the door
appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure,
and I had no desire to aggravate his impatience previous to
inspecting the penetralium.
One step brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here " the house "
pre-eminently. It includes kitchen and parlour, generally ; but
I believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen is forced to retreat
altogether into another quarter : at least I distinguished a
chatter of tongues, and a clatter of culinary utensils, deep
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 21
within ; and I observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking,
about the huge fire-place ; nor any glitter of copper saucepans
and tin cullenders on the walls. One end, indeed, reflected
splendidly both light and heat from ranks of immense pewter
dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and tankards, towering row
after row, on a vast oak dresser, to the very roof. The latter
had never been underdrawn : its entire anatomy lay bare to an
inquiring eye, except where a frame of wood laden with oatcakes
and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
Above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a couple
of horse-pistols : and, by way of ornament, three gaudily painted
canisters disposed along its ledge. The floor was of smooth,
white stone ; the chairs, high-backed, primitive structures,
painted green : one or two heavy black ones lurking in the
shade. In an arch under the dresser, reposed a huge, liver-
coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of squealing
puppies ; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing extra-
ordinary as belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a
stubborn countenance, and stalwart limbs set out to advantage
in knee-breeches and gaiters. Such an individual seated in
his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the round table
before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles
among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. But
f\lr. Heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style.
of living. / He is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and
mannersa gentleman : that is, as much a gentleman as many a
country squire : rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss
with his negligence, because he has an erect and handsome
figure ; and rather morose. Possibly, some people might suspect
him of a degree of under-bred pride ; I have a sympathetic chord
within that tells me it is nothing of the sort : I know, by
instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays
of feeling — to manifestations of mutual kindliness. He'll love
and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of
impertinence to be loved or hated again. No, I'm running on
too fast : I bestow my own attributes over liberally on him.
Mr. Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping
his hand out of the way when he meets a would-be acquaint-
ance, to those which actuate me. Let me hope my constitution
is almost peculiar : my dear mother used to say I should never
22 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
liave a comfortable home ; and only last summer I proved
myself perfectly unworthy of one.
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I
was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature :
a real goddess in my eyes, as long as she took no notice of
me. I *'never told my love " vocally ; still, if looks have
language, the merest idiot might have guessed I was over head
and ears : she understood me at last, and looked a return —
the sweetest of all imaginable looks. And what did I do?
I confess it with shame — shrunk icily into myself, like a snail ;
at every glance retired colder and farther ; till finally the poor
innocent was led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed
with confusion at her supposed mistake, persuaded her mamma
to decamp. By this curious turn of disposition I have gained
the reputation of deliberate heartlessness ; how undeserved, I
alone can appreciate.
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards
which my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence
by attempting to caress the canine mother who had left her
nursery, and was sneaking .wolfishly to the back of my legs,
her lip curled up, and her white teeth watering for a snatch.
My caress provoked a long, guttural gnarU
" You'd better let the dog alone, " growled Mr. Heathcliff
in unison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of
his foot. " She's not accustomed to be spoiled — not kept
for a pet. " Then, striding to a side door, he shouted again,
" Joseph ! "
Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but
gave no intimation of ascending ; so his master dived down to
him, leaving me vis-a-vis the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim
shaggy sheep-dogs, who shared with her a jealous guardian-
ship over all my movements. Not anxious to come in contact
with their fangs, I sat still ; but, imagining they would scarcely
understand tacit insults, I unfortunately indulged in winking and
malting faces at the trio, and some turn of my physiognomy
so irritated madam, that she suddenly broke into a fury and
leapt on my knees. I flung her back, and hastened to inter-
pose the table between us. This proceeding roused the whole
hive : half-a-dozen four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages,
issued from hidden dens to the common centre. I felt my heels
and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault ; and parrying off the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
larger combatants as effectually as I could with the poker, I was
■constrained to demand, aloud, assistance from some of the
liousehold in re-establishing peace.
Mr. Heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with
vexatious phlegm : I don't think they moved one second faster
than usual, though the hearth was an absolute tempest of
worrying and yelping. Happily, an inhabitant of the kitchen
made more despatch : a lusty dame, with tucked-up gown,
bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the midst of
us flourishing a frying-pan : and used that weapon, and her
tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically,
and she only remained, heaving like a sea after a high wind,
when her master entered on the scene.
" What the devil is the matter? " he asked, eyeing me in a
manner that I could ill endure after this inhospitable treatment,
" What the devil, indeed! " I muttered. " The herd of
possessed swine could have had no worse spirits in them than
those animals of yours, sir. You might as well leave a stranger
with a brood of tigers ! "
" They won't meddle with persons who touch nothing, " he
remarked, putting the bottle before me, and restoring the dis-
placed table.''The dogs do right to be vigilant. Take a
glass of wine? "
" No, thank you. "
• " Not bitten, are you ? "
*'If I had been, I would have set my signet on the biter. "
Heathcliff's countenance relaxed into a grin.
" Come, come, " he said, " you are flurried, Mr. Lockwood.
Here, take a little wine. Guests are so exceedingly rare in
this house that I and my dogs, I am willing to own, hardly
know how to receive them. Your health, sir ! "
I bowed and returned the pledge ; beginning to perceive
that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of
a pack of curs : besides, I felt loath to yield the fellow further
amusement at my expense ; since his humour took that turn.
He — probably swayed by prudential consideration of the folly
of offending a good tenant — relaxed a little in the laconic
style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs, and
introduced what he supposed would be a subject of interest to
me, — a discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my
present place of retirement. I found him very intelligent on
22, WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the topics we touched ; and before I went home, I was en-
couraged so far as to volunteer another visit to-morrow. He
evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. I shall go, not-
withstanding. It is astonishing how sociable I feel myself
compared with him.
CHAPTER n.
Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I had half a
mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through
heath and mud to Wuthering Heights. On coming up from
dinner however (N.B. — I dine between twelve and one o'clock ;
the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken as a fixture along with
the house, could not, or would not, comprehend my request
that I might be served at five), on mounting the stairs with
this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, I saw a servant-
girl on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles,
and raising an infernal dust as she extinguished the flames
with heaps of cinders. This spectacle drove me back immedi-
ately ; I took my hat, and, after a four miles'walk, arrived at
Heathcliff's garden gate just in time to escape the first feathery
flakes of a snow-shower.
On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black
frost, and the air made me shiver through every limb. Being
unable to remove the chain, I jumped over, and, running up
the flagged causeway bordered with straggling gooseberry
bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my knuckles tingled
and the dogs howled.
" Wretched inmates! " I ejaculated mentally, " you deserve
perpetual isolation from your species for your churlish inhos-
pitality. At least, I would not keep my doors barred in the
day-time. I don't care — I will get in ! " So resolved, I grasped
the latch and shook it vehemently. Vinegar-faced Joseph pro-
jected his head from a round window of the barn.
" What are ye for? " he shouted. " T'maister's down i'
l'fowld. Go round by th'end ot'laith, if ye went to spake
to him. "
" Is there nobody inside to open the door? " I hallooed,
responsively.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2)
" There's nobbut t'missis; and shoo'll not oppen't an ye
mak yer flaysome dins till neeght. "
" Why? Cannot you tell her who I am, eh, Joseph ? "
" Nor-ne me! I'll hae no hend wi't, " muttered the head,
vanishing. *
The snow began to drive thickly. I seized the handle to
essay another trial ; when a young man without coat, and
shouldering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind. He
hailed me to follow him, and, after marching through a wash-
house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed, pump, and
pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
apartment, where I was formerly received. It glowed dehght-
fully in the radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal,
peat, and wood ; and near the table, laid for a plentiful evening
meal, I was pleased to observe the " missis, " an individual whose
existence I had never previously suspected. I bowed and waited,
thinking she would bid me take a seat. She looked at me, lean-
ing back in her chair, and remained motionless and mute.
" Rough weather! " I remarked. " I'm afraid, Mrs. Heath-
cliff, the door must bear the consequence of your servants "
leisure attendance : I had hard work to make them hear me. "
She never opened her mouth. I stared — she stared also : at
any rate, she kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner,
exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable.
" Sit down, " said the young man gruffly. " He'll be in soon. "
I obeyed ; and hemmed, and called the villain Juno, who
deigned, at this second interview, to move the extreme tip of
her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance.
" A beautiful animal ! " I commenced again. " Do you intend
parting with the little ones, madam? "
/ " They are not mine, " said the amiable hostess, more repel-
lingly than Heathcliff himself could have replied.
" Ah, your favourites are among these? " I continued, turning
to an obscure cushion full of something like cats.
" A strange choice of favourites ! " she observed scornfully.
Unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits. I hemmed once
more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on
the wildness of the evening.
" You should not have come out, " she said, rising and
reaching from the chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.
Her position before was sheltered from the light ; now, I had
26 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
a distinct view of her whole figure and countenance. She was
slender, and apparently scarcely past girlhood : an admirable
form, and the most exquisite little face that I have ever had the
pleasure of beholding ; small features, very fair ; flaxen ringlets,
or rather golden, hanging^oose on her delicate neck ; and eyes,
had they been agreeable in expression, that would have been
irresistible : fortunately for my susceptible heart, the only senti-
ment they evinced hovered between scorn, and a kind of despera-
tion, singularly unnatural to be detected there. The canisters
were almost out of her reach ; I made a motion to aid her ; she
turned upon me as a miser might turn if any one attempted to
assist him in counting his gold.
" I don't want your help, " she snapped ; " I can get them for
myself. "
" I beg your pardon ! " I hastened to reply.
" Were you asked to tea? " she demanded, tying an apron
over her neat black frock, and standing with a spoonful of the
leaf poised over the pot.
" I shall be glad to have a cup, " I answered.
''Were you asked ? " she repeated.
" No, " I said, half smiling. " You are the proper person to
ask me. "
She flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her chair
in a pet ; her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed
out, like a child's ready to cry.
Meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person a
decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting himself before
the blaze, looked down on me from the corner of his eyes, for
all the world as if there were some mortal feud unavenged
between us. I began to doubt whether he were a servant or
not : his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
the superiority observable in Mr. and Mrs. Heathcliff; his
thick, brown curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers
encroached bearishly over his cheeks, and his hands were em-
browned like those of a common labourer: still his bearing
was free, almost haughty, and he showed none of a domestic's
assiduity in attending on the lady of the house. In the absence
of clear proofs of his condition, I deemed it best to abstain
from noticing his curious conduct ; and, five minutes after-
wards, the entrance of Heathcliff relieved me, in some measure,
from my uncomfortable state.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. TJ
" You see, sir, I am come, according'to promise! " I
exclaimed, assuming the cheerful; " and I fear I shall be
weather-bound for half-an-hour, if you can afford me shelter
during that space. "
" Half-an-hour? " he said, shaking the white flakes from his
clothes ; " I wonder you should select the thick of a snowstorm
to ramble about in. Do you know that you run a risk of being
lost in the marshes? People familiar with these moors often
miss their road on such evenings ; and I can tell you there is
no chance of a change at present. "
" Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, and he might
stay at the Grange till morning — could you spare me one ? "
" No, I could not. "
" Oh, indeed ! Well, then, I must trust to my own sagacity. "
" Umph! "
" Are you going to mak th'tea ? " demanded he of the shabby
coat, shifting his ferocious gaze from me to the young lady.
" Is he to have any ? " she asked, appealing to Heathcliff.
" Get it ready, will you? " was the answer, uttered so savagely
that I started. The tone in which the words were said revealed
a genuine bad nature. I no lougijr felt inclined-tQucall Heath-
cliff a capital fellQ:\v. When the preparations were finished, he
invited me with — " Now, sir, bring forward your chair. " And
we all, including the rustic youth, drew round the table : an
austere silence prevaiHng while m'c discussed our meal.
I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make
an effort to dispel it. They could not every day sit so grim and
taciturn ; and it was impossible, however ill-tempered they
might be, that the universal scowl they wore was their every-
day countenance.
" It is strange, " I began, in the interv'al of swallowing one
cup of tea and receiving another — " it is strange how custom
can mould our tastes and ideas : many could not imagine the
existence of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the
world as you spend, Mr. Heathcliff; yet I'll venture to say,
that, suiTOunded by your family, and with your amiable lady
as the presiding genius over your home and heart " -^^
" My amiable lady! " he interrupted, with an almost
diabolical sneer on his face. " Where is she — my amiable
lady? "
" Mrs. Heathcliff, your wife, I mean. "
25 WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I
" Well, yes — Oh, you would intimate that her spirit has
taken the post of ministering angel, and guards the fortunes
of Wuthering Heights even when her body is gone. Is
that it? "
Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct it. I
might have seen there was too great a disparity between the
ages of the parties to make it likely that they were man and
wife. One was about forty : a period of mental vigour at
which men seldom cherish the delusion of being married for
love by girls : that dream is reserved for the solace of our
declining years. The other did not look seventeen.
Then it flashed upon me — " The clown at my elbow, who
is drinking his tea out of a basin and eating his bread with
unwashed hands, may be her husband : Heathcliff, junior, of
course. Here is the consequence of being buried alive : she
has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance
that better individuals existed ! A sad pity — I must beware
how I cause her to regret her choice. " The last reflection
may seem conceited ; it was not. My neighbour struck me
as bordering on repulsive ; I knew, through experience, that
I was tolerably attractive.
" Mrs. Heathcliff is my daughter-in-law, " said Heathcliff,
corroborating my surmise. He turned, as he spoke, a peculiar
look in her direction : a look of hatred ; unless he has a most
perverse set of facial muscles that will not, like those of other
people, interpret the language of his soul.
" Ah, certainly — I see now : you are the favoured possessor of
the beneficent fairy, " I remarked, turning to my neighbour.
This was worse than before : the youth grew crimson, and
clenched his fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault.
But he seemed to recollect himself presently, and smothered the
storm in a brutal curse, muttered on my behalf : which, however,
I took care not to notice.
" Unhappy in your conjectures, sir, " observed my host ; " we
neither of us have the privilege of owning your good fairy ; her
mate is dead. I said she was my daughter-in-law, therefore, she
must have married my son. "
" And this young man is "
" Not my son, assuredly. "
Heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29
" My name is Hareton Earnshaw, " growled the other ; " and
I'd counsel you to respect it ! "
" I've shown no disrespect, " was my reply, laughing internally
at the dignity with which he announced himself.
He fixed his eye on me longer than I cared to return the stare,
for fear I might be tempted either to box his ears or render my
hilarity audible. I began to feel unmistakably out of place in
that pleasant family circle. The dismal spiritual atmosphere
overcame, and more than neutralised, the glowing physical
comforts round me ; and I resolved to be cautious how I
ventured under those rafters a third time.
The business of eating being concluded, and no one uttering
a word of sociable conversation, I approached a window to
examine the weather. A sorrowful sight I saw : dark night
coming down prematurely, and sky and hills mingled in one
bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.
" I don't think it possible for me to get home now without a
guide, " I could not help exclaiming. " The roads will be
buried already ; and, if they were bare, I could scarcely dis-
tinguish a foot in advance. "
" Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch.
They'll be covered if left in the fold all night : and put a plank
before them, " said Heathcliff.
" How must I do? " I continued, with rising irritation.
There was no reply to my question ; and on looking round I
saw only Joseph bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and
Mrs. Heathcliff leaning over the fire, diverting herself with
burning a bundle of matches which had fallen from the chimney-
piece as she restored the tea canister to its place. The former,
when he had deposited his burden, took a critical survey of the
room, and in cracked tones, grated out —
" Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i'idleness
un war, when all on'em's goan out ! Bud yah're a nowt, and
it's no use talking — yah'll niver mend o'yer ill ways, but goa
raight to t'divil, like yer mother afore ye ! "
I imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was
addressed to me ; and, suflRciently enraged, stepped towards the
aged rascal with an intention of kicking him out of the door.
Mrs. Heathcliff, however, checked me by her answer.
" You scandalous old hypocrite ! " she replied. " Are you not
afraid of being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the
30 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
devil's name? I warn you to refrain from provoking me, or I'll
ask your abduction as a special favour. Stop ! look here,
Joseph, " she continued, taking a long, dark book from a shelf;
" I'll show you how far I've progressed in the Black Art: I shall
soon be competent to make a clear house of it. The red cow
didn't die by chance ; and your rheumatism can hardly be
reckoned among providential visitations ! "
" Oh, wicked, wicked! " gasped the elder; " may the Lord
deliver us from evil ! "
" No, reprobate! you are a castaway — be off, or I'll hurt
you seriously ! I'll have you all modelled in wax and clay ;
and the first who passes the kmits I fix, shall — I'll not say
what he shall be done to — but, you'll see ! Go, I'm looking at
you ! "
The little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful
eyes, and Joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out
praying and ejaculating " wicked " as he went. I thought her
conduct must be prompted by a species of dreary fun : and,
now that we were alone, I endeavoured to interest her in my
distress.
" Mrs. Heathcliff, " I said oarnestly, " you must excuse me
for troubling you. I presume, because, with that face, I'm sure
you cannot help being good-hearted. Do point out some land-
marks by which I may know my way home : I have no more
idea how to get there than you would have how to get to
London ! "
" Take the road you came, " she answered, ensconcing herself
in a chair, with a candle, and the long book open before her,
" It is brief advice, but as sound as I can give. "
" Then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or
a pit full of snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly
your fault ? "
" How so? I cannot escort you. They wouldn't let me go
to the end of the garden-wall. "
'• Yo7i ! I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold,
for my convenience, on such a night, " I cried. " I want you to
tell me my way, not to show it ; or else to persuade Mr. Heath-
cliff to give me a guide. "
" Who? There is himself, Earnshaw, Zillah, Joseph and L
Which would you have? "
''Are there no boys at the farm ? "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Jt
*'No ; those are all. "
" Then, it follows that I am compelled to stay, "
''That you may settle with your host. I have nothing to do
with it. "
" I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash
journeys on these hills, " cried Heathcliff's stern voice from the
kitchen entrance. " As to staying here, I don't keep accom-
modations for visitors : you must share a bed with Hareton or
Joseph, if you do. "
" I can sleep on a chair in this room, " I replied.
" No, no ! A stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor : it
will not suit me to permit any one the range of the place while
I am off guard ! " said the unmannerly wretch.
With this insult, my patience was at an end, I uttered an
expression of disgust, and pushed past him into the yard,
running against Earnshaw in my haste. It was so dark that
I could not see the means of exit ; and, as I wandered round,
I heard another specimen of their civil behaviour amongst each
other. At first the young man appeared about to befriend me.
" I'll go with him as far as the park, " he said.
" You'll go with him to hell! " exclaimed his master, or
whatever relation he bore. " And who is to look after the
horses, eh? "
" A man's life is of more consequence than one evening's
neglect of the horses : somebody must go, " murmured Mrs,
HeathclifT, more kindly than I expected,
" Not at your command! " retorted Hareton. " If you set
store on him, you'd better be quiet. "
" Then I hope his ghost will haunt you; and I hope ]Mr.
HeathcUff will never get another tenant till the Grange is a
ruin ! " she answered sharply.
" Hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on'em ! " muttered Joseph,
towards whom I had been steering.
He sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a
lantern, which I seized unceremoniously, and, calhng out that I
would send it back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.
" Maister, maister, he's stahng t'lanthern ! " -shouted the
ancient, pursuing my retreat. " Hey, Gnasher ! Hev, dog!
Hey, Wolf, holld him, holld him ! "
On opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat,
bearing me down and extinguishing the light ; while a mingled
32 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
guffaw from Heathcliff and Hareton, put the copestone on my
rage and humiliation. Fortunately, the beasts seemed more
bent on stretching their paws and yawning, and flourishing their
tails, than devouring me alive ; but they would suffer no resurrec-
tion, and I was forced to lie till their malignant masters pleased
to deliver me : then, hatless and trembling with wrath, I ordered
the miscreants to let me out — on their peril to keep me one
minute longer — with several incoherent threats of retaliation that,
in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of King Lear.
The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding
at the nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and still I scolded. I
don't know what would have concluded the scene, had there not
been one person at hand rather more rational than myself, and
more benevolent than my entertainer. This was Zillah, the
stout housewife ; who at length issued forth to inquire into the
nature of the uproar. She thought that some of them had been
laying violent hands on me ; and, not daring to attack her
master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger
scoundrel.
" Well, Mr. Earnshaw, " she cried, " I wonder what you'll
have agait next ! Are we going to murder folk on our very door-
stones? I see this house will never do for me — look at t'poor
lad, he's fair choking ! Wisht, wisht ! you mun'n't go on so.
Come in, and I'll cure that : there now, hold ye still. "
With these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water
down my neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. Mr. Heathcliff
followed, his accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual
moroseness.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy and faint ; and thus com-
pelled perforce to accept lodgings under his roof. He told Zillah
to give me a glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner
room ; while she condoled with me on my sorry predicament,
and having obeyed his orders, whereby I was somewhat revived,
ushered me to bed.
CHAPTER ni.
While leading the way upstairs, she recommended that I
should hide the candle, and not make a noise ; for her master
had an odd notion about the chamber she would put me in, and
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3 3
never let anybody lodge there willingly. I asked the reason.
She did not know, she answered : she had only lived there a
year or two ; and they had so many queer goings on, she could
not begin to be curious.
Too stupified to be curious myself, I fastened my door and
glanced round for the bed. The whole furniture consisted of a
chair, a clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out
near the top resembling coach windows. Having approached
this structure I looked inside, and perceived it to be a singular
sort of old-fashioned couch, very conveniently designed to obviate
the necessity for every member of the family having a room to
himself. In fact, it formed a little closet, and the ledge of a
window, which it enclosed, served as a table. I slid back the
panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them together again,
and felt secure against the vigilance of Heathcliff, and every
one else.
The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed
books piled up in one corner ; and it was covered with writing
scratched on the paint. This writing, however, was nothing
but a name repeated in all kinds of characters, large and small
— Catheriyie Eanishaiv, here and there varied to Catheriiie
Heathcliff, and then again to Catherine Linton.
In vapid listlessness I leant my head against the window,
and continued spelling over Catherine Earnshaw — Heathcliff
— Linton, till my eyes closed ; but they had not rested five
minutes when a glare of white letters started from the dark as
vivid as spectres — the air swarmed with Catherines ; and rousing
myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my candle-
wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and perfuming
the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin. I snuffed it off,
and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and lingering
nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee
It was a Testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty I
a fly-leaf bore the inscription — " Catherine Earnshaw, her book, "
and a date some quarter of a century back. I shut it, and took
up another, and another, till I had examined all. Catherine's
library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it to have
been well used ; though not altogether for a legitimate purpose :
scarcely one chapter had escaped a pen-and-ink commentary — at
least, the appearance of one — covering every morsel of blank
that the printer had left. Some were detached sentences ; other
B
34 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
parts took the form of a regular diary, scrawled in an unformed,
childish hand. At the top of an extra page (quite a treasure,
probably, when first lighted on) I was greatly amused to behold
an excellent caricature of my friend- Joseph, — rudely yet power-
fully sketched. An immediate interest kindled within me for the
unknown Catherine, and I began forthwith to decipher her faded
.hieroglyphics.
" An awful Sunday! " commenced the paragraph beneath.
''I wish my father were back again. Hindley is a detestable
substitute — his conduct to Heathcliff is atrocious — H. and I are
going to rebel — we took our initiatory step this evening.
" All day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to
church, so Joseph must needs get up a congregation in the
garret ; and, while Hindley and his wife basked downstairs
before a comfortable fire — doing anything but reading their
Bibles, I'll answer for it — Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy
plough-boy, were commanded to take our Prayer-books, and
mount : we were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn, groaning
and shivering, and hoping that Joseph would shiver too, so that
he might give us a short homily for his own sake. A vain idea !
The service lasted precisely three hours ; and yet my brother had
the face to exclaim, when he saw us descending,'What, done
already ?'On Sunday evenings we used to be permitted to play,
if we did not make much noise ; now a mere titter is sufficient to
send us into corners !
"'You forget you have a master here,'says the tyrant.'I'll
demolish the first who puts me out of temper ! I insist on perfect
sobriety and silence. Oh, boy ! was that you ? Frances, darling,
pull his hair as you go by : I heard him snap his fingers.'Frances
pulled his hair heartily, and then went and seated herself on her
husband's knee ; and there they were, like two babies, kissing
and talking nonsense by the hour — foolish palaver that we should
be ashamed of. We made ourselves as snug as our means
allowed in the arch of the dresser. I had just fastened our
pinafores together, and hung them up for a curtain, when in
comes Joseph on an errand from the stables. He tears down
my handywork, boxes my ears, and croaks —
"'T'maister nobbut just buried, and Sabbath no o'ered, und
t'sound o't'gospel still i'yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking !
Shame on ye ! sit ye down, ill childer ! there's good books eneugh
if ye'll read'em : sit ye down, and think o'yer sowls !'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 35
•'Saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that
^ve might receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the
text of the lumber he thrust upon us. I could not bear the P^^
employment. I took my dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled
it into the dog-kennel, vowing I hated a good book. Heathcliff
kicked his to the same place. Then there was a hubbub !
"'Maister Hindley !'shouted our chaplain.'Maister, coom
hither ! Miss Cathy's riven th'back off'Th'Helmet o'Salva-
tion,'un'Heathcliff's pawsed his fit into t'first part o''T'Brooad'\ f\
^^ " ay to Destruction !'It's fair flaysome that ye let'em go on
this gait. Ech ! th'owd man wad ha'laced'em properly — but
he's goan !'
" Hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and
seizing one of us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled
both into the back-kitchen ; where, Joseph asseverated,'owd
Xick'\vould fetch us as sure as we were living: and, so
comforted, we each sought a separate nook to await his advent.
S^reached this book, and a pot of ink from a shelf, and pushed 55
nie house-door ajar to give me light, and I have got the time on
with writing for twenty minutes |\ but my companion is impatient,
and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman's cloak,
and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. A pleasant
suggestion — and then, if the surly old man come in, he may
believe his prophecy verified — we cannot be damper, or colder,
in the rain than we are here. "
I suppose Catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence
took up another subject : she waxed lachrymose.
" How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make me
cry so ! " she wrote. " My head aches, till I cannot keep it on
the pillow ; and still I can't give over. Poor Heathcliff ! Hindley
calls him a vagabond, and won't let him sit with us, nor eat with
us any more ; and, he says, he and I must not play together, and
threatens to turn him out of ♦he house if we break his orders. He
has been blaming our father (how dared he?) for treating H. too
liberally ; and swears he will re > ice him to his right place "
I began to nod drowsily over l!he dim page : my eye wandered
from manuscript to print. If saw a red ornamented title—
" Seventy Times Seven, and tlie First of the Seventy-First. A
Pious Discourse delivered by the Reverend Jabes Branderham,

^6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough. " And while I was, half
consciously, worrying my brain to guess what Jabes Branderham
would make of his subject, I sank back in bed, and fell asleep.
Alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper ! what else could
it be that made me pass such a terrible night ? I don't remember
another that I can at all compare with it since I was capable
of suffering.
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible of my
locality. I thought it was morning ; and I had set out on my
way home, with Joseph for a guide. The snow lay yards deep
in our road ; and, as we floundered on, my companion wearied
me with constant reproaches that I had not brought a pilgrim's
staff: telling me that I could never get into the house without
one, and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which I
understood to be so denominated. For a moment I considered
it absurd that I should need such a weapon to gain admittance
into my own residence. Then a new idea flashed across me. I
was not going there : we were journeying to hear the famous
Jabes Branderham preach from the text — " Seventy Times
Seven ; " and either Joseph, the preacher, or I had committed
the " First of the Seventy-First, " and were to be publicly exposed
and excommunicated.
We came to the chapel. I have passed it really in my walks,
twice or thrice ; it lies in a hollow, between two hills : an elevated
hollow, near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer
all the purposes of embalming on the few corpses deposited there.
The roof has been kept whole hitherto ; but as the clergyman's
stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, and a house with two
rooms, threatening speedily to determine into one, no clergyman
will undertake the duties of pastor : especially as it is currently
reported that his flock would rather let him starve than increase
the living by one penny from their own pockets. However, in
my dream, Jabes had a full and attentive congregation ; and he
preached — good God ! what a sermor, . divided mio four himdred
and nifiety parts, each fully equal to an ordinary address from
the pulpit, and each discussing, a separate sin ! Where he
searched for them, I cannot tell. He had his private manner
of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the brother
should sin different sins on every occasion. They were of the
most curious character : odd transgressions that I never imagined
previously.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. yj
Oh, how weary I grew. How I writhed, and yawned, and
nodded, and revived ! How I pinched and pricked myself, and
rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sat down again, and nudged
Joseph to inform me if he would ever have done. I was con-
demned to hear all out : finally, he reached the''First of the
Seventy-First. " At that crisis, a sudden inspiration descended
on me ; I was moved to rise and denounce Jabes Branderham
as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon.
" Sir, " I exclaimed, " sitting here within these four walls, at
one stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and
ninety heads of your discourse. Seventy times seven times have
I plucked up my hat and been about to depart — Seventy times
seven times have you preposterously forced me to resume my
seat. The four hundred and ninety-first is too much. Fellow-
martyrs, have at him ! Drag him down, and crush him to
atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
more ! "
" Thou art the Man! " cried Jabes, after a solemn pause,
leaning over his cushion. " Seventy times seven times didst
thou gapingly contort thy visage— seventy times seven did I
take counsel with my soul— Lo, this is human weakness : this
also may be absolved ! The First of the Seventy-First is come.
Brethren, execute upon him the judgment written. Such honour
have all His saints ! "
With that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting
their pilgrim's staves, rushed round me in a body ; and I, having
no weapon to raise in self-defence, commenced grappling with
Joseph, my nearest and most ferocious assailant, for his. In
the confluence of the multitude, several clubs crossed ; blows,
aimed at me, fell on other sconces. Presently the whole chapel
resounded with rappings and counter-rappings : every man's
hand was against his neighbour; and Branderham, unwilling
to remain idle, poured forth his zeal in a shower of loud taps on
the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at
last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me. And what was it
that had suggested the tremendous tumult? What had played
Tabes's part in the row? Merely, the branch of a fir-tree that
touched my lattice, as the blast wailed by, and rattled its dry
cones against the panes ! I listened doubtingly an instant ;
detected the disturber, then turned and dozed, and dreamt
again : if possible, still more disagreeably than before.
38 WUTHERING HEKiHTS.
This time, I remembered I was lying in the oak closet, and
I heard distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow ;
I heard, also, the fir-bough repeat its teasing sound, and
ascribed it to the right cause : but it annoyed me so much, that
I resolved to silence it, if possible ; and, I thought, I rose and
endeavoured to unhasp the casement. The hook was soldered
into the staple : a circumstance observed by me when awake,
but forgotten. " I must stop it, nevertheless! " I muttered,
knocking my knuckles through the glass, and stretching an arm
out to seize the importunate branch ; instead of which, my
fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand ! The
intense horror of nightmare came over me : I tried to draw
back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melancholy
voice sobbed, " Let me in— let me in ! " " Who are you? " I
asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself. " Catherine
Linton, " it replied shiveringly (why did I think of Linfoii " ? I
had read Earnshaiu twenty times for Linton) ; " I'm come home :
I'd lost my way on the moor ! " As it spoke, I discerned,
obscurely, a child's face looking through the window. Terror
made me cruel ; and, finding it useless to attempt shaking the
creature off, I pulled its wrist on to the broken pain, and
rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the
bedclothes: still it wailed, " Let me in! " and maintained its
tenacious gripe, almost maddening me with fear. " How can
I ! " I said at length, " Let me go, if you want me to let you
in ! " The fingers relaxed, I snatched mine through the hole,
hurriedly piled the books up in a pyramid against it, and
stopped my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer. I seemed
to keep them closed above a quarter of an hour ; yet, the
instant I hstened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on !
" Begone! " I shouted, " I'll never let you in, not if you beg
for twenty years. " " It is twenty years, " mourned the voice:
" twenty years. I've been a waif for twenty years ! " Thereat
began a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
as if thrust forward. I tried to jump up ; but could not stir a
limb ; and so yelled aloud, in a frenzy of fright. To my con-
fusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal : hasty footsteps
approached my chamber door ; somebody pushed it open, with
a vigorous hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at
the top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet, and wiping the
perspiration from my forehead : the intruder appeared to
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 39
hesitate, and muttered to himself. At last, he said in a half-
\vhisper, plainly not expecting an answer, " Is anyone here? "
I considered it best to confess my presence ; for I knew Heath-
cliff's accents, and feared he might search further, if I kept
quiet. With this intention, I turned and opened the panels. I
shall not soon forget the effect my action produced.
Heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers:
with a candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white
as the wall behind him. The first creak of the oak startled
him hke an electric shock ! the light leaped from his hold to a
distance of some feet, and bis agitation was so extreme, that he
could hardly pick it up.
" It is only your guest, sir, " I called out, desirous to spare
him the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. " I had
the misfortune to scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful night-
mare. I'm sorry I disturbed you. "
" Oh, God confound you, Mr. Lockwood ! I wish you were
at the " commenced my host, setting the candle on a chair,
because he found it impossible to hold it steady. " And who
showed you up into this room? " he continued, crushing his
nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the
maxillary convulsions. " Who was it? I've a good mind to
turn them out of the house this moment? "
" It was your sen^ant, Zillah, " I replied, flinging myself on
tQ^he floor, and rapidly resuming my garments. " I should
not care if you did, Mr. Heathcliff ; she richly deserves it. I
suppose that she wanted to get another proof that the place
was haunted, at my expense. Well, it is — swarming with ghosts
and goblins ! You have reason in shutting it up, I assure yoiu
No one will thank you for a doze in such a den ! "
" What do you mean? " asked Heathchff, " and what are you
doing? Lie down and finish out the night, since you a7-e here ;
but, for Heaven's sake ! don't repeat that horrid noise : nothing
could excuse it, unless you were having your throat cut ! "
" If the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably
would have strangled me! " I returned. " I'm not going to
endure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors again.
Was not the Reverend Jabes Branderham akin to you on the
mother's side? And that minx, Catherine Linton, or Earn-
shaw, or however she was called — she must have been a change-
ling — wicked little soul ! She told me she had been walking.
40 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the earth those twenty years : a just punishment for her mortal
transgressions, I've no doubt ! "
Scarcely were these words uttered, when I recollected the
association of Heathcliff's with Catherine's name in the book,
which had completely slipped from my memory, till thus
awakened. I blushed at my inconsideration ; but, without
showing further consciousness of the offence, I hastened to add
— " The truth is, sir, I passed the first part of the night in "
Here I stopped afresh — I was about to say " perusing those old
volumes, " then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as well as their printed, contents : so, correcting myself,
I went on, " In spelling over the name scratched on that window-
ledge. A monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep,
like counting, or "
" What can you mean by talking in this way to me'? " thun-
dered Heathcliff with savage vehemence.''How — how dare you,
under my roof ?— God ! he's mad to speak so ! " And he struck
his forehead with rage.
I did not know whether to resent this language or pursue
my explanation ; but he seemed so powerfully affected that I
took pity and proceeded with my dreams ; affirming I had never
heard the appellation of " Catherine Linton " before, but read-
ing it often over produced an impression which personified itself
when I had no longer my imagination under control. Heathcliff
gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed, as I spoke ; finally
sitting down almost concealed behind it. I guessed, however,
by his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he struggled to
vanquish an excess of violent emotion. Not liking to show him
that I had heard the conflict, I continued my toilette rather
noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of
the night : " Not three o'clock yet ! I could have taken oath
it had been six. Time stagnates here: we must surely have
retired to rest at eight ! "
" Always at nine in winter, and rise at four, " said my host,
suppressing a groan : and, as I fancied, by the motion of his
arm's shadow, dashing a tear from his eyes. " Mr. Lockwood, "
he added, " you may go into my room: you'll only be in the
way, coming downstairs so early ; and your childish outcry has
sent sleep to the devil for me. "
" And for me, too, " I replied. " I'll walk in the yard till day-
light, and then I'll be off; and you need not dread a repetition
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 4 1
of my intrusion. I'm now quite cured of seeking pleasure in
society, be it country or town. A sensible man ought to find
sufficient company in himself. "
" Delightful company! " muttered Heathcliff. " Take the
candle, and go where you please. I shall join you directly.
Keep out of the yard, though, the dogs are unchained ; and the
house — Juno mounts sentinel there, and — nay, you can only
ramble about the steps and passages. But, away with you !
I'll come in two minutes ! "
I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber ; when, ignorant where
the narrow lobbies led, I stood still, and was witness, involun-
tarily, to a piece of superstition on the'part of my landlord,
which belied, oddly, his apparent sense. He got on to the bed,
and wrenched open the lattice, bursting, as he pulled at it, into
an uncontrollable passion of tears. " Come in ! come in ! " he
sobbed.''Cathy, do come. Oh do — 07ice more ! Oh ! my
heart's darling ! hear me this time, Catherine, at last ! " The
spectre showed a spectre's ordinary caprice : it gave no sign of
being ; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even
reaching my station, and blowing out the light.
There was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied
this raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and
I drew off, half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having
related my ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony ;
though ivhy, was beyond my comprehension. I descended
cautiously to the lower regions, and landed in the back-kitchen,
where a gleam of fire, raked compactly together, enabled me to
rekindle my candle. Nothing was stirring except a brindled, grey
cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted me with a queru-
lous mew.
Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly enclosed
the hearth ; on one of these I stretched myself, and Grimalkin
mounted the other. We were both of us nodding, ere any one
invaded our retreat, and then it was Joseph, shuffling down a
wooden ladder that vanished in the roof, through a trap : the
ascent to his garret, I suppose. He cast a sinister look at the
little flame which I had enticed to play between the o-ibs, swept
the cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in the vacancy,
commenced the operation of stuffing a three-inch pipe with
tobacco. My presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed a
piece of impudence too shameful for remark : he silently applied
42 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the tube to his hps, folded his arms, and puffed away. I let him
enjoy the luxury unannoyed ; and after sucking out his last
wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up, and departed
as solemnly as he came.
A more elastic footstep entered next ; and now I opened my
mouth for a " good morning, " but closed it again, the salutation
unachieved ; for Hareton Earnshaw was performing his orisons
sotto voce, in a series of curses directed against every object he
touched, while he rummaged a corner for a spade or shovel to
dig through the drifts. He glanced over the back of the bench,
dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of exchanging civilities
with me as with my companion the cat. I guessed, by his pre-
parations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch,
made a movement to follow him. He noticed this, and thrust
at an inner door with the end of his spade, intimating by an
inarticulate sound that there was the place where I must go, if I
changed my locality.
It opened into the house, where the females were already astir.
Zillah urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal
fi . bellows ; and Mrs. Heatlicliff, kneeling on the hearth^r ^a ding a
book by the aid of the blaze. She held her hand interposed
between the furnace-heat and her eyes, and seemed absorbed in
her occupation ; desisting from it only to chide the servant for
covering her with sparks, or to push away a dog, now and then,
that snoozled its nose over-forwardly into her face. I was
surprised to see Heathcliflf there also. He stood by the fire, his
back towards me, just finishing a stormy scene to poor Zillah ;
who ever and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner
of her apron, and heave an indignant groan.
''And you, you worthless " — he broke out as I entered, turning
to his daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as
duck, or sheep, but generally represented by a dash . " There
you are, at your idle tricks again ! The rest of them do earn
their bread — you live on my charity ! Put your trash away, and
find something to do. You shall pay me for the plague of having
you eternally in my sight — do you hear, damnable jade? "
" I'll put rrty .tnisl > .away, because you can make me, if I
refuse, " answered the young lady, closing her book, and throwing
it on a chair. " But I'll not do anything, though you should
swear your tongue out, except what I please ! "
Heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 43
distance, obviously acquainted with its weight. Having no desire
to be entertained by a cat-and-dog combat, I stepped forward
briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and
innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted dispute. Each
had enough decorum to suspend fui'ther hostilities : Heathcliff
placed his fists, out of temptation, in his pockets ; Mrs. Heath-
cliff curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off, where she kept
her word by playing the part of a statue during the remainder of
my stay. That was not long. I declined joining their break-
fast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an opportunity of
escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and cold as im-
palpable ice.
My landlord hallooed for me to stop, ere I reached the
bottom of the garden, and offered to accompany me across the
moor. It was well he did, for the whole hill-back was one
billowy, white ocean ; the swells and falls not indicating corres-
ponding rises and depressions in the ground : many pits, at
least, were filled to a level ; and entire ranges of mounds, the
refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my yester-
ilay's walk left pictured in my mind. I had remarked on one
side of the road, at intervals of six or seven }'ards, a line of up-
right stones, continued through the whole length of the barren :
these were erected, and daubed with lime on purpose to serve
as guides in the dark ; and also when a fall, like the present,
confounded the deep swamps on either hand with the firmer
path : but, excepting a dirty dot pointing up here and there,
all traces of their existence had vanished : and my companion
found it necessary to warn me frequently to steer to the right or
left, when I imagined I was following, correctly, the windings
of the road.
We exchanged little conversation, and he halted at the
entrance of Thrushcross Park, saying, I could make no error
there. Our adieux were limited to a hasty bow, and then I
pushed forward, trusting to my own resources ; for the porter's
lodge is untenanted as yet. The distance from the gate to the
Grange is two miles : I believe I managed to make it four ; what
with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the neck in
snow : a predicament which only those who have experienced it
can appreciate. At any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the
clock chimed twelve as I entered the house ; and that gave exactly
an hour for every mile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.
44 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
My human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me ;
exclaiming, tumultuously, they had completely given me up :
everybody conjectured that I perished last night ; and they
were wondering how they must set about the search for my
remains. I bid them be quiet, now that they saw me returned,
and, benumbed to my very heart, I dragged upstairs ; whence,
after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or
forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, I am adjourned to
my study, feeble as a kitten : almost too much so to enjoy the
cheerful fire and smoking coffee which the servant has prepared
for my refreshment.
CHAPTER IV.
What vain weather-cocks we are ! I, who had determined to
hold myself independent of all social intercourse, and thanked
my stars that, at length, I had lighted on a spot where it was
next to impracticable — I, weak wretch, after maintaining till
dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude, was finally com-
pelled to strike my colours ; and, under pretence of gaining
information concerning the necessities of my establishment, I
desired Mrs. Dean, when she brought in supper, to sit down
while I ate it ; hoping sincerely she would prove a regular gossip,
and either rouse me to animation or lull me to sleep by her talk.
" You have lived here a considerable time, " I commenced ;
" did you not say sixteen years? "
" Eighteen, sir: I came, when the mistress was married, to
wait on her ; after she died, the master retained me for his
housekeeper. "
" Indeed. "
There ensued a pause. She was not a gossip, I feared ;
unless about her own affairs, and those could hardly interest me.
However, having studied for an interval, with a fist on either
knee, and a cloud of meditation over her ruddy countenance,
she ejaculated —
" Ah, times arc greatly changed since then ! "
" Yes, " I remarked, " you've seen a good many alterations, I
suppose? "
" I have : and troubles too, " she said.
" Oh, I'll turn the talk on my landlord's family! " I thought
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 45
to myself. " A good subject to start ! And that pretty girl-
widow, I should like to know her history : whether she be a
native of the country, or, as is more probable, an exotic that the
surly indigence will not recognise for kin. " With this intention
I asked Airs. Dean why Heathcliff let Thrushcross Grange, and
preferred living in a situation and residence so much inferior.
" Is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order? " I
inquired.
" Rich, sir! " she returned. " He has, nobody knows what
money, and every year it increases. Yes, yes, he's rich enough
to live in a finer house than this : but he's very near — close-
handed ; and, if he had meant to flit to Thrushcross Grange, as
soon as he heard of a good tenant he could not have borne to
miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more. It is strange
people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
world ! "
" He had a son, it seems? "
" Yes, he had one — he is dead. "
" And that young lady, Mrs. Heathchff, is his widow? "
" Yes. "
''Where did she come from originally ? "
" Why, sir, she is my late master's daughter : Catherine Linton
was her maiden name. I nursed her, poor thing ! I did wish
Mr. Heathcliff would remove here, and then we might have been
together again. "
" What ! Catherine Linton? " I exclaimed, astonished. But
a minute's reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly
Catherine. " Then, " I continued, " my predecessor's name was
Linton? "
" It was. "
''And who is that Earnshaw : Hareton Earnshaw, who lives
with Mr. Heathchff? are they relations? "
" No ; he is the late Mrs. Linton's nephew. "
" The young lady's cousin, then ? "
■ " Yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the
mother's, the other on the father's side : Heathcliff married Mr.
Linton's sister. "
" I see the house at Wuthering Heights has'Earnshaw'
carved over the front door. Are they an old family? "
" Very old, sir ; and Hareton is the last of them, as our Miss
Cathy is of us— I mean of the Lintons. Have you been to
46 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Wutherin^ Heights ? I beg pardon for asking ; but I should
like to hear how she is ! "
" Mrs. Heathchff ? She looked very well, and very handsome ;
yet, I think, not very happy. "
" Oh dear, I don't wonder! And how did you like the
master? "
" Aroughfeilow,rather, Mrs. Dean. Isnotthat his character? "
" Rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone ! The less you
meddle with him the better. "
" He must have had some ups and downs in life to make him
such a churl. Do you know anything of his history? "
" It's a cuckoo's, sir — I know ail about it : except where he was
born, and who were his parents, and how he got his money, at
first. And Hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock !
The unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parisiv-4hat does
not guess how he has been cheated. "
" Well, Mrs. Dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell me
something of my neighbours : I feel I shall not rest, if I go to
bed ; so be good enough to sit and chat an hour. "
" Oh, certainly, sir! I'll just fetch a little sewing, and then
I'll sit as long as you please. But you've caught cold ; I saw
you shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive it out. "
The worthy woman bustled off, and I crouched nearer the fire;
my head felt hot, and the rest of me chill : moreover, I was ex-
cited, almost to a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and
brain. This caused me to feel, not uncomfortable, but rather
fearful (as I am still) of serious effects from the incidents of to-
day and yesterday. She returned presently, bringing a smoking
basin and a basket of work ; and, having placed the former on
the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find me so com-
panionable.
Before I came to live here, she commenced— waiting no
farther invitation to her story — I was almost always at Wuthering
Heights; because my mother had nursed Mr. Hindley Earnshaw,
that was Hareton's father, and I got used to playing with the
children : I ran errands too, and helped to make hay, and
hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set
me to. One fine summer morning — it was the beginning of
harvest, I remember — Mr. Earnshaw, the old master, came down-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 47
Stairs, dressed for a journey; and after he had told Joseph what
was to be done during the day, he turned to Hindley, and Cathy,
and me— for I sat eating my porridge with them — and he said,
speaking to his son, " Now my bonny man, I'm going to Liver-
pool to-day, w^hat shall I bring you ? You may choose what you
like : only let it be little, for I shall walk there and back : sixty
miles each way, that is a long spell 1 " Hindley named a fiddle,
and then he asked Miss Cathy; she w^as hardly six years old, but
She could ride any horse in the stable, and she chose a whip.
He did not forget me ; for he had a kind heart, though he was
rather severe sometimes. He promised to bring me a pocket-
ful of apples and pears, and then he kissed his children, said
good-bye, and set off.
It seemed a long while to us all — the three days of his absence
— and often did little Cathy ask when he would be home. Mrs.
Earnshaw expected him by supper-time on the third evening,
and she put the meal off hour after hour ; there were no signs of
his coming, however, and at last the children got tired of running
down to the gate to look. Then it grew dark ; she would have
had them to bed, but they begged sadly to be allowed to stay up ;
and, just about eleven o'clock, the door-latch was raised quietly
and in stepped the master. He threw himself into a chair,
laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for he was
nearly killed — he would not have such another walk for the
three kingdoms.
" And at the end of it, to be flighted to death ! " he said, open-
ing his great-coat, which he held bundled up in his arms. " Sec
here, wife ! I was never so beaten with anything in my life : but
you must e'en take it as a gift of God ; though it's as dark
almost as if it came from the devil. " —
We crowded round, and over Miss Cathy's head, I had a peep
at a dirty, ragged, black-haired child ; big enough both to walk
and talk : indeed, its face looked older than Catherine's ; yet,
Avhen it was set on its feet, it only stared round, and repeated
over and over again some gibberish, that nobody could under-
stand. I was frightened, and Mrs. Earnshaw was ready to fling
it out of doors : she did fly up, asking how he could fashion to
bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had their own
bairns to feed and fend for? What he meant to do with it, and
whether he were mad ? The master tried to explain the matter ;
but he was really half dead with fatigue, and all that I could
48 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
make out, amongst her scolding, was a tale of his seeing it
starving, and houseless, and as good as dumb, in the streets of
Liverpool ; where he picked it up and inquired for its owner.
Not a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said ; and his money
and time being both limited, he thought it better to take it home
with him at once, than run into vain expenses there : because he
was determined he would not leave it as he found it. Well, the
conclusion was that my mistress grumbled herself calm ; and
Mr. Earnshaw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and
let it sleep with the children.
Hindley and Cathy contented themselves with looking and
listening till peace was restored : then, both began searching
their father's pockets for the presents he had promised them.
The former was a boy of fourteen, but when he drew out what
had been a fiddle crushed to morsels in the great-coat, he
blubbered aloud ; and Cathy, when she learned the master had
lost her whip in attending on the stranger, showed her humour
by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing ; earning for
her pains a sound blow from her father to teach her cleaner
manners. They entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or
even in their room ; and I had no more sense, so I put it on the
landing of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow.
By chance, or else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to Mr.
Earnshaw's door, and there he found it on quitting his chamber.
Inquiries were made as to how it got there ; I was obliged to
confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity
was sent out of the house.
This was Heathcliffs first introduction to the family. On
coming back a few days afterwards (for I did not consider my
banishment perpetual) I found they had christened him " Heath-
cliff: " it was the name of a son who died in childhood, and it
has served him ever since, both for Christian and surname. Miss
Cathy and he were now very thick ; but Hindley hated him ! and
to say the truth I did the same ; and we plagued and went on
with him shamefully : for I wasn't reasonable enough to feel my
injustice, and the mistress never put in a word on his behalf
when she saw him wronged.
He seemed a sullen, patient child ; hardened, perhaps, to ill-
treatment : he would stand Hindley's blows without winking or
.shedding a tear, and my pinches moved him only to draw in a
breath and open his eyes, as if he had hurt himself by accident
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 49
and nobody was to blame. This endurance made old Earnshaw
furious, when he discovered his son persecuting the poor, father-
less child, as he called him. He took to Heathcliff strangely,
believing all he said (for that matter, he said precious little, and
generally the truth); and petting him up far above Cathy, who
was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.
So, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the house ;
and at Mrs. Earnshaw's death, which happened in less than two
years after, the young master had learned to regard his father
as an oppressor rather than a friend, and Heathcliff as a usurper
of his parent's affections and his privileges ; and he grew bitter
with brooding over these injuries. I sympathised a while ; but
when the children fell ill of the measles, and I had to tend them,
and take on me the cares of a woman at once, I changed my
ideas. Heathcliff was dangerously sick : and while he lay at the
worst he would have me constantly by his pillow : I suppose he
felt I did a good deal for him, and he hadn't wit to guess that
I was compelled to do it. However, I will say this, he was the
quietest child that ever nurse watched over. The difference
between him and the others forced me to be less partial. Cathy
and her brother harassed me terribly : he was as uncomplaining
as a lamb ; though hardness, not gentleness, made him give
little trouble.
He got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great
measure owing to me, and praised me for my care. I was vain
of his commendations, and softened towards the being by whose
means I earned them, and thus Hindley lost his last ally : still
I couldn't dote on Heathcliff, and I wondered often what my
master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy, who never, to
my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.
He was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible ;
though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and
conscious he had only to speak and all the house would be
obliged to bend to his wishes. As an instance, I remember Mr.
Earnshaw once bought a couple of colts at the parish fair, and
gave the lads each one. Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it
soon fell lame, and when he discovered it, he said to Hindley —
" You must exchange horses with me : I don't like mine ; and
if you won't I shall tell your father of the three thrashings you've
given me this week, and show him my arm, which is black to
the shoulder. " Hindley put out his tongue and cuffed him over
50 WUTHERINCx HEIGHTS.
the ears. " You'd better do it at once, " he persisted, escaping;
to the porch (they were in the stable) : " you will have to ; and
if I speak of these blows, you'll get them again with interest. "
" Off, dog! " cried Hindley, threatening him with an iron
weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. " Throw it, " he
replied, standing still, " and then I'll tell how you boasted that
you would turn me out of doors as soon as he died, and see
whether he will not turn you out directly. " Hindley threw it,'
hitting him on the breast, and down he fell, but staggered up
immediately, breathless and white ; and, had not I prevented
it, he would have gone just so to the master, and got full
revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who
had caused it. " Take my colt, gipsy, then ! " said young Earn-
shaw. " And I pray that he may break your neck : take him,
and be damned, you beggarly interloper ! and wheedle my father
out of all he has : only afterwards show him what you are, imp
of Satan. — And take that, I hope he'll kick out your brains ! "
Heathchff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own
stall ; he was passing behind it, when Hindley finished his
speech by knocking him under its feet, and without stopping to
examine whether his hopes were fulfilled, ran away as fast as
he could. I was surprised to witness how coolly the child
gathered himself up, and went on with his intention ; exchanging
saddles and all, and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to
overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned, before
he entered the house. I persuaded him easily to let me lay the
blame of his bruises on the horse : he minded little what tale
was told since he had what he wanted. He complained so
seldom, indeed, of such stirs as these, that I really thought him
not vindictive : I was deceived completely, as you will hear.
CHAPTER V.
In the course of time, Mr, Earnshaw began to fail. He had
been active and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly ; and
when he was confined to the chimney-corner he grew grievously
irritable. A nothing vexed him ; and suspected slights of his
authority nearly threw him into fits. This was especially to be
remarked if any one attempted to impose upon, or domineer
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 5 1
over, his favourite : he was painfully jealous lest a word should
be spoken amiss to him ; seeming to have got into his head the
notion that, because he liked Heathcliff, all hated, and longed to
do him an ill turn. It was a disadvantage to the lad ; for the
kinder among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured
his partiality ; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the
child's pride and black tempers. Still it became in a manner
necessary; twice, or thrice, Hindley's manifestation of scorn,
while his father was near, roused the old man to a fury : he seized
his stick to strike him, and shook with rage that he could not do it.
At last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the
living answer by teaching the little Lintons and Earnshaws,
and farming his bit of land himself) advised that the young
man should be sent to college ; and Mr. Earnshaw agreed^
though with a heavy spirit, for he said — " Hindley was nought^
and would never thrive as where he wandered. "
I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt me to
think the master should be made uncomfortable by his own
good deed. I fancied the discontent of age and disease arose
from his family disagreements : as he would have it that it did :
really, you know, sir, it was in his sinking frame. We might
have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for two people.
Miss Cathy and Joseph, the servant : you saw him, I dare say,
up yonder. He was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest
self-righteous pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to rake the
promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours. By
his knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, he contrived ta
make a great impression on Mr. Earnshaw ; and the more
feeble the master became, the more influence he gained. He
was relentless in worrying him about his soul's concerns, and
about ruling his children rigidly. He encouraged him to regard
Hindley as a reprobate ; and, night after night, he regularly
grumbled out a long string of tales against Heathcliff and
Catherine : alway minding to flatter Earnshaw's weakness by
heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.
Certainly, she had ways with her such as I never saw a child
take up before ; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times
and ofter^er in a day : from the hour she came downstairs till
the hour she went to bed, we had not a minute's security that
she wouldn't be in mischief. Her spirits were always at high-
water mark, her tongue always going — singing, laughing, and
52 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
plaguing everybody who would not do the same. A wild, wicked
slip she was — but she had the bonniest eye, the sweetest smile,
and hghtest foot in the parish : and, after all, I believe she meant
no harm ; for when once she made you cry in good earnest, it
seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and
oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. She was'
much too fond of Heathcliff. The greatest punishment we could
invent for her was to keep her separate from him : yet she got
chided more than any of us on his account. In play, she liked
exceedingly to act the little mistress ; using her hands freely, and
commanding her companions : she did so to me, but I would not
bear shopping and ordering ; and so I let her know.
Now, Mr. Earnshaw did not understand jokes from his
children : he had always been strict and grave with them ; and
Catherine, on her part, had no idea why her father should be
Grosser and less patient in his ailing condition, than he was in
his prime. His peevish reproofs wakened in her a naughty
delight to provoke him : she was never so happy as when we
were all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold,
saucy look, and her ready words ; turning Joseph's religious
curses into ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father
hated most — showing how her pretended insolence, which he
thought real, had more power over Heathcliff than his kindness :
how the boy would do her bidding in anything, and his only
when it suited his own inchnation. After behaving as badly as
possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to make it up at
night. " Nay, Cathy, " the old man would say,''I cannot love
thee ; thou'rt worse than thy brother. Go, say thy prayers, child,
and ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue that
we ever reared thee ! " That made her cry, at first : and then
being repulsed continually hardened her, and she laughed if I told
her to say she was sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
But the hour came, at last, that ended Mr. Earnshaw's troubles
on earth. He died quietly in his chair one October evening,
seated by the fireside. A high wind blustered round the house,
and roared in the chimney : it sounded wild and stormy, yet it
was not cold, and we were all together — I, a little removed from
the hearth, busy at my knitting/an d Joseph reading his Bible
near the table (for the servants gfenefally sat liT^the house then,
after their work was done). Miss Cathy had been sick, and that
made her still ; she leant against her father s knee, and Heathcliff
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 55
was lying on the floor with his head in her lap. I remember the
master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair — it
pleased him rarely to see her gentle — and saying — " Why canst
thou not always be a good lass, Cathy? " And she turned her
face up to his, and laughed, and answered, " Why cannot you
always be a good man, father? " But as soon as she saw him
vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said she would sing him
to sleep. She began singing very low, till his fingers dropped
'from hers, and his head sank on his breast. Then I told her to
hush, and no^tir, for fear she should wake him. We all kept as
mute as mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer,
only Joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that
he must rouse the master for prayers and bed. He stepped
forward, and called him by name, and touched his shoulder ;
but he would not move, so he took the candle and looked at him.
I thought there was something wrong as he set down the light ;
and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to
" frame upstairs, and make little din — they might pray alone
that evening — he had summut to do. "
" I shall bid father good-night first, " said Catherine, putting
her arms round his neck, before we could hinder her. The poor
thing discovered her loss directly — she screamed out — " Oh,
he's dead, Heathcliff ! he's dead ! " And they both set up a
heart-breaking cry.
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter ; but Joseph asked
what we could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in
heaven. He told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton
for the doctor and the parson. I could not guess the use that
either would be of, then. However, I went, through wind and
rain, and brought one, the doctor, back with me ; the other said
he would come in the morning. Leaving Joseph to explain
matters ; I ran to the children's room : their door was ajar, I
saw they had never laid down, though it was past midnight ;
but they were calmer, and did not need me to console them.
The little souls were comforting each other with better thoughts
than I could have hit on : no parson in the world ever pictured
heaven so beautifully as they did, in their innocertt talk : and,
while I sobbed and listened, I could not help wishing we were
all there safe tosrether.
54 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER VI.
]\Ir. Hindley came home to the fmieral ; and — a thing that
amazed us, and set the neighbours gossiping right and left— he
brought a wi/e with him. What she was, and where she was
born, he never informed us : probably she had neither money
nor name to recommend her, or he would scarcely have kept
the union from his father.
She Avas not one that would have disturbed the house much
on her own account. Every object she saw, the moment she
crossed the threshold, appeared to delight her ; and every cir-
cumstance that took place about her : except the preparing for
the burial, and the presence of the mourners. I thought she
was half silly, from her behaviour while that went on : she ran
into her chamber, and made me come with her, though I should
have been dressing the children ; and there she sat shivering and
clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly — " Are they gone
yet? " Then she began describing with hysterical emotion the
effect it produced on her to see black ; and started, and trembled,
and, at last, fell a-weeping — and when I asked what was the
matter? answered, she didn't know ; but she felt so afraid of
dying ! I imagined her as little likely to die as myself. She .
was rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexioned, and her
eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds. I did remark, to be sure,
that mounting the stairs made her breathe very quick : that the
least sudden noise set her all in a quiver, and that she coughed
troublesomely sometimes : but I knew nothing of what these
symptoms portended, and had no impulse to sympathise with
her. We don't in general take to foreigners here, jMr. Lock-
wood, unless they take to us first.
Young Earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years
of his absence. He had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and
spoke and dressed quite differently ; and, on the very day of his
return, he told Joseph and me we must thenceforth quarter our-
selves in the back-kitchen, and leave the house for him. Indeed,
he would have carpeted and papered a small spare room for a
parlour ; but his wife expressed such pleasure at the white floor
and huge glowing fire-place, at the pewter dishes and delf-case,
and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to move about
in where they usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her
comfort, and so dropped the intention.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 55
She expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her new
acquaintance ; and she prattled to Catherine, and kissed her,
and ran about with her, and gave her quantities of presents,
at the beginning. Her affection tired very soon, however, and
when she grew peevish, Hindley became tyrannical. A few
words from her, evincing a dislike to Heathcliff, were enough
to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy. He drove him
from their company to the servants, deprived him of the instruc-
tions of the curate, and insisted that he should labour out of
doors instead ; compelling him to do so as hard as any other
lad on the farm.
Heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because
Cathy taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with
him in the fields. They both promised fair to grow up as rude
as savages ; the young master being entirely negligent how they
behaved, and what they did, so they kept clear of him. He
would not even have seen after their going to church on Sundays,
only Joseph and the curate reprimanded his carelessness when
they absented themselves ; and that reminded him to order
Heathchff a flogging, and Catherine a fast from dinner or supper.
But it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors
in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punish-
ment grew a mere thing to laugh at. The curate might set as
many chapters as he pleased for Catherine to get by heart, and
Joseph might thrash Heathcliff till his arm ached ; they forgot
everything the minute they were together again : at least the
minute they had contrived some naughty plan of revenge ; and
maoy a time I've cried to myself to watch them growing more
reckless daily, and I not daring to speak a syllable, for fear of
losing the small power I still retained over the unfriended creatures.
One Sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from
the sitting-room, for making a noise, or a light offence of the
kind ; and when I went to call them to supper, I could discover
them nowhere. We searched the house, above and below, and
the yard and stables ; they were invisible : and at last, Hindley in a
passion told us to bolt the doors, and swore nobody should let them
in that night. The household went to bed ; and I, toolinxious to
lie down, opened my lattice and put my head out to hearken,
though it rained : determined to admit them in spite of the pro-
hibition, should they return. In a while, I distinguished steps
coming up the road, and the light of a lantern glimmered through
56 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the gate. I threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent thera
from waking Mr. Earnshaw by knocking. There was Heathchff,
by himself : it gave me a start to see him alone.
''Where is Miss Catherine ? " I cried hurriedly. " No accident,
I hope? " " At Thrushcross Grange, " he answered; " and I
would have been there too, but they had not the manners to ask
me to stay. " " Well, you will catch it ! " I said : " you'll never
be content till you're sent about your business. What in the
world led you wandering to Tlirushcross Grange?'" Let me
get off my wet clothes, and I'll tell you all about it, Nelly, " he
replied. I bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he
undressed and I waited to put out the candle, he continued —
" Cathy and I escaped from the wash-house to have a ramble at
liberty, and getting a glimpse of the Grange lights, we thought
we would just go and see whether the Lintons passed their
Sunday evenings standing shivering in corners, while their father
and mother sat eating and drinking, and singing and laughing,
and burning their eyes out before the fire. Do you think they
do ? Or reading sermons, and being catechised by their man-
servant, and set to learn a column of Scripture names, if they
don't answer properly? " " Probably not, " I responded. " They
are good children, no doubt, and don't deserve the treatment
you receive, for your bad conduct. " " Don't cant, Nelly, " he
said : " nonsense ! We ran from the top of the Heights to the
park, without stopping — Catherine completely beaten in the race,
because she was barefoot. You'll have to seek for her shoes in
the bog to-morrow. We crept through a broken hedge, groped
our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a flower-plot under
the drawing-room window. The light came from thence ; they
had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were only half closed.
Both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement, and
clinging to the ledge, and we saw — ah ! it was beautiful — a
splendid place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs
and tables, and a pure white ceiling bordered by gold, a shower
of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the centre, and
shimmering with little soft tapers. Old Mr. and Mrs. Linton
were not there ; Edgar and his sister had it entirely to themselves.
Shouldn't they have been happy ? We should have thought our-
selves in heaven ! And now, guess what your good children were
doing? Isabella — I believe she is eleven, a year younger than
Cathy — lay screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 57
as if witches were running red-hot needles into her. Edgar stood
on the hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table
sat a httle dog, shaking its paw and yelping ; which, from their
mutual accusations, we understood they had nearly pulled in two
between them. The idiots ! That was their pleasure ! to quarrel
who should hold a heap of w^arm hair, and each begin to cry
because both, after struggling to get it, refused to take it. We
laughed outright at the petted things ; we did despise them !
When would you catch me wishing to have what Catherine
wanted ? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling,
and sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole
room? I'd not exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition
here, for Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grange — not if I might
have the privilege of flinging Joseph off the highest gable, and
painting the house-front with Hindley's blood ! "
" Hush, hush ! " I interrupted. " Still you have not told me,
Heathcliff, how Catherine is left behind? "
" I told you w^e laughed, " he answered. " The Lintons heard
us, and with one accord, they shot hke arrows to the door ; there
was silence, and then a cry,'Oh, mamma, mamma ! Oh, papa !
Oh, mamma, come here. Oh, papa, oh !'They really did
howl out something in that way. We made frightful noises to
terrify them still more, and then we dropped off the ledge,
because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
better flee. I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging her on,
W'hen all at once she fell down.'Run, Heathcliff, run !'she
whispered.'They have let the bull-dog loose, and he holds me !'
The devil had seized her ankle, Nelly : I heard his abominable
snorting. She did not yell out— no ! she would have scorned to
do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a mad cow. I did,
though : I vociferated curses enough to annihilate any fiend in
Christendom ; and I got a stone and thrust it between his jaws,
and tried with all my might to cram it down his throat. A beast of
a servant came up with a lantern, at last, shouting —'Keep fast.
Skulker, keep fast !'He changed his note, however, when he
saw Skulker's game. The dog was throttled off; his huge,
purple tongue hanging half a foot out of his moutlr, and his
pendent lips streaming with bloody slaver. The man took
Cathy up : she was sick : not from fear, I'm certain, but from
pain. He carried her in ; I followed, grumbling execrations and
vengeance.'What prey, Robert ?'hallooed Linton from the
58 V/UTHERING HEIGHTS.
entrance.'Skulker has caught a Httle girl, sir,'he replied;
'and there's a lad here,'he added, making a clutch at me,'who
looks an out-and-outer ! Very like, the robbers were for putting
them through the window to open the doors to the gang after all
were asleep, that they might murder us at their ease. Hold
your tongue, you foul-mouthed thief, you 1 you shall go to the
gallows for this. Mr. Linton, sir, don't lay by your gun.''No,
no, Robert,'said the old fool.'The rascals knew that yesterday
was my rent-day : they thought to have me cleverly. Come in ;
I'll furnish them a reception. There, John, fasten the chain.
Give Skulker some water, Jenny. To beard a magistrate in his
stronghold, and on the Sabbath, too ! Where will their insolence
stop? Oh, my dear Mary, look here! Don't be afraid, it is
but a boy — yet the villain scowls so plainly in his face ; would
it not be a kindness to the country to hang him at once, before
he shows his nature in acts as well as features?'He pulled me
under the chandelier, and Mrs, Linton placed her spectacles on
her nose and raised her hands in horror. The cowardly children
crept nearer also, Isabella lisping —'Frightful thing ! Put him
in the cellar, papa. He's exactly hke the son of the fortune-
teller that stole my tame pheasant. Isn't he, Edgar?'
" While they examined me, Cathy came round ; she heard the
last speech, and laughed. Edgar Linton, after an inquisitive
stare, collected sufficient wit to recognise her. They see us at
church, you know, though we seldom meet them elsewhere.
'That's Miss Earnshaw !'he whispered to his mother,'and
look how Skulker has bitten her — how her foot bleeds !'
"'Miss Earnshaw? Nonsense!'cried the dame;'Miss
Earnshaw scouring the country with a gipsy ! And yet, my
dear, the child is in mourning — surely it is — and she may be
lamed for life !'
"'What culpable carelessness in her brother!'exclaimed
Mr. Linton, turning from me to Catherine.'I've understood
from Shielders'" (that was the curate, sir) "'that he lets her,
grow up in absolute heathenism. But who is this? Where did
she pick up this companion ? Oho ! I declare he is that strange
acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey to Liverpool
'— a little Lascar, or an American or Spanish castaway.'
"'A wicked boy, at all events,'remarked the old lady,'and
quite unfit for a decent house ! Did you notice his language,
Linton? I'm shocked that my children should have heard it.'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 59
" I recommenced cursing — don't be angry, Nelly — and so
Robert was ordered to take me off. I refused to go without
Cathy ; he dragged me into the garden, pushed the lantern into
my hand, assured me that Mr. Earnshaw should be informed of
my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly, secured the
door again. The curtains were still looped up at one corner,
and I resumed my station as spy ; because, if Catherine had
wished to return, I intended shattering their great glass panes to
a million of fragments, unless they let her out. She sat on the
sofa quietly. Mrs. Linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-
maid which we had borrowed for our excursion, shaking her
head and expostulating with her, I suppose : she was a young
lady, and they made a distinction between her treatment and
mine. Then the woman-servant brought a basin of warm water,
and washed her feet ; and Mr. Linton mixed a tumbler of negus,
and Isabella emptied a plateful of cakes into her lap, and Edgar
stood gaping at a distance. Afterwards, they dried and combed
her beautiful hair, and gave her a pair of enormous slippers, and
wheeled her to the fire ; and I left her, as merry as she could be,
dividing her food between the little dog and Skulker, whose nose
she pinched as he ate ; and kindling a spark of spirit in the
vacant blue eyes of the Lintons — a dim reflection from her own
enchanting face. I saw they were full of stupid admiration ;
she is so immeasurably superior to them — to everybody on earth,
is she not, Nelly? "
" There will more come of this business than you reckon on. " I
^answered, covering him up and extinguishing the light. " You
are incurable, Heathcliff ; and Mr. Hindley will have to proceed
to extremities, see if he won't. " My words came truer than I
desired. The luckless adventure made Earnshaw furious. And
then Mr. Linton, to mend manners, paid us a visit himself on
the morrow ; and read the young master such a lecture on the
road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about him ,
in earnest. Heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that
tl > e first word he spoke to ISIiss Catherine should ensure a dis-
missal ; and Mrs. Earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law
in due restraint when she returned home; employing --art, not
force : with force she would have found it impossible.
60 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER VII.
Cathy stayed at Thrushcross Grange five weeks : till Christmas.
By that time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners
much improved. The mistress visited her often in the interval,
and commenced her plan of reform by trying to raise her self-
respect with fine clothes and flattery, which she took readily ; so
that, instead of a wild, hatless little savage jumping into the
house, and rushing to squeeze us all breathless, there'lighted
from a handsome black pony a very dignified person, with brown
ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered beaver, and a long
cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with both hands
that she might sail in. Hindley lifted her from her horse, ex-
claiming delightedly, " Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty ! I
should scarcely have known you : you look like a lady now.
Isabella Linton is not to be compared with her, is she, Frances ? "
" Isabella has not her natural advantages, " replied his wife:
" but she must mind and not grow wild again here. Ellen, help
Miss Catherine off with her things — Stay, dear, you will dis-
arrrange your curls — let me untie your hat. "
I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath, a grand
plaid silk frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes ; and, while
her eyes sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to
welcome her, she dare hardly touch them lest they should fawn
upon her splendid garments. She kissed me gently : I was all
flour making the Christmas cake, and it would not have done
to give me a hug ; and, then, she looked round for Heathcliff.
Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw watched anxiously their meeting ; think-
ing it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what grounds
they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.
Heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. If he were careless,
and uncared for, before Catherine's absence, he had been ten
times more so, since. Nobody but I even did him the kindness
to call him a dirty boy, and bid him wash himself, once a week ;
and children of his age seldom have a natural pleasure in soap
and water. Therefore, not to mention his clothes, which had
seen three months'service in mire and dust, and his thick im-
comhjed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
beclouded. He might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding
such a bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of a rougli-
headed counterpart of himself, as he expected. " Is Heathcliff
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 6 1
not here? " she demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying
fingers wonderfully whitened with doing nothing and staying
indoors.
" Heathcliff, you may come forward, " cried Mr. Hindley,
enjoying his discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding
young blackguard he would be compelled to present himself.
" You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like the
other servants. "
Cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment,
flew to embrace him ; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his
cheek within the second, and then stopped, and drawing back,
burst into a laugh, exclaiming, " Why, how very black and
cross you look ! and how — how funny and grim ! But that's
because I'm used to Edgar and Isabella Linton. Well, Heath-
cliff, have you forgotten me? "
She had some reason to put the question, for shame and
pride threw double gloom over his countenance, and kept him
immovable.
" Shake hands, Heathcliff, " said Mr. Earnshaw, condescend-
ingly ; " once in a way, that is permitted. "
" I shall not, " replied the boy, finding his tongue at last ; " I
shall not stand to be laughed at. I shall not bear it ! "
And he would have broken from the circle, but Miss Cathy
seized him again.
" I did not mean to laugh at you, " she said ; " I could not
hinder myself: Heathcliff, shake hands at least ! What are you
sulky for? It was only that you looked odd. If you wash your
face and brush your hair it will be all right : but you are so dirty !'\
She gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her
own, and also at her dress ; which she feared had gained no
embellishment from its contact with his.
" You needn't have touched me! " he answered, following
her eye and snatching away his hand.''I shall be as dirty as
I please : and I like to be dirty, and I will be dirty. "
With that he dashed head foremost out of thc'room, amid the
merriment of the master and mistress, and to the serious disturb-
ance of Catherine ; who could not comprehend how her^remarks
should have produced such an exhibition of bad temper.
After playing lady's-maid to the new-comer, and putting my
cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful
with great fires, befitting Christmas eve, I prepared to sit down
62 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and amuse myself by singing carols, all alone ; regardless of
Joseph's affirmations that he considered the merry tunes I chose
as next door to songs. He had retired to private prayer in his
chamber, and Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw were engaging Missy's
attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present to the
little Lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness. They
had invited them to spend the morrow at Wuthering Heights,
and the invitation had been accepted, on one condition : Mrs.
Linton begged that her darlings might be kept carefully apart
from that " naughty swearing boy. "
Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I smelt the
rich scent of the heating spices ; and admired the shining kitchen
utensils, the polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs
ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled ale for supper ;
and above all, the speckless purity of my particular care — the
scoured and well-swept floor. I gave due inward applause to
every object, and then I remembered how old Earnshaw used
to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lass, and shp
a shilling into my hand as a Christmas-box ; and from that I
went on to think of his fondness for Heathcliff, and his dread
lest he should suffer neglect after death had removed him ; and
that naturally led me to consider the poor lad's situation now,
and from singing I changed my mind to crying. It struck me
soon, however, there would be more sense in endeavouring to
repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them : I got
up and walked into the court to seek him. He was not far ; I
found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the
stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.
" Make haste, Heathcliff! " I said, " the kitchen is so com-
fortable ; and Joseph is upstairs : make haste, and let me dress
you smart before Miss Cathy comes out, and then you can sit
together, with the whole hearth to yourselves, and have a long
chatter till bedtime. "
He proceeded with his task and never turned his head
towards me.
" Come — are you coming? " I continued. " There's a little
cake for each of you, nearly enough ; and you'll need half-an-
hour's donning. "
I waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.
Catherine supped with her brother and sister-in-law: Joseph
and I joined at an unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on
WUTHERIXG HEIGHTS. 63
one side and sauciness on the other. His cake and cheese re-
mained on the table all night for the fairies. He managed to
continue work till nine o'clock, and then marched dumb and
dour to his chamber. Cathy sat up late, having a world of
things to order for the reception of her new friends : she came
into the kitchen once to speak to her old one ; but he was gone,
and she only stayed to ask what was the matter with him, and then
went back. In the morning he rose early ; and as it was a holiday
carried his ill-humour on to the moors ; not re-appearing till the
family were departed for church. Fasting and reflection seemed
to have brought him to a better spirit. He hung about me for a
while, and having screwed up his courage, exclaimed abruptly —
" Nelly, make me decent, I'm going to be good. "
" High time, Heathcliff, " I said; " you /z^iz'^ grieved Catherine:
she's sorry she ever came home, I dare say ! It looks as if you
envied her, because she is more thought of than you. "
The notion oi envying Catherine was incomprehensible to him,
but the notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.
" Did she say she was grieved? " he inquired, looking very
serious.
" She cried when I told her you were off again this morning. "
" Well, / cried last night, " he returned, " and I had more
reason to cry than she. "
" Yes : you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart
and an empty stomach, " said I. " Proud people breed sad
sorrows for themselves. But, if you be ashamed of your touchi-
ness, you must ask pardon, mind, when she comes in. You
must go up and offer to kiss her, and say — you know best what
to say ; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her con-
verted into a stranger by her grand dressx And now, though I
have dinner to get ready, I'll steal time to arrange you so that
Edgar Linton shall look quite a doll beside you : and that he
does. You are younger, and yet, I'll be bound, you are taller
and twnce as broad across the shoulders : you could knock him
■down in a twinkling? don't you feel that you could? "
Heathcliff's face brightened a moment ; then it was overcast
afresh, and he sighed.
" But, Nelly, if I knocked him down twenty times, that
wouldn't make him less handsome or me more so. I wish I had
light hair and a fair skin, and was dressed and behaved as well,
and had a chance of being as rich as he will be ! "
64 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" And cried for mamma at every turn, " I added, " and trem-
bled if a country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at
home all day for a shower of rain. Oh, Heathcliff, you are
showing a poor spirit ! Come to the glass, and I'll let you see
what you should wish. Do you mark those two lines between
your eyes ; and those thick brows, that instead of rising arched,
sink in the middle ; and that couple of black fiends, so deeply
buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting
under them, like devil's spies? Wish and learn to smooth away
the surly wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the
fiends to confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting
nothing, and always seeing friends where they are not sure of
foes. Don't get the expression of a vicious cur that appears to
know the kicks it gets are its desert, and yet hates all the world
as well as the kicker, for what it suffers. "
" In other words, I must wish for Edgar Linton's great blue
eyes and even forehead, " he replied. " I do — and that won't
help me to them. "
" A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad, " I con-
tinued, " if you were a regular black ; and a bad one will turn
the bonniest into something worse than ugly. And now that
we've done washing, and combing, and sulking — tell me whether
you don't think yourself rather handsome? I'll tell you, I do.
You're fit for a prince in disguise. Who knows but your father
was Emperor of China, and your mother an Indian queen, each
of them able to buy up, with one week's income, Wuthering
Heights and Thrushcross Grange together? And you were
kidnapped by wicked sailors and brought to England. Were I
in your place, I would frame high notions of my birth ; and the
thoughts of what I was should give me courage and dignity to
support the oppressions of a little farmer 1 "
So I chattered on ; and Heathcliff gradually lost his frown
and began to look quite pleasant, when all at once our conver-
sation was interrupted by a rumbling sound moving up the road
and entering the court. He ran to the window and I to the-
door, just in time to behold the two Lintons descend from the
family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the Earnshaws-
dismount from their horses : they often rode to church in winter.
Catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put.
colour into their white faces.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 6)
I urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable
humour, and he willingly obeyed ; but ill luck would have it that,
as he opened the door leading from the kitchen on one side,
Hindley opened it on the other. They met, and the master,
irritated at seeing him clean and cheerful ; or, perhaps, eager to
keep his promise to Mrs. Linton, shoved him back with a sudden
thrust, and angrily bade Joseph " keep the fellow out of the
room — send him into the garret till dinner is over. He'll be
cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left
alone with them a minute. "
" Nay, sir, " I could not avoid answering, " he'll touch nothing,
not he : and I suppose he must have his share of the dainties as
well as we. "
" He shall have his share of my hand, if I catch him down-
stairs till dark, " cried Hindley. " Begone, you vagabond!
What! you are attempting the coxcomb, are you? Wait tiQ
I get hold of those elegant locks — see if I won't pull them a
bit longer. "
" They are long enough already, " observed Master Linton,
peeping from the doorway ; " I wonder they don't make his head
ache. It's like a colt's mane over his eyes 1 "
He ventured this remark without any intention to insult ; but
Heathcliffs violent nature was not prepared to endure the
appearance of impertinence from one whom he seemed to hate,
even then, as a rival. He seized a tureen of hot apple sauce (the
first thing that came under his gripe) and dashed it full against
the speaker's face and neck ; who instantly commenced a lament
that brought Isabella and Catherine hurrying to the place. Mr.
Earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to
his chamber ; where, doubtless, he administered a rough remedy
to cool the fit of passion, for he appeared red and breathless. I
got the dish-cloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed Edgar's nose
and mouth, affirming it served him right for meddling. His
sister began weeping to go home, and Cathy stood by con-
founded, blushing for all.
" You should not have spoken to him I " she expostulated with
Master Linton. " He was in a bad temper, and now you've
spoilt your visit ; and he'll be flogged : I hate him to be flogged !
I can't eat my dinner. Why did you speak to him, Edgar? "
" I didn't, " sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and
finishing the remainder of the purification with his cambric
c
66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS. |
pocket-handkerchief. " I promised mamma that I wouldn'l say
one word to him, and I didn't. "
" Well, don't cry, " replied Catherine contemptuously, " you're
not killed. Don't make more mischief ; my brother is coming :
be quiet ! Hush 1 Isabella! Has anybody hurt j >'C« f "
" There, there, children — to your seats! " cried Hindley,
bustling in. " That brute of a lad has warmed me nicely. Next
time, Master Edgar, take the law into your own fists — it will give
you an appetite ! "
The little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
feast. They were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled,
since no real harm had befallen them. Mr. Earnshaw carved
bountiful platefuls, and the mistress made them merry with lively
talk. I waited behind her chair, and was pained to behold
Catherine, with dry eyes and an indifferent air, commence cutting
up the wing of a goose before her. " An unfeeling child, " I
thought to myself; " how lightly she dismisses her old play-
mate's troubles. I could not have imagined her to be so selfish. "
She lifted a mouthful to her lips ; then she set it down again :
her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. She slipped
her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal
her emotion, I did not call her unfeeling long ; for I perceived
she was in purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find
an opportunity of getting by herself, or paying a visit to Heath-
cliff, who had been locked up by the master : as I discovered, on
endeavouring to introduce to him a private mess of victuals.
In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that he might
be liberated then, as Isabella Linton had no partner ; her en-
treaties were vain, and I was appointed to supply the deficiency.
We got rid of all gloom in the excitement of the exercise, and our
pleasure was increased by the arrival of the Gimmerton band, mus-
tering fifteen strong : a trumpet, a trombone, clarionets, bassoons,
French horns, and a bass viol, besides singers. They go the
I'ounds of all the respectable houses, and receive contributions
every Christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to hear them.
After the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs and
glees. Mrs. Earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.
Catherine loved it too ; but she said it sounded sweetest at the
top of the steps, and she went up in the dark : I followed. They
shut the house door below, never noting our absence, it was so
full of people. She made no stay at the stairs'head, but mounted
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 67
farther, to the garret ^vhere Heathcliff was confined, and called
him. He stubbornly declined answering for a while ; she per-
severed, and finally persuaded him to hold communion with her
through the boards. I let the poor things converse unmolested,
till I supposed the songs were going to cease, and the singers to
get some refreshment ; then, I clambered up the ladder to warn
her. Instead of finding her outside, I heard her voice within.
The little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along
the roof, into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost
tlifficulty I could coax her out again. When she did come
Heathcliff came with her, and she insisted that I should take
him into the kitchen, as my fellow-servant had gone to a neigh-
bour's to be removed from the sound of our " devil's psalmody, "
as it pleased him to call it. I told them I intended by no means
to encourage their tricks ; but as the prisoner had never broken
his fast since yesterday's dinner, I would wink at his cheating
JNIr. Hindley that once. He went down ; I set him a stool by
the fire, and offered him a quantity of good things ; but he was
side and could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were
thrown away. He leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin
on his hands, and remained wrapt in dumb meditation. On my
inquiring the subject of his thoughts, he answered gravely —
" I'm trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley back. I don't
care how long I wait, if I can only do it at last. I hope he will
not die before I do ! "
" For shame, Heathcliff! " said I. " It is for God to punish
wicked people ; we should learn to forgive. "
" No, God won't have the satisfaction that I shall, " he returned.
" I only wish I knew the best way ! Let me alone, and I'll plan
it out : while I'm thinking of that I don't feel pain. "
But, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tales cannot divert you. I'm
annoyed how I should dream of chattering on at such a rate ; and
your gruel cold, and you nodding for bed ! I could have told
Heathcliff's history, all that you need hear, in half-a-dozen words.
Thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded
to lay aside her sewing ; but I felt incapable of moving from the
hearth, and I was very far from nodding. " Sit still, Mrs. Dean, "
I cried, " do sit still, another half-hour ! You've done just right
to tell the story leisurely. That is the method I like ; and you
must finish it in the same style. I am interested in every char-
acter you have mentioned, more or less. "
6S WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir. "
''No matter — I'm not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours.
One or two is early enough for a person who lies till ten. "
" You shouldn't lie till ten. There's the very prime of the-
morning gone long before that time. A person who has not
done one half his day's work by ten o'clock, runs a chance of
leaving the other half undone. "
" Nevertheless, Mrs. Dean, resume your chair; because to-
morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon. I prog-
nosticate for myself an obstinate cold, at least. "
" I hope not, sir. Well, you must allow me to leap over some
three years ; during that space Mrs. Earnshaw "
" No, no, I'll allow nothing of the sort ! Are you acquainted
with the mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and
the cat licking its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch
the operation so intently that puss's neglect of one ear would put
you seriously out of temper? "
" A terribly lazy mood, I should say. "
" On the contrary, a tiresomely active one. It is mine, at
present ; and, therefore, continue minutely. I perceive that
people in these regions acquire over people in towns the value
that a spider in a dungeon does over a spider in a cottage, to their
various occupants ; and yet the deepened attraction is not entirely
owing to the situation of the looker-on. They do live more in
earnest, more in themselves, and less in surface, change, and
frivolous external things. I could fancy a love for life here almost
possible ; and I was a fixed unbeliever in any love of a year's
standing. One state resembles setting a hungry man down to a
single dish, on which he may concentrate his entire appetite and
do it justice ; the other, introducing him to a table laid out by
French cooks : he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from
the whole ; but each part is a mere atom in his regard and re-
membrance. "
" Oh ! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to
know us, " observed Mrs. Dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.
" Excuse me, " I responded ; " you, my good friend, are a
striking evidence against that assertion. Excepting a few pro-
vincialisms of slight consequence, you have no marks of the
manners which I am habituated to consider as peculiar to your
class. I am sure you have thought a great deal more than the
generality of servants think. You have been compelled to culti-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 69
vate your reflective faculties for want of occasions for frittering
your life away in silly trifles. "
Mrs, Dean laughed.
" I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body, "
she said ; " not exactly from living among the hills and seeing
one set of faces, and one series of actions, from year's end to
year's end ; but I have undergone sharp discipline, which has
taught me wisdom : and then, I have read more than you would
fancy, Mr. Lockwood. You could not open a book in this library
that I have not looked into, and got something out of also : un-
less it be that range of Greek and Latin, and that of French ; and
those I know one from another : it is as much as you can expect
of a poor man's daughter. However, if I am to follow my story
in true gossip's fashion, I had better go on ; and instead of leaping
three years, I will be content to pass to the next summer — the
summer of 1778, that is, nearly twenty-three years ago. "
CHAPTER Vni.
On the morning of a fine June day, my first bonny little nursling,
and the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock, was born. We
were busy with the hay in a far away field, when the girl that
- " jsually brought our breakfasts, came running an hour too soon,
•across the meadow and up the lane, calling me as she ran.
" Oh, such a grand bairn ! " she panted out, " The finest lad
that ever breathed ! But the doctor says missis must go : he says
she's been in a consumption these many months. I heard him
tell Mr. Hindley : and now she has nothing to keep her, and
she'll be dead before winter. You must come home directly.
You're to nurse it, Nelly : to feed it with sugar and milk, and
take care of it day and night. I wish I were you, because it will
be all yours when there is no missis ! "
" But is she very ill? " I asked, flinging down my rake, and
tying my bonnet,
" I guess she is ; yet she looks bravely, " replied the girl, " and
she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man. She's
out of her head for joy, it's such a beauty ! If I were her, I'm
certain I should not die : I should get better at the bare sight of
it, in spite of Kenneth. I was fairly mad at him. Dame Archer
brought the cherub down to master, in the house, and his face
'JO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
just began to light up, \vhen the old croaker steps forward, and
says he —'Earnshaw, it's a blessing your wife has been spared to
leave you this son. When she came, I felt convinced we shouldn't
keep her long ; and now, I must tell you, the winter will pro-
bably finish her. Don't take on, and fret about it too much ! it
can't be helped. And besides, you should have known better
than to choose such a rush of a lass !'"
" And what did the master answer? " I inquired.
" I think he swore : but I didn't mind him, I was straining to
see the bairn, " and she began again to describe it rapturously.
I, as zealous as herself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my
part ; though I was very sad for Hindley's sake. He had room
in his heart only for two idols — his wife and himself : he doted
on both, and adored one, and I couldn't conceive how he would
bear the loss.
When w^e got to Wuthering Heights, there he stood at the
front door ; and, as I passed in, I asked, " How was the baby? "
" Nearly ready to run about, Nell ! " he replied, putting on a
cheerful smile.
" And the mistress? " I ventured to inquire; " the doctor
says she's "
" Damn the doctor! " he interrupted, reddening. " Frances
is quite right ; she'll be perfectly well by this time next week. Are
you going upstairs ? will you tell her that I'll come, if she'll promise
not to talk. I left her because she would not hold her tongue ;
and she must — tell her Mr. Kenneth says she must be quiet. "
I delivered this message to Mrs. Earnshaw ; she seemed in
flighty spirits, and replied merrily—
" I hardly spoke a word, Ellen, and there he has gone out
twice, crying. Well, say I promise I won't speak : but that
does not bind me not to laugh at him ! "
Poor soul ! Till within a week of her death that gay heart
never failed her, and her husband persisted doggedly, nay,
furiously, in affirming her health improved every day. When
Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless at that
stage of the malady, and he needn't put him to further expense
by attending her, he retorted — ■
" I know you need not — she's well — she does not want any
more attendance from you ! She never was in a consumption.
It was a fever ; and it is gone : her pulse is as slow as mine now,
and her cheek as cook "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Jl
He told his wife the same story, and she seemed to beUeve
him ; but one night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of
saying she thought she should be able to get up to-morrow, a
fit of coughing took her — a very slight one — he raised her in his
arms ; she put her two hands about his neck, her face changed,
and she was dead.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly into
my hands. Mr. Earnshaw, provided he saw him- healthy and
never heard him cry, was contented, as far as regarded him. For
himself, he grew desperate : his sorrow w'as of that kind that will
not lament. He neither wept nor prayed : he cursed and defied :
execrated God and man, and gave himself up to reckless dissi-
pation. The servants could not bear his tyrannical and evil
conduct long : Joseph and I were the only two that would stay.
I had not the heart to leave my charge ; and besides, you know
I had been his foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more
readily than a stranger would. Joseph remained to hector over
tenants and labourers ; and because it was his vocation to be
where he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.
The master's bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty
example for Catherine and Heathcliff. His treatment of the
latter was enough to make a fiend of a saint. And, truly, it
appeared as if the lad were possessed of something diabolical
at that period. He delighted to witness Hindley degrading
himself past redemption ; and became daily more notable for
savage sullenness and ferocity, I could not half tell what an
infernal house we had. The curate dropped calling, and no-
body decent came near us, at last ; unless Edgar Linton's visits
to Miss Cathy might be an exception. At fifteen she was the
queen of the country side ; she had no peer ; and she did turn
cut a haughty, headstrong creature ! I own I did not like her,
after her infancy was past ; and I vexed her frequently by trying
to bring down her arrogance : she never took an aversion to me,
though. She had a wondrous constancy to old attachments :.
even Heathcliff kept his hold on her affections unalterably ; and
young Linton, with all his superiority, found it difficult to make
an equally deep impression. He was my late master ; that is his
portrait over the fireplace. It used to hang on one side, and his
wife's on the other ; but hers has been removed, or else you
might see something of what she was. Can you make that out?'
Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a soft-featured
72 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
face, exceedingly resembling the young lady at the Heights, but
more pensive and amiable in expression. It formed a sweet
picture. The long light hair curled slightly on the temples ; the
eyes were large and serious ; the figure almost too graceful. I
did not marvel how Catherine Earnshaw could forget her first
friend for such an individual. I marvelled much how he, with
a mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea of
Catherine Earnshaw.
" A very agreeable portrait, " I observed to the housekeeper.
" Is it like? "
" Yes, " she answered; " but he looked better when he was
animated ; that is his everyday countenance : he wanted spirit
in general. "
Catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the Lintons since
her five weeks'residence among them ; and as she had no tempta-
tion to show her rough side in their company, and had the sense
to be ashamed of being rude where she experienced such invari-
able courtesy, she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and
gentleman, by her ingenious cordiality ; gained the admiration
of Isabella, and the heart and soul of her brother : acquisitions
that flattered her from the first, for she was full of ambition, and
led her to adopt a double character without exactly intending to
deceive any one. In the place where she heard Heathcliff termed
a " vulgar young ruffian, " and " worse than a brute, " she took
care not to act like him ; but at home she had small inclination
to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and restrain
an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering
Heights openly. He had a terror of Earnshaw's reputation,
and shrunk from encountering him ; and yet he was always
received with our best attempts at civility : the master himself
avoided offending him, knowing why he came ; and if he could
not be gracious, kept out of the way. I rather think his appear-
ance there was distasteful to Catherine : she was not artful, never
played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two
friends meeting at all ; for when Heathcliff expressed contempt
of Linton in his presence, she could not half coincide, as she did
in his absence ; and when Linton evinced disgust and antipathy
to Heathcliff, she dared not treat his sentiments with indifference,
as if depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any conse-
quence to her. I've had many a laugh at her perplexities and
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 73
untold troubles, which she vainly strove to hide from my mockery.
That sounds ill-natured : but she was so proud, it became really
impossible to pity her distresses, till she should be chastened
into more humility. She did bring herself, finally, to confess,
and to confide in me : there was not a soul else that she migfit
fashion into an adviser.
Mr. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and Heath-
cliff presumed to give himself a holiday on the strength of it.
He had reached the age of sixteen then, I think, and without
having bad features, or being deficient in intellect, he contrived
to convey an impression of inward and outward repulsiveness
that his present aspect retains no traces of. In the first place,
he had by that time lost the benefit of his early education : con-
tinual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had extin-
guished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
and any love for books or learning. His childhood's sense of
superiority, instilled into him by the favours of old Mr. Earnshaw,
was faded away. He struggled long to keep up an equality with
Catherine in her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent
regret : but he yielded completely ; and there was no prevailing
on him to take a step in the way of moving upward, when he
found he must, necessarily, sink beneath his former level. Then
personal appearance sympathised with mental deterioration : he
acquired a slouching gait, and ignoble look ; his naturally re-
served disposition was exaggerated into an almost idiotic excess
of unsociable moroseness ; and he took a grim pleasure, appa-
rently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few
acquaintance.
Catherine and he were constant companions still at his seasons
of respite from labour ; but he had ceased to express his fond-
ness for her in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from her
girlish caresses, as if conscious there could be no gratification in
lavishing such marks of affection on him. On the before-named
occasion he came into the house to announce his intention of
doing nothing, while I was assisting Miss Cathy to arrange her
dress : she had not reckoned on his taking it into his head to
be idle ; and imagining she would have the whole place to her-
self, she managed, by some means, to inform Mr. Edgar of her
brother's absence, and was then preparing to receive him.
" Cathy, are you busy, this afternoon? " asked Heathcliff.
" Are you going anywhere ? "
74 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" No, it is raining, " she answered.
" Why have you that silk frock on, then ? " he said. " Nobody
■coming here, I hope? "
" Not that I know of, " stammered Miss : " but you should be
in the field now, Heathcliff. It is an hour past dinner time : I
thought you were gone. "
" Hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence, "
observed the boy. " I'll not work any more to-day: I'll stay
with you. "
" Oh, but Joseph will tell, " she suggested ; " you'd better go! "
" Joseph is loading lime on the further side of Pennistow Crag ;
it will take him till dark, and he'll never know. "
So saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down. Catherine
reflected an instant, with knitted brows — she found it needful to
smooth the way for an intrusion. " Isabella and Edgar Linton
talked of calling this afternoon, " she said, at the conclusion of a
minute's silence. " As it rains, I hardly expect them ; but they
may come, and if they do, you run the risk of being scolded for
no good. "
" Order Ellen to say you are engaged, Cathy, " he persisted ;
" don't turn me out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours ! I'm
■on the point, sometimes, of complaining that they — but I'll
not "
" That they what? " cried Catherine, gazing at him with a
troubled countenance. " Oh, Nelly! " she added petulantly,
jerking her head away from my hands, " you've combed my hair
quite out of curl ! That's enough ; let me alone. What are
you on the point of complaining about, Heathchff? "
" Nothing — only loolc at the almanac on that wall; " he
pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window, and con-
tinued — " The crosses are for the evenings you have spent with
the Lintons, the dots for those spent with me. Do you see?
I've marked every day. "
" Yes — very foolish : as if I took notice ! " replied Catherine,
in a peevish tone. " And where is the sense of that? "
" To show that I do take notice, " said Heathcliff.
" And should I always be silting with you? " she demanded,
gro^ving more irritated.''What good do I get ? What do you
talk about ? You might be dumb, or a baby, for anything you
say to amuse me, or for anything you do, either I "
" You never told me before that I talked too little, or that you
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 75
■disliked my company, Cathy ! " exclaimed Heathcliff, in much
agitation.
" It's no company at all, when people know nothing and say
nothing, " she muttered.
Her companion rose up, but he hadn't time to express his feel-
ings further, for a horse's feet were heard on the flags, and having
knocked gently, young Linton entered, his face brilliant with
delight at the unexpected summons he had received. Doubtless
Catherine marked the difference between her friends, as one came
in and the other went out. The contrast resembled what you see
in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal country for a beautiful fertile
valley ; and his voice and greeting were as opposite as his aspect.
He had a sweet, low manner of speaking, and pronounced his
words as you do : that's less gruff than we talk here, and softer.
" I'm not come too soon, am I? " he said, casting a lock at
me : I had begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the
far end in the dresser.
" No, " answered Catherine. " What are you doing there,
Nelly? "
" My work, miss, " I replied. (Mr. Hindley had given me
directions to make a third party in any private visits Linton
■chose to pay.)
She stepped behind me and whispered crossly, " Take yourself
and your dusters off ; whencompanyareinthehouse, servantsdon't
commence scouring and cleaning in the room where they are ! "
" It's a good opportunity, now that master is away, " I answered
aloud: " he hates me to be fidgeting over these things in his
presence. I'm sure Mr. Edgar will excuse me. "
" I hate you to be fidgeting in viy presence, " exclaimed the
young lady imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak :
she had failed to recover her equanimity since the little dispute
with Heathcliff.
" I'm sorry for it. Miss Catherine, " was my response ; and I
proceeded assiduously with my occupation.
She, supposing Edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth
from my hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very
spitefully on the arm. I've said I did not love her, and rather
relished mortifying her vanity now and then : besides, she hurt
me extremely ; so I started up from my knees, and screamed out,
" Oh, miss, that's a nasty trick ! You have no right to nip me,
and I'm not going to bear it. "
76 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" I didn't touch you, you lying creature! " cried she, her
fingers tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage.
She never had power to conceal her passion, it always set her
whole complexion in a blaze.
" What's that, then? " I retorted, showing a decided purple
witness to refute her.
She stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and then irresistibly
impelled by the naughty spirit within her, slapped me on the
cheek : a stinging blow that filled both eyes with water.
" Catherine, love! Catherine! " interposed Linton, greatly
shocked at the double fault of falsehood and violence which his
idol had committed.
" Leave the room, Ellen ! " she repeated, trembling all over.
Little Hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was sitting
near me on the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying him-
self, and sobbed out complaints against " wicked aunt Cathy, "
which drew her fury on to his unlucky head : she seized his
shoulders, and shook him till the poor child waxed livid, and
Edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands to deliver him. In
an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young man
felt it applied over his own ear in a way that could not be mis-
taken for jest. He drew back in consternation. I lifted Hareton
in my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the
door of communication open, for I was curious to watch how they
would settle their disagreement. The insulted visitor moved to
the spot where he had laid his hat, pale and with a quivering lip.
" That's right! " I said to myself. " Take warning and
begone ! It's a kindness to let you have a ghmpse of her
genuine disposition. "
" Where are you going? " demanded Catherine, advancing to
the door.
He swerved aside, and attempted to pass.
" You must not go ! " she exclaimed energetically.
" I must and shall ! " he replied in a subdued voice.
" No, " she persisted, grasping the handle; " not yet, Edgar
Linton : sit down ; you shall not leave me in that temper. I should
be miserable all night, and I won't be miserable for you 1 "
" Can I stay after you have struck me? " asked Linton.
Catherine was mute.
" You've made me afraid and ashamed of you, " he continued ;
" I'll not come here again ! "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.']'J
Her eyes began to glisten, and her lids to twinkle.
" And you told a deliberate untruth ! " he said.
" I didn't ! " she cried, recovering her speech ; " I did nothing
deliberately. Well, go, if you please — get away ! And now I'll
cry — I'll cry myself sick ! " "
She dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set to weeping
in serious earnest. Edgar persevered in his resolution as far as
the court ; there he lingered. I resolved to encourage him.
" Miss is dreadfully wayward, sir, " I called out. " As bad as
any marred child : you'd better be riding home, or else she will
be sick only to grieve us. "
The soft thing looked askance through the window : he pos-
sessed the power to depart, as much as a cat possesses the power
to leave a mouse half killed, or a bird half eaten. Ah, I thought,
there will be no saving him : he's doomed, and flies to his fate !
And so it was : he turned abruptly, hastened into the house again,
shut the door behind him ; and when I went in a while after to
inform them that Earnshaw had come home rabid drunk, ready
to pull the whole place about our ears (his ordinary frame of mind
in that condition), I saw the quarrel had merely effected a closer
intimacy — had broken the outworks of youthful timidity, and
enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and confess
themselves lovers.
Intelligence of Mr. Hindley's arrival drove Linton speedily to
his horse, and Catherine to her chamber. I went to hide httle
Hareton, and to take the shot out of the master's fowling-piece,
which he was fond of playing with in his insane excitement, to the
hazard of the lives of any who provoked, or even attracted his
notice too much ; and I had hit upon the plan of removing it,
that he might do less mischief if he did go the length of firing
the gun.
CHAPTER IX.
He entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear ; and caught
me in the act of stowing his son away in the kitchen qupboard.
Hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror of encounter-
ing either his wild beast's fondness or his madman's rage ; for in
one he ran a chance of being squeezed and kissed to death, and
in the other of being flung into the fire, or dashed against the
7^ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
wall ; and the poor thing remained perfectly quiet wherever I
chose to put him.
" There, I've found it out at last ! " cried Hindley, pulling me
back by the skin of my neck, like a dog. " By heaven and hell,
you've sworn between you to murder that child ! I know how it
is, now, that he is always out of my way. But, with the help of
Satan, I shall make you swallow the carving-knife, Nelly ! You
needn't laugh ; for I've just crammed Kenneth, head-downmost,
in the Blackhorse marsh ; and two is the same as one — and I
want to kill some of you : I shall have no rest till I do ! "
" But I don't like the carving-knife, Mr, Hindley, " I answered ;
" it has been cutting red herrings. I'd rather be shot, if you
please. "
" You'd rather be damned! " he said; " and so you shall.
No law in England can hinder a man from keeping his house
decent, and mine's abominable ! open your mouth. "
He held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between my
teeth : but, for my part, I was never much afraid of his vagaries.
I spat out, and affirmed it tasted detestably — I would not take
it on any account.
" Oh ! " said he, releasing me, " I see that hideous little villain
is not Hareton : I beg your pardon, Nell. If it be, he deserves
flaying alive for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as
if I were a goblin. Unnatural cub, come hither ! I'll teach thee
to impose on a good-hearted, deluded father. Now, don't you*
think the lad would be handsomer cropped ? It makes a dog
fiercer, and I love something fierce — get ine a scissors— something
fierce and trim ! Besides, it's infernal affectation — devilish con-
ceit it is, to cherish our ears — we're asses enough without them.
Hush, child, hush ! Well then, it is my darling ! wisht, dry thy
eyes — there's a joy; kiss me. What! it won't? Kiss me,
Hareton ! Damn thee, kiss me ! By God, as if I would rear such
a monster ! As sure as I'm living, I'll break the brat's neck. "
Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father's arms
with all his might, and redoubled his yells when he carried him
upstairs and lifted him over the banister. I cried out that he-
would frighten the child into fits, and ran to rescue him. As I
reached them, Hindley leant forward on the rails to listen to a
noisebelow ; almost forgetting what he had in his hands. " Who
is that ? " he asked, hearing some one approaching the stair's foot.
I leant forward also, for the purpose of signing to Heathcliff,,
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 79
whose step I recognised, not to come further ; and, at the instant
when my eye quitted Hareton, he gave a sudden spring, dehvered
himself from the careless grasp that held him, and fell.
There was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before
we saw that the little wretch was safe. Heathcliff arrived under-
neath just at the critical moment ; by a natural impulse, he
arrested his descent, and setting him on his feet, looked up to
discover the author of the accident. A miser who has parted
with a lucky lottery ticket for five shillings, and finds next day
he has lost in the bargain five thousand pounds, could not show
a blanker countenance than he did on beholding the figure of
Mr. Eamshaw above. It expressed, plainer than words could
do, the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument
of thwarting his own revenge. Had it been dark, I dare say, he
would have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton's
skull on the steps ; but we witnessed his salvation ; and I was
presently below with my precious charge pressed to my heart.
Hindley descended more leisurely, sobered and abashed.
" It is your fault, Ellen, " he said; " you should have kept
him out of sight : you should have taken him from me ! Is he
injured anywhere? "
" Injured ! " I cried angrily ; " if he's not killed, he'll be an
idiot ! Oh ! I wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to
see how you use him. You're worse than a heathen — treating
your own flesh and blood in that manner! "
He attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself with
me, sobbed off his terror directly. At the first finger his father
laid on him, however, he shrieked again louder than before, and
struggled as if he would go into convulsions.
" You shall not meddle with him ! " I continued. " He hates
you — they all hate you — that's the truth ! A happy family you
have : and a pretty state you're come to ! "
" I shall come to a prettier, yet, Nelly, " laughed the mis-
guided man, recovering his hardness. " At present, convey
yourself and him away. And, hark you, Heathcliff! clear you
too, quite from my reach and hearing. I wouldn't murder you
to-night ; unless, perhaps, I set the house on fire : but that's as
my fancy goes. "
While saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the
dresser, and poured some into a tumbler.
" Nay, don't ! " I entreated. " Mr. Hindley, do take warning.
So WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Have mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for
yourself ! "
" Any one will do better for him than I shall, " he answered.
" Have mercy on your own soul! " I said, endeavouring to
snatch the glass from his hand.
" Not I! On the contrary, I shall have great pleasure in
sending it to perdition to punish its Maker, " exclaimed the
blasphemer. " Here's to its hearty damnation ! "
He drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go ; terminating
his command ^1^'ith a sequel of horrid imprecations, too bad to
repeat or remember.
" It's a pity he cannot kill himself with drink, " observed
Heathcliff, muttering an echo of curses back when the door was
shut. " He's doing his very utmost ; but his constitution defies
him. Mr. Kenneth says he would wager his mare, that he'll
outlive any man on this side Gimmerton, and go to the grave a
hoary sinner ; unless some happy chance out of the common
course befall him. "
I went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to
sleep. Heathcliff, as I thought, walked through to the barn. It
turned out afterwards that he only got as far as the other side the
settle, when he flung himself on a bench by the wall, removed
from the fire, and remained silent.
I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and humming a song that
began —
" It was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
The mither beneath the mools heard that " —
when Miss Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her
room, put her head in, and whispered —
" Are you alone, Nelly? "
" Yes, miss, " I replied.
She entered and approached the hearth, I, supposing she
was going to say something, looked up. The expression of her
face seemed disturbed and anxious. Her lips were half asunder,
as if she meant to speak, and she drew a breath ; but it escaped
in a sigh instead of a sentence. I resumed my song ; not having
forgotten her recent behaviour.
" Where's Heathcliff? " she said, interrupting me.
" About his work in the stable, " was my answer.
He did not contradict me ; perhaps he had fallen into a doze.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 8 1
There followed another long pause, during which I perceived a
drop or two trickle from Catherine's cheek to the flags. Is she
sorry for her shameful conduct ? I asked myself. That will be a
novelty : but she may come to the point as she will — I shan't
help her ! No, she felt small trouble regarding any subject, save
her own concerns.
" Oh, dear ! " she cried at last. " I'm very unhappy ! "
" A pity, " observed I. " You're hard to please: so many
friends and so few cares, and can't make yourself content ! "
" Nelly, will you keep a secret for me? " she pursved, kneeling
down by me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that
sort of look which turns off bad temper, even when one has all
the right in the world to indulge it.
" Is it worth keeping? " I inquired, less sulkily.
" Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out ! I want to
know what I should do. To-day, Edgar Linton has asked me
to marry him, and I've given him an answer. Now, before I
tell you whether it was a consent or denial, you tell me which it
ought to have been. "
" Really, Miss Catherine, how can I know? " I replied.
" To be sure, considering the exhibition you performed in his
presence this afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse
him : since he asked you after that, he must either be hopelessly
stupid or a venturesome fool. "
" If you talk so, I won't tell you any more, " she returned
peevishly, rising to her feet. " I accepted him, Nelly. Be
quick, and say whether I was wrong ! "
" You accepted him! then what good is it discussing the
matter? You have pledged your word, and cannot retract? "
" But, say whether I should have done so— do! " she ex-
claimed in an irritated tone ; chafing her hands together, and
frowning.
" There are many things to be considered before that question
can be answered properly, " I said sententiously. " First and
foremost, do you love Mr. Edgar? "
" Who can help it ? Of course I do, " she answered.
Then I put her through the following catechism : for a girl of
twenty-two it was not injudicious.
" Why do you love him, Miss Cathy? "
" Nonsense, I do — that's sufficient. "
" By no means ; you must say why ? "
82 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be with. "
" Bad ! " was my commentary,
" And because he is young and cheerful. "
" Bad, still. "
" And because he loves me. "
" Indifferent, coming there. "
" And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest
woman of the neighbourhood, and I shall be proud of having
such a husband. "
" Worst of all. And now, say how you love him ? "
" As everybody loves — You're silly, Nelly. "
" Not at all — Answer. "
" I love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head,
and everything he touches, and every word he says. I love all
his looks, and all his actions, and him entirely and altogether.
There now ! "
" And why? "
" Nay; you are making a jest of it; it is exceedingly ill-
natured ! It's no jest to me ! " said the young lady, scowhng,
and turning her face to the fire.
" I'm very far from jesting, Miss Catherine, " I replied.
" You love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and young, and
cheerful, and rich, and loves you. The last, however, goes for
nothing : you would love him without that, probably ; and with
it you wouldn't, unless he possessed the four former attractions. "
" No, to be sure not: I should only pity him — hate him,
perhaps, if he were ugly, and a clown. "
" But there are several other handsome, rich young men in
the world : handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is. What
should hinder you from loving them? "
" If there be any, they are out of my way ! I've seen none like
Edgar. "
" You may see some ; and he won't always be handsome, and
young, and may not always be rich. "
" He is now ; and I have only to do with the present. I wish
you would speak rationally. "
" Well, that settles it : if you have only to do with the present,
marry Mr. Linton. "
" I don't want your permission for that — I shall marry him :
and yet you have not told me whether I'm right. "
" Perfectly right ; if people be right to many only for the
WUTHERINCx HEIGHTS. 8$
present. And now, let us hear what you are unhappy about.
Your brother will be pleased ; the old lady and gentleman will
not object, I think ; you will escape from a disorderly, comfort-
less home into a wealthy, respectable one ; and you love Edgar,
and Edgar loves you. All seems smooth and easy: where is
the obstacle ? "
''Here! and herd " replied Catherine, striking one hand on
her forehead, and the other on her breast : " in whichever place
the soul lives. In my soul and in my heart, I'm convinced I'm
wrong ! "
" That's very strange ! I cannot make it out. "
" It's my secret. But if you will not mock at me, I'll
explain it : I can't do it distinctly : but I'll give you a feeling
of how I feel. "
She seated herself by me again : her countenance grew sadder
and graver, and her clasped hands trembled.
" Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams? " she said,
suddenly, after some minutes'reflection.
" Yes, now and then, " I answered.
" And so do I. I've dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed
with me ever after, and changed my ideas : they've gone through
and through me, like wine through water, and altered the colour
of my mind. And this is one; I'm going to tell it — but take
care not to smile at any part of it. "
" Oh! don't. Miss Catherine! " I cried. " We're dismal
enough without conjuring up ghosts and visions to perple.x us.
Come, come, be merry and like yourself ! Look at little
Hareton ! he's dreaming nothing dreary. How sweetly he smiles
in his sleep ! "
" Yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude!
You remember him, I dare say, when he was just such another
as that chubby thing : nearly as young and innocent. However,
Nelly, I shall oblige you to listen : it's not long ; and I've no
power to be merry to-night. "
" I won't hear it, I won't hear it ! " I repeated hastily.
I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still ; and
Catherine had an unusual gloom in her aspect, that -made me
dread something from which I might shape a prophecy, and
foresee a fearful catastrophe. She was vexed, but she did not
proceed. Apparently taking up another subject, she recom^
menced in a short time.
84 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" If I were in heaven, Nelly, I should be extremely miserable. "
" Because you are not fit to go there, " I answered. " All
sinners would be miserable in heaven. "
" But it is not for that. I dreamt once that I was there. "
" I tell you I won't hearken to your dreams, Miss Catherine !
I'll go to bed, " I interrupted again.
She laughed, and held me down ; for I made a motion to
leave my chair.
" This is nothing, " cried she : " I was only going to say that
heaven did not seem to be my home ; and I broke my heart
with weeping to come back to earth ; and the angels were so
angry that they flung me out into the middle of the heath on
the top of Wuthering Heights ; where I woke sobbing for joy.
That will do to explain my secret, as well as the other. I've no
more business to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in heaven ;
and if the wicked man in tliere had not brought Heathcliff so
low, I shouldn't have thought of it. It would degrade me to
marry Heathcliff now ; so he shall never know how I love him :
and that, not because he's handsome, Nelly, but because he's
more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his
and mine are the same ; and Linton's is as different as a moon-
beam from lightning, or frost from fire. "
Ere this speech ended, I became sensible of Heathcliffs
presence. Having noticed a slight movement, I turned my head,
and saw him rise from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. He
had listened till he heard Catherine say it would degrade her to
marry him, and then he stayed to hear no further. My com-
panion, sitting on the ground, was prevented by the back of the
settle from remarking his presence or departure ; but I started,
and bade her hush !
" Why? " she asked, gazing nervously round.
" Joseph is here, " I answered, catching opportunely the roll
of his cart-wheels up the road ; " and Heathcliff will come in
with him. I'm not sure whether he were not at the door this
moment. "
" Oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door! " said she.
" Give me Hareton, while you get the supper, and when it is
ready ask me to sup with you. I want to cheat my uncomfortable
conscience, and be convinced that Heathcliff has no notion of
these things. He has not, has he? He does not know what
behig in love is? "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 85
" I see no reason that he should not know, as well as you, " I
returned ;''and \fj07i are his choice, he'll be the most unfortunate
creature that ever was born ! As soon as you become Mrs.
Linton, he loses friend, and love, and all ! Have you considered
how you'll bear the separation, and how he'll bear to be quite
deserted in the world? Because, Miss Catherine "
" He quite deserted ! we separated ! " she exclaimed, with an
accent of indignation. " Who is to separate us, pray ? They'll
meet the fate of Milo ! Not as long as I live, Ellen : for no
mortal creature. Every Linton on the face of the earth might
melt into nothing, before I could consent to forsake Heathcliif.
Oh, that's not what I intend — that's not what I mean ! I
shouldn't be Mrs. Linton were such a price demanded ! He'll
be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime. Edgar must
shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least. He will,
when he learns my true feelings towards him. Nelly, I see now,
you think me a selfish wretch ; but did it never strike you that
if Heathcliff and I married, we should be beggars? whereas, if
I marry Linton, I can aid Heathcliff to rise, and place him out
of my brother's power. "
" With your husband's money, Miss Catherine? " I asked.
" You'll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon: and,
though I'm hardly a judge, I think that's the worst motive
you've given yet for being the wife of young Linton. "
" It is not, " retorted she ; " it is the best ! The others were
the satisfaction of my whims : and for Edgar's sake, too, to satisfy
him. This is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person
my feelings to Edgar and myself. I cannot express it ; but surely
you and everybody have a notion that there is or should be an
existence of yours beyond you. What were the use of my crea-
tion, if I were entirely contained here ? My great miseries in this
world have been Heathcliff s miseries, and I watched and felt each
from the beginning : my great thought in living is himself. If all
else perished, and ke remained, /should still continue to be ; and
if all else remained, and he were annihilated, the universe would
turn to a mighty stranger : I should not seem a part of it. My
love for Linton is like the foliage in the woods : time will change
it, I'm well aware, as winter changes the trees. My love for
Heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath : a source of little
visible delight, but necessary. Nelly, I a7n Heathcliff! He's
always, always in my mind : not as a pleasure, any more than I
S6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
am always a pleasure to myself, but as my own being. So don't
talk of our separation again : it is impracticable ; and "
She paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown ; but I
jerked it forcibly away. I was out of patience with her folly !
" If I can make any sense of your nonsense, miss, " I said, " it
only goes to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you
undertake in marrying ; or else that 5'ou are a wicked, unprin-
cipled girl. But trouble me with no more secrets : I'll not
promise to keep them. "
" You'll keep that? " she asked eagerly.
" No, I'll not promise, " I repeated.
She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph finished
our conversation ; and Catherine removed her seat to a corner,
and nursed Hareton, while I made the supper. After it was
cooked, my fellow-servant and I began to quarrel who should
carry some to Mr, Hindley ; and we didn't settle it till all was
nearly cold. Then we came to the agreement that we would let
him ask, if he wanted any ; for we feared particularly to go into
his presence when he had been some time alone.
" And how isn't that nowt corned in fro'th'field, be this
time? What is he about? girt idle seeght ! " demanded the old
man, looking round for Heathcliff.
" I'll call him, " I replied. " He's in the barn, I've no doubt. "
I went and called, but got no answer. On returning, I whis-
pered to Catherine tliat he had heard a good part of what she
said, I was sure ; and told how I saw him quit the kitchen just
as she complained of her brother's conduct regarding him. She
jumped up in a fine fright, flung Hareton on to the settle, and ran
to seek for her friend herself ; not taking leisure to consider why
she was so flurried, or how her talk would have affected him.
She was absent such a while that Joseph proposed we should
wait no longer. He cunningly conjectured they were staying
away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. They
were " ill eneugh for ony fahl manners, " he affirmed. And on
their behalf he added that night a special prayer to the usual
quarter of an hour's supplication before meat, and would have
tacked another to the end of the grace, had not his young
mistress broken in upon him with a hurried command that he
ITiust run down the road, and wherever Heathcliff had rambled,
iind and make him re-enter directly !
" I want to speak to him, and I musf, before I go upstairs, "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 8/
she said. " And the gate is open : he is somewhere out of
hearing ; for he would not reply, though I shouted at the top
of the fold as loud as I could. "
Joseph objected at first ; she was too much in earnest, how-
ever, to suffer contradiction ; and at last he placed his hat on
his head, and walked grumbling forth. Meantime, Catherine
paced up and down the floor, exclaiming —
" I wonder where he is— I wonder where he can be ? What
did I say, Nelly? I've forgotten. Was he vexed at my bad
humour this afternoon ? Dear ! tell me what I've said to grieve
him ? I do wish he'd come. I do wish he would ! "
" What a noise for nothing! " I cried, though rather uneasy
myself. " What a trifle scares you ! It's surely no great cause
of alarm that Heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the
moors, or even lie too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft. I'll
engage he's lurking there. See if I don't ferret him out ! "
I departed to renew my search ; its result was disappoint-
ment, and Joseph's quest ended in the same.
" Yon lad gets war un war! " observed he on re-entering.
" He's left th'yate at t'full swing, and Miss's pony has trodden
dahn two rigs o'corn, and plottered through, raight o'er into t'
meadow ! Hahsomdiver, t'maister'uU play f devil to-morn,
and he'll do weel. He's patience itsseln wi'sich careless, offald
craters— patience itsseln he is ! Bud he'll not be soa alius— yah's
see, all on ye ! Yah mumn't drive him out of his heead for nowt ! "
" Have you found Heathcliff, you ass? " interrupted Catherine.
" Have you been looking for him, as I ordered? "
" I sud more likker look for th'horse, " he replied. " It'ud
be to more sense. Bud, I can look for norther horse nur man
of a neeght loike this— as black as t'chimbley ! und Heathcliff's
noan t'chap to cooni at viy whistle— happen he'll be less hard
o'hearing \s\ ye ! "
It xaas a very dark evening for summer : the clouds appeared
inclined to thunder, and I said we had better all sit down ; the
approaching rain would be certain to bring him home without
further trouble. However, Catherine would not be persuaded
into tranquillity. She kept wandering to and fro, from the gate
to the door, in a state of agitation which permitted no > epose ;
and at length took up a permanent situation on one side of the
wall, near the road : where, heedless of my expostulations and
the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash
88 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
around her, she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening,
and then crying outright. She beat Hareton, or any child, at a
good passionate fit of crying.
About midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling
over the Heights in full fury. There was a violent wind, as well
as thunder, and either one or the other split a tree oif at the
corner of the building : a huge bough fell across the roof, and
knocked down a portion of the east chimney-stack, sending a
clatter of stones and soot into the kitchen fire. We thought a
bolt had fallen in the middle of us ; and Joseph swung on to his
knees, beseeching the Lord to remember the patriarchs Noah
and Lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous, though He
smote the ungodly. I felt some sentiment that it must be a
judgment on us also. The Jonah, in my mind, was Mr. Earn-
shaw ; and I shook the handle of his den that I might ascertain
if he were yet living. He repHed audibly enough, in a fashion
which made my companion vociferate, more clamorously than
before, that a wide distinction might be drawn between saints
like himself and sinners like his master. But the uproar passed
away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed ; excepting
Cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in re-
fusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawl-less
to catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes.
She came in and lay down on the settle, all soaked as she was,
turning her face to the back, and putting her hands before it.
" Well, miss! " I exclaimed, touching her shoulder; " you
are not bent on getting your death, are you? Do you know
what o'clock it is ? Half-past twelve. Come, come to bed !
there's no use waiting longer on that foolish boy : he'll be gone
to Gimmerton, and he'll stay there now. He guesses we
shouldn't wake for him till this late hour : at least, he guesses
that only Mr. Hindley would be up ; and he'd rather avoid
having the door opened by the master. "
" Nay, nay, he's noan at Gimmerton, " said Joseph. " I's
niver wonder but he's at t'bothom of a bog-hoile. This visitation
worn't for nowt, and I wod hev ye to look out, miss — yah muh be
t'next. Thank Hivin for all ! All warks togither for gooid to
them as is chozzen, and piked out fro'th'rubbidge ! Yah knaw
whet t'Scripture ses. " And he began quoting several texts,
referring us to chapters and verses where we might find them.
I, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 89
wet things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook
myself to bed with little Hareton, who slept as fast as if every-
one had been sleeping round him. I heard Joseph read on a
while afterwards ; then I distinguished his slow step on the
ladder, and then I dropped asleep.
Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by the sun-
beams piercing the chinks of the shutters. Miss Catherine still
seated near the fire-place. The house door was ajar, too ; light
entered from its unclosed windows ; Hindley had come out, and
stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard and drowsy.
" What ails you, Cathy? " he was saying when I entered:
" you look as dismal as a drowned whelp. Why are you so
damp and pale, child? "
" I've been wet, " she answered reluctantly, " and I'm cold,
that's all. "
" Oh, she is naughty! " I cried, perceiving the master to be
tolerably sober. " She got steeped in the shower of yesterday
evening, and there she has sat the night through, and I couldn't
prevail on her to stir. "
Mr. Earnshaw stared at us in surprise. " The night through, "
he repeated. " What kept her up? not fear of the thunder,
6urely? That was over hours since. "
Neither of us wished to mention Heathcliff s absence, as long
as we could conceal it ; so I replied, I didn't know how she took it
into her head to sit up ; and she said nothing. The morning
was fresh and cool ; I threw back the lattice, and presently the
room filled with sweet scents from the garden ; but Catherine
called peevishly to me,''Ellen, shut the window. I'm starving ! "
And her teeth chattered as she shrunk closer to the almost ex-
tinguished embers.
" She's ill, " said Hindley, taking her wrist ; " I suppose that's
the reason she would not go to bed. Damn it ! I don't want to
be troubled with more sickness here. What took you into the
rain ! "
" Running after t'lads, as usuald ! " croaked Joseph, catching
an opportunity, from our hesitation, to thrust in his evil tongue,
" If I war yah, maister, I'd just slam t'boards i'their faces all
on'em, gentle and simple ! Never a day ut yah're off, but yon
cat o'Linton comes sneaking hither ; and Miss Nelly, shoe's a
fine lass ! shoo sits watching for ye i't'kitchen ; and as yah're in
at one door, he's out at t'other ; and, then, wer grand lady goes
90 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
a coorting of her side ! It's bonny behaviour, hirking amang t'
fields, after twelve o't'night, \vi'that fahl, flaysome divil of a
gipsy, Heathcliff ! They think I'm blind ; but I'm noan : nowt
ut t'soart ! — I seed young Linton boath coming and going, and
I seedjK«/i " (directing his discourse to me), " yah gooid fur nowt,
slattenly witch ! nip up and bolt into th'house, t'minute yah
heard t'maister's horse fit clatter up t'road. "
" Silence, eavesdropper! " cried Catherine; " none of your
insolence before me ! Edgar Linton came yesterday by chance,
Hindley ; and it was /who told him to be off: because I knew
you would not like to have met him as you were. "
" You lie, Cathy, no doubt, " answered her brother, " and you
are a confounded simpleton ! But never mind Linton at present :
tell me, were you not with Heathchff last night ? Speak the truth,
now. You need not be afraid of harming him : though I hate
him as much as ever, he did me a good turn a short time since,
that will make my conscience tender of breaking his neck. To
prevent it, I shall send him about his business, this very morning ;
and after he's gone, I'd advise you all to look sharp : I shall only
have the more humour for you. "
" I never saw Heathclifif last night, " answered Catherine,
beginning to sob bitterly : " and if you do turn him out of doors,
I'll go with him. But, perhaps, you'll never have an opportunity :
perhaps he's gone. " Here she burst into uncontrollable grief,
and the remainder of her words were inarticulate.
Hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade
her get to her room immediately, or she shouldn't cry for nothing !
I obliged her to obey ; and I shall never forget what a scene she
acted when we reached her chamber : it terrified me. I thought
-she was going mad, and I begged Joseph to run for the doctor.
It proved the commencement of delirium : Mr. Kenneth, as soon
as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill ; she had a fever.
He bled her, and he told me to let her live on whey and water-
gruel, and take care she did not throw herself downstairs or out
of the window ; and then he left : for he had enough to do in the
parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary distance between
cottage and cottage.
Though I cannot say I made a gentle nurse, and Joseph and "
the master were no better ; and though our patient was as
wearisome and headstrong as a patient could be, she weathered
it through. Old Mrs. Linton paid us several visits, to be sure.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 9 1
and set things to rights, and scolded and ordered us all ; and
when Catherine was convalescent, she insisted on conveying her
to Thrushcross Grange : for which deliverance we were very grate-
ful. But tiie poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness :
she and her husband both took the fever, and died within a few
days of each other.
Our young lady returned to us, saucier and more passionate,
and haughtier than ever. Heathcliff had never been heard of
since the evening of the thunderstorm ; and one day I had the
misfortune, when she had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the
blame of his disappearance on her : where indeed it belonged,
as she well knew. From that period, for several months, she
ceased to hold any communication with me, save in the relation
of a mere servant. Joseph fell under a ban also : he would speak
his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a little girl ;
and she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress, and thought
that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with con-
sideration. Then the doctor had said that she would not bear
crossing much ; she ought to have her own way ; and it was
nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to
stand up and contradict her. From Mr. Earnshaw and his com-
panions she kept aloof; and tutored by Kenneth, and serious
threats of a fit that often attended her rages, her brother allowed
her whatever she pleased to demand, and generally avoided
aggravating her fiery temper. He was rather too indulgent in
humouring her caprices ; not from affection, but from pride : he
wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the family by an
alliance with the Lintons, and as long as she let him alone she
might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared ! Edgar
Linton, as multitudes have been before and will be after him,
was infatuated ; and believed himself the happiest man alive on
the day he led her to Gimmerton Chapel, three years subsequent
to his father's death.
Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to leave Wuther-
ing Heights and accompany her here. Litde Hareton was nearly
five years old, and I had just begun to teach him his letters.
We made a sad parting ; but Catherine's tears were more power-
ful than ours. When I refused to go, and when she found her en-
treaties did not move me, she went lamenting to her husband and
brother. The former offered me munificent wages ; the latter
ordered me to pack up : he wanted no women in the house, he
92 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
said, now that there was no mistress ; and as to Hareton, the
curate should take him in hand, by-and-by. And so I had but
one choice left : to do as I was ordered. I told the master he
got rid of all decent people only to run to ruin a little faster ; I
kissed Hareton, said good-bye ; and since then he has been a
stranger : and it's very queer to think it, but I've no doubt he
has completely forgotten all about Ellen Dean, and that he was
ever more than all the world to her, and she to him !
At this point of the housekeeper's story, she chanced to glance
towards the time-piece over the chimney ; and was in amazement
on seeing the minute-hand measure half-past one. She would
not hear of staying a second longer : in truth, I felt rather dis-
posed to defer the sequel of her narrative, myself. And now that
she is vanished to her rest, and I have meditated for another
hour or two, I shall summon courage to go, also, in spite of
aching laziness of head and limbs.
CHAPTER X.
A CHARMING introduction to a hermit's life ! Four weeks'torture,
tossing, and sickness ! Oh ! these bleak winds and bitter northern
skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons ! And,
oh, this dearth of the human physiognomy ! and, worse than all,
the terrible intimation of Kenneth that I need not expect to be
out of doors till spring !
Mr. Heathcliff has just honoured me with a call. About seven
days ago he sent me a brace of grouse — the last of the season.
Scoundrel ! He is not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine ;
and that I had a great mind to tell him. But, alas ! how could
I offend a man who was charitable enough to sit at my bedside a
good hour, and talk on some other subject than pills and draughts,
blisters and leeches ? This is quite an easy interval. I am too weak
to read ; yet I feel as if I could enjoy something interesting. Why
not have up Mrs. Dean to finish her tale ? I can recollect its
chief incidents as far as she had gone. Yes : I remember her
hero had run off, and never been heard of for three years ; and
the heroine was married. I'll ring : she'll be delighted to find
me capable of talking cheerfully. Mrs. Dean came.
V/UTHERING HEIGHTS. 93
'" It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine, " she
commenced.
" Away, away with it ! " I replied ; " I desire to have "
" The doctor says you must drop the powders. "
■ " With all my heart ! Don't interrupt me. Come and take
your seat here. Keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of
vials. Draw your knitting out of your pocket — that will do— now
continue the history of Mr. Heathcliff, from where you left off, to
the present day. Did he finish his education on the Continent,
and come back a gentleman? or did he get a sizar's place at col-
lege, or escape to America, and earn honours by drawing blood
from his foster-country? or make a fortune more promptly on
the English highways ? "
" He may have done a little in all these vocations, Mr. Lock-
wood ; but I couldn't give my word for any. I stated before that
I didn't know how he gained his money ; neither am I aware of
the means he took to raise his mind from the savage ignorance
into which it was sunk : but, with your leave, I'll proceed in my
own fashion, if you think it will amuse and not weary you. Are
you feeling better this morning? "
" Much. "
•'That's good news. I got Miss Catherine and myself to
Thrushcross Grange ; and, to my agreeable disappointment, she
behaved infinitely better than I dared to expect. She seemed
almost over fond of Mr. Linton ; and even to his sister she showed
plenty of affection. They were both very attentive to her comfort,
certainly. It was not the thorn bending to the honeysuckles, but
the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. There were no mutual
concessions : one stood erect, and the others yielded : and who can
be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither
opposition nor indifference ? I observed that Mr. Edgar had a
deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour. He concealed it from
her ; but if ever he heard me answer sharply, or saw any other
servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of hers, he would
show his trouble by a frown of displeasure that never darkened on
his own account. He many a time spoke sternly to me about my
pertness ; and averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict a
worse pang than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed. TS'ot to
grieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy ; and, for the
space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as harmless as sand, be-
cause no fire came near to explode it. Catherine had seasons of
C)-j. WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
gloom and silence now and then : they were respected with sym-
pathising silence by her husband, who ascribed them to an altera-
tion in her constitution, produced by her perilous illness ; as she
was never subject to depression of spirits before. The return of
sunshine was welcomed by answering sunshine from him. I
believe I may assert that they were really in possession of deep
and growing happiness.
It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the long run ; the
mild and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineer-
ing ; and it ended when circumstances caused each to feel that
the one's interest was not the chief consideration in the other's
thoughts. On a mellow evening in September, I was coming
from the garden with a heavy basket of apples which I had been
gathering. It had got dusk, and the moon looked over the high
-wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to lurk in the corners
of the numerous projecting portions of the building. I set my
burden on the house steps by the kitchen door, and lingered to
rest, and drew in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet air ; my
€yes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when I
heard a voice behind me say —
" Nelly, is that you? "
It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone ; yet there was some-
thing in the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound
familiar. I turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully ; for the
doors were shut, and I had seen nobody on approaching the steps.
Something stirred in the porch ; and, moving nearer, I distin-
guished a tall man dressed in dark clothes, with dark face and
hair. He leant against the side, and held his fingers on the latch
as if intending to open for himself. " Who can it be? " I thought.
" Mr. Earnshaw? Oh, no! The voice has no resemblance to his. "
" I have waited here an hour, " he resumed, while I continued
staring ; " and the whole of that time all round has been as still
as death. I dared not enter. You do not know me? Look,
I'm not a stranger ! "
A ray fell on his features ; the cheeks were sallow, and half
covered with black whiskers ; the brows lowering, the eyes deep
set and singular. I remembered the eyes.
" What! " I cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a
worldly visitor, and I raised my hands in amazement. " What !
you come back? Is it really you? Is it? "
" Yes, Heathcliff, " he replied, glancing from me up to the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 95
windows, which reflected a score of glittering moons, but showed
no lights from within. " Are they at home? where is she?
Nelly, you are not glad ! you needn't be so disturbed. Is she
here ? Speak ! I want to have one word with her — your mistress.
Go, and say some person from Gimmerton desires to see her. "
" How will she take it? " I exclaimed. " What will she do?
The surprise bewilders me — it will put her out of her head ! And
you are Heathcliff ! But altered ! Nay, there's no comprehend-
ing it. Have you been for a soldier? "
" Go and carry my message, " he interrupted impatiently.
" I'm in hell till you do ! "
He lifted the latch, and I entered ; but when I got to the parlour
where Mr. and Mrs. Linton were, I could not persuade myself
to proceed. At length, I resolved on making an excuse to ask
if they would have the candles lighted, and I opened the door.
They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against
the wall, and displayed, beyond the garden trees and the wild
green park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a long line of mist
winding nearly to its top (for very soon after you pass the
chapel, as you may have noticed, the sough that runs from
the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of the glen).
Wuthering Heights rose above this silvery vapour ; but our old
house was invisible ; it rather dips down on the other side. Both
the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked
wondrously peaceful. I shrank reluctantly from performing
my errand ; and was actually going away leaving it unsaid,
after having put my question about the candles, when a sense of
my folly compelled me to return, and mutter — " A person from
Gimmerton wishes to see you, ma'am. "
" What does he want? " asked Mrs. Linton.
" I did not question him, " I answered.
" Well, close the curtains, Nelly, " she said ; " and bring up
tea. I'll be back again directly. "
She quitted the apartment ; ^Slr. Edgar inquired, carelessly,
who it was.
" Some one mistress does not expect, " I replied. " That
Heathcliff — you recollect him, sir, — who used to live at Mr.
Earnshaw's. "
" What! the gipsy — the ploughboy ? " he cried. " Why did
you not say so to Catherine ? "
" Hush ! you must not call him by those names, master, " I
96 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
said. " She'd be sadly grieved to hear you. She was nearly
heartbroken when he ran off. I guess his return will make a
jubilee to her. "
Mr. Linton walked to a window on the other side of the room
that overlooked the court. He unfastened it and leant out.
I suppose they were below, for he exclaimed quickly — " Don't
stand there, love ! Bring the person in, if it be any one par-
ticular. " Ere long I heard the chck of the latch, and Catherine
flew upstairs, breathless and wild ; too excited to show glad-
ness : indeed, by her face, you would rather have surmised an
awful calamity.
" Oh, Edgar, Edgar ! she panted, flinging her arms round his
neck. " Oh Edgar, darling ! Heathcliffs come back — he is ! "
And she tightened her embrace to a squeeze.
" Well, well, " cried her husband crossly, " don't strangle me
for that ! He never struck me as such a marvellous treasure.
There is no need to be frantic ! "
" I know you didn't like him, " she answered, repressing a little
the intensity of her delight. " Yet, for my sake, you must be
friends now. Shall I tell him to come up? "
" Here? " he said, " into the parlour? "
" Where else? " she asked.
He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suitable
place for him. Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll expression —
half angry, half laughing at his fastidiousness.
" No, " she added after a while ; " I cannot sit in the kitchen.
Set two tables here, Ellen : one for your master and Miss Isabella,
being gentry ; the other for Heathcliff and myself, being of the
lower orders. Will that please you, dear? Or must I have a
fire lighted elsewhere ? If so, give directions. I'll run down and
secure my guest. I'm afraid the joy is too great to be real ! "
She was about to dart off again ; but Edgar arrested her.
" You bid him step up, " he said, addressing me; " and,
Catherine, try to be glad, without being absurd ! the whole
household need not witness the sight of your welcoming a run-
away servant as a brother, "
I descended and found Heathcliff waiting under the porch,
evidently anticipating an invitation to enter. He followed my
guidance without waste of words, and I ushered him into the
presence of the master and mistress, whose flushed cheeks
betrayed signs of warm talking. But the lady's glowed with
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 97
another feeling when her friend appeared at the door : she sprang
forward, took both his hands, and led him to Linton ; and then
she seized Linton's reluctant fingers and crushed them into his.
Now fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, I was amazed,
more than ever, to behold the transformation of Heathcliff. He
had grown a tall, athletic, well-formed man ; beside whom, my
master seemed quite slender and youth-like. His upright carriage
suggested the idea of his having been in the army. His counte-
nance was much older in expression and decision of feature than
Mr. Linton's ; it looked intelligent, and retained no marks of
former degradation, A half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the
depressed brows and eyes full of black fire, but it was subdued ;
and his manner was even dignified : quite divested of roughness,
though too stern for grace. My master's surprise equalled or ex-
ceeded mine : he remained for a minute at a loss how to address
the ploughboy, as he had called him. Heathcliff dropped his
slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till he chose to speak.
" Sit down, sir, " he said, at length. " Mrs. Linton, recalling
old times, would have me give you a cordial reception ; and, of
course, I am gratified when anything occurs to please her. "
" And I also, " an swered Heathcliff,''especially if it be anything
in which I have a part. I shall stay an hour or two willingly. "
He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on
him as if she feared he would vanish were she to remove it. He
did not raise his to her often : a quick glance now and then
sufficed ; but it flashed back, each time more confidently, the
undisguised delight he drank from hers. They were too mucli
absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer embarrassment. Not so
Mr. Edgar : he grew pale with pure annoyance : a feeling that
reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across the
rug, seized Heathcliff's hands again, and laughed like one beside
herself.
" I shall think it a dream to-morrow ! " she cried. " I shall
not be able to believe that I have seen, and touched, and
spoken to you once more. Asd yet, cruel Heathcliff! you
don't deserve this welcome. To be absent and silent for three
years, and never to think of me ! "
" A little more than you have thought of me, " he murmured.
" I heard of your marriage, Cathy, not long since ; and, while
waiting in the yard below, I meditated this plan : — ^just to have
one glimpse of your face, a stare of surprise, perhaps, and pre-
D
98 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
tended pleasure ; afterwards settle my score with Hindley ; aiid
then prevent the law by doing execution on myself. Your wel-
come has put these ideas out of my mind ; but beware of meeting
me with another aspect next time ! Nay, you'll not drive me off
again. You were really sorry for me, were you ? Well, there was
cause. I've fought through a bitter life since I last heard your
voice ; and you must forgive me, for I struggled only for you ! "
*■'Catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to
the table, " interrupted Linton, striving to preserve his ordinary
tone, and a due measure of politeness. " Mr. Heathcliff will have
a long walk, wherever he may lodge to-night ; and I'm thirsty. "
She toqk her post before the urn ; and Miss Isabella came,
STimmoned by the bell ; then, having handed their chairs forward,
I left the room. The meal hardly endured ten minutes. Cathe-
rine's cup was never filled : she could neither eat nor drink.
Edgar had made a slop in his saucer, and scarcely swallowed a
mouthful. Their guest did not protract his stay that evening
above an hour longer. I asked, as he departed, if he went to
Gimmerton ?
" No, to Wuthering Heights, " he answered : " Mr. Earnshaw
invited me, when I called this morning. "
iSIr. Earnshaw invited hivi I and he called on Mr. Earnshaw !
I pondered this sentence painfully, after he was gone. Is he
turning out a bit of a hypocrite, and coming into the country to
work mischief under a cloak ? I mused : I had a presentiment in
the bottom of my heart that he had better have remained away.
About the middle of the night, I was wakened from my first
nap by Mrs. Linton gliding into my chamber,, taking a seat on
my bedside, and pulling me by the hair to rouse me.
" I cannot rest, Ellen, " she said, by way of apology. " And I
want some living creature to keep me company in my happiness !
Edgar is sulky, because I'm glad of a thing that does not interest
him : he refuses to open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly
speeches ; and he affirmed I was cruel and selfish for wishing to
talk when he was so sick and sleepy. He always contrives to be
sick at the least cross ! I gave a few sentences of commendation
to Heathcliff, and he, either for a headache or a pang of envy,
began to cry : so I got up and left him. "
" What use is it praising Heathcliff to him? " I answered.
" As lads they had an aversion to each other, and Heathcliff
would hate just as much to hear him praised : it's human nature.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOI
Let Mr. Linton alone about him, unless j'ou would like an ojade
quarrel between them. "
" But does it not show great weakness ? " pursued she. " I'm
not envious : I never feel hurt at the brightness of Isabella's
yellow hair and the whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance,
and the fondness all the family exhibit for her. Even you,
Nelly, if we have a dispute sometimes, you back Isabella at
once ; and I yield like a foolish mother : I call her a darling, and
flatter her into a good temper. It pleases her brother to see us
cordial, and that pleases me. But they are very much alike :
they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was made for their
accommodation; and though I humour both, I think a smart
chastisement might improve them, all the same. "
" You're mistaken, ]\Irs. Linton, " said I. " They humour
you : I know what there would be to do if they did not. You
can well afford to indulge their passing whims as long as their
business is to anticipate all your desires. You may, however,
fall out, at last, over something of equal consequence to both
sides ; and then those you term weak are very capable of being
as obstinate as you. "
" And then we shall fight to the death, shan't we, Nelly? " she
returned, laughing. " No! I tell you, I have such faith in
Linton's love, that I believe I might kill him, and he v/ouldn't
v/ish to retaliate. "
I advised her to value him the more for his affection.
" I do : " she answered, " but he needn't resort to whining for
trifles. It is childish ; and, instead of melting into tears because
I said that Heathcliff was now worthy of any one's regard, and
it would honour the first gentleman in the country to be his
friend, he ought to have said it for me, and been delighted from
sympathy. He must get accustomed to him, and he may as well
like him : considering how Heathcliff " has reason to object to him,
I'm sure he behaved excellently ! "
" What do you think of his going to Wuthering Heights ? " I
inquired. " He is reformed in every respect, apparently : quite
a Christian : offering the right hand of fellowship to his enemies
all around 1 "
" He explained it, " she replied. " I wonder as much as you.
He said he called to gather information concerning me from you,
supposing you resided there still ; and Joseph told Hindley, who
came out and fell to questioning him of what he had been doing,
9^ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
tep now he had been livings; and finally, desired him to walk
in. There were some persons sitting at cards ; Heathcliff joined
them ; my brother lost some money to him, and, finding him
plentifully supplied, he requested that he would come again in
the evening : to which he consented. Hindley is too reckless to
select his acquaintance prudently : he doesn't trouble himself to
reflect on the causes he might have for mistrusting one whom he
has basely injured. But Heathcliff afifirms his principal reason
for resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is a wish
to install himself in quarters at walking distance from the Grange,
and an attachment to the house where we lived together ; and
likewise a hope that I shall have more opportunities of seeing
him there than I could have if he settled in Gimmerton. He
means to offer liberal payment for permission to lodge at the
Heights ; and doubtless my brother's covetousness will prompt
him to accept the terms : he was always greedy ; though what
he grasps with one hand he flings away with the other. "
" It's a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling in ! "
said I. " Have you no fear of the consequences, Mrs. Linton? "
" None for my friend, " she replied: " his strong head will
keep him from danger ; a little for Hindley : but he can't be
made morally worse than he is ; and I stand between him and
bodily harm. The event of this evening has reconciled me to
God and humanity ! I had risen in angry rebellion against
Providence. Oh, I've endured very, very bitter misery, Nelly !
If that creature knew how bitter, he'd be ashamed to cloud its
removal with idle petulance. It was kindness for him which in-
duced me to bear it alone : had I expressed the agony I frequently
felt, he would have been taught to long for its alleviation as
ardently as I. However, it's over, and I'll take no revenge on
his folly ; I can afford to suffer anything hereafter ! Should the
meanest thing alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn the
other, but, I'd ask pardon for provoking it ; and, as a proof, I'll
go make my peace with Edgar instantly. Good-night ! I'm
an angel ! "
In this self-complacent conviction she departed ; and the
success of her fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow:
Mr. Linton had not only abjured his peevishness (though his
spirits seemed still subdued by Catherine's exuberance of vivacity),
])Ut he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella with her to
Wuthering Heights in the afternoon ; and she rewarded him
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOI
with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return, as made
the house a paradise for several days ; both master and servants
profiting from the perpetual sunshine.
Heathcliff— Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future— used the
liberty of visiting at Thrushcross Grange cautiously, at first : he
seemed estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion.
Catherine, also, deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions
of pleasure in receiving him ; and he gradually established his
right to be expected. He retained a great deal of the reserve
for which his boyhood was remarkable ; and that served to
repress all startling demonstrations of feeling. My master's
uneasiness experienced a lull, and further circumstances diverted
it into another channel for a space.
His new source of trouble sprang from the not-anticipated
misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible
attraction towards the tolerated guest. She was at that time a
charming young lady of eighteen ; infantile in manners, though
possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a keen temper, too, if
irritated. Her brother, who loved her tenderly, was appalled at
this fantastic preference. Leaving aside the degradation of an
alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his
property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one's
power, he had sense to comprehend Heathcliff's disposition : to
know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was
unchangeable and unchanged. And he dreaded that mind :
it revolted him : he shrank forebodingly from the idea of com-
mitting Isabella to its keeping. He would have recoiled still
more had he been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited,
and was bestowed where ic awakened no reciprocation of senti-
ment ; for the minute he discovered its existence, he laid the
blame on Heathchff's deliberate designing.
We had all remarked, during some time, that Miss Linton
fretted and pined over something. She grew cross and weari-
some ; snapping at and teasing Catherine continually, at the
imminent risk of exhausting her limited patience. We excused
her, to a certain extent, on the plea of ill-health : she was
dwindling and fading before our eyes. But one day;, when she
had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast, com-
plaining that the servants did not do what she told them ; that
the mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and
Edgar neglected her ; that she had caught a cold with the doors
I02 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
being left open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to
vex her, with a hundred yet more frivolous accusations, Mrs.
Linton peremptorily insisted that she should get to bed ; and,
having scolded her heartily, threatened to send for the doctor.
Mention of Kenneth caused her to exclaim, instantly, that her
health was perfect, and it was only Catherine's harshness which
made her unhappy.
" How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling? " cried
the mistress, amazed at the unreasonable assertion. " You are
surely losing your reason. When have I been harsh, tell me? "
" Yesterday, " sobbed Isabella, " and now ! "
" Yesterday ! " said her sister-in-law. " On what occasion? "
" In our w'alk along the moor : you told me to ramble where
I pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliff ! "
" And that's your notion of harshness? " said Catherine,
laughing. " It was no hint that your company was superfluous :
we didn't care whether you kept with us or not ; I merely thought
Heathcliff's talk would have nothing entertaining for your ears. "
" Oh no, " wept the young lady; " you wished me away,
because you knew I liked to be there ! "
" Is she sane? " asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to me. " I'll
repeat our conversation, word for word, Isabella ; and you
point out any charm it could have had for you. "
" I don't mind the conversation, " she answered : " I wanted
to be with "
" Well ! " said Catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete
the sentence.
" With him : and I won't be always sent oft I " she continued,
kindling up.''You are a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desire
no one to be loved but yourself ! "
''You are an impertinent little monkey 1 " exclaimed Mrs,
Linton, in surprise. " But I'll not beheve this idiocy! It is
impossible that you can covet the admiration of Heathcliff—
that you consider him an agreeable person ! I hope I have
misunderstood you, Isabella? "
" No, you have not, " said the infatuated girl. " I love him
more than ever you loved Edgar ; and he might love me, if you
would let him ! "
" I wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then ! " Catherine declared
emphatically : and she seemed to speak sincerely. " Nelly, help
me to convince her of her madness. Tell her what Heathcliff is :
V.'UTHERIXG HEIGHTS. lay
an unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation :
an arid wilderness of furze and whinstone. I'd as soon .''ut that
little canary into the park on a winter's day, as reconiiiend you
to bestow your heart on him ! It is deplorable igno)ince of his
character, child, and nothing else, which makes that dream
enter your head. Pray, don't imagine that he conceJs depths
of benevolence and affection beneath a stern exterior'; He's
not a rough diamond — a pearl-containing oyster of a ru^ic :
he's a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. I never say to him'Let thi.
or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
harm them ;'I say'Let them alone, because / should hate them
to be wronged :'and he'd crush you like a sparrow's egg, Isabella,-
if he found you a troublesome charge. I know he couldn't love
a Linton ; and yet he'd be quite capable of marrying your fortune
and expectations ! avarice is growing with him a besetting sin.
There's my picture : and I'm his friend — so much so, that had
he thought seriously to catch you, I should, perhaps, have held
my tongue, and let you fall into his trap. "
Miss Linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
" For shame! for shame! " she repeated angrily, " you are
worse than twenty foes, you poisonous friend ! "
" Ah ! you won't believe me, then? " said Catherine. " You
think I speak from wicked selfishness ? "
" I'm certain you do, " retorted Isabella ; " and I shudder at
you ! "
" Good ! " cried the other. " Try for yourself, if that be your
spirit : I have done, and yield the argument to your saucy in-
solence. "
''And I must suffer for her egotism ! " she sobbed, as Mrs.
Linton left the room, " All, all is against me: she has blighted
my single consolation. But she uttered falsehoods, didn't she?
Mr. Heathcliff is not a fiend : he has an honourable soul, and
a true one, or how could he remember her? "
" Banish him from your thoughts, miss, " I said. " He's a bird
of bad omen : no mate for you. Mrs. Linton spoke strongly,,
and yet I can't contradict her. She is better acquainted with
his heart than I, or any one besides ; and she never would repre-
sent him as worse than he is. Honest people don't hide their
deeds. How has he been living ? how has he got rich ? why is
he staying at Wuthering Heights, the house of a man whom he
abhors? They say Mr. Earnshaw is worse and worse since he
104 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
came, They sit up all night together continually, and Hindley
has bi:en borrowing money on his land, and does nothing but
play and drink : I heard only a week ago — it was Joseph who
told me- I met him at Gimmerton :'Nelly,'he said,'we's hae
a crowner's'quest enow, at ahr folks. One on'em's a'most
getten K-s finger cut off wi'handing t'other fro'stickin hisseln
loike d cawlf. That's maister, yah knaw,'at's soa up o'going
tu.^ t'grand'sizes. He's noan feared o't'bench o'judges,
norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nur Matthew, nor noan on
'em, not he ! He fair likes — he langs to set his brazened face
agean'em ! And yon bonny lad Heathcliff, yah mind, he's a
rare un ! He can girn a laugh as well's onybody at a raight
divil's jest. Does he niver say nowt of his fine living amang us,
when he goes to t'Grange? Tnis is t'way on't : — up at sun-
down : dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und can'le-light till next
day at noon : then, t'fooil gangs banning un raving to his
cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i'thur lugs fur
varry shame ; un'the knave, why he can caint his brass, un ate,
un sleep, un off to his neighbour's, to gossip wi't'wife. I'course,
he tells Dame Catherine how her fathur's goold runs into his
pocket, and her fathur's son gallops down t'broad road, while
he flees afore to oppen t'pikes?'Now, Miss Linton, Joseph is
an old rascal, but no liar ; and, if his account of Heathcliff's
conduct be true, you would never think of desiring such a
husband, would you? "
" You are leagued with the rest, Ellen ! " she replied. " I'll not
listen to your slanders. What malevolence you must have to
wish to convince me that there is no happiness in the world 1 "
Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself,
or persevered in nursing it perpetually, I cannot say : she had
little time to reflect. The day after, there was a justice-meeting
at the next town ; my master was obliged to attend ; and Mr.
Heathcliff, aware of his absence, called rather earlier than usual.
Catherine and Isabella were sitting in the library, on hostile
terms, but silent. The latter alarmed at her recent indiscretion,
and the disclosure she had made of her secret feelings in a tran-
sient fit of passion ; the former, on mature consideration, really
offended with her companion ; and, if she laughed again at her
pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her. She
did laugh as she saw Pleathcliff pass the window. I was sweep-
ing the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on her lips.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I05
Isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained till
the door opened ; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which
she would gladly have done had it been practicable.
" Come in, that's right! " exclaimed the mistress gaily, pull-
ing a chair to the fire. " Here are two people sadly in need of
a third to thaw the ice between them ; and you are the very one
we should both of us choose. Heathcliff, I'm proud to show
you, at last, somebody that dotes on you more than myself. I
expect you to feel flattered. Nay, it's not Nelly ; don't look at
her ! My poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by mere
contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. It lies in
your own power to be Edgar's brother ! No, no, Isabella, you
shan't run off, " she continued, arresting, with feigned playful-
ness, the confounded girl, who had risen indignantly. " We
were quarrelling like cats about you, Heathcliff; and I was
fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and admiration : and,
moreover, I was informed that if I would but have the manners
to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, would
shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send
my image into eternal oblivion ! "
" Catherine! " said Isabella, calling up her dignity, and dis-
daining to struggle from the tight grasp that held her. " I'd
thank you to adhere to the truth and not slander me, even in
joke ! Mr. Heathcliff, be kind enough to bid this friend of yours
release me : she forgets that you and I are not intimate ac-
quaintances ; and what amuses her is painful to me beyond
expression, "
As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked
thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning
him, she turned and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to
her tormentor.
" By no means ! " cried Mrs, Linton in answer. " I won't be
named a dog in the manger again. You shall stay : now then !
Heathcliff, why don't you evince satisfaction at my pleasant
news? Isabella swears that the love Edgar has for me is
nothing to that she entertains for you. I'm sure she made some
speech of the kind; did she not, Ellen? And she has fasted
ever since the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and rage
that I despatched her out of your society under the idea of its
being unacceptable. "
" I think you belie her, " said Heathcliff, twisting his chair to
u 2
I06 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
face them. " She wishes to be out of my society now, at any
rate ! "
And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might
do at a strange repulsive animal : a centipede from the Indies, for
instance, which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the
aversion it raises. The poor thing couldn't bear that : she
grew white and red in rapid succession, and, while tears beaded
her lashes, bent the strength of her small fingers to loosen the
firm clutch of Catherine ; and perceiving that as fast as she
raised one finger off her arm another closed down, and she could
not remove the whole together, she began to make use of her
nails ; and their sharpness presently ornamented the detainer's
with crescents of red.
" There's a tigress ! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting her free,
and shaking her hand with pain. " Begone, for God's sake, and
hide your vixen face ! How foolish to reveal those talons to him.
Can't you fancy the conclusions he'll draw? Look, Heathcliff I
they are instruments that will do execution — you must beware of
your eyes. "
" I'd wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me, "
he answered brutally, when the door had closed after her.
''But what did you mean by teasing the creature in that manner,
Cathy? You were not speaking the truth, were you? "
" I assure you I was, " she returned. " She has been dying for
your sake several weeks ; and raving about you this morning,
and pouring forth a deluge of abuse, because I represented your
failings in a plain light, for the purpose of mitigating her ado-
ration. But don't notice it further : I wished to punish her sauci-
ness, that's all. I like her too well, my dear Heathcliff, to let
you absolutely seize and devour her up. "
" And I like her too ill to attempt it, " said he, " except in a
very ghoulish fashion. You'd hear of odd things if I lived alone
with that mawkish, waxen face : the most ordinary would be
painting on its white the colours of the rainbow, and turning the
blue eyes black, every day or two : they detestably resemble
Linton's. "
" Delectably ! " observed Catherine. " They are dove's eyes
— angel's ! "
" She's her brother's heir, is she not? " he asked, after a brief
silence.
" I should be sorry to think so, " returned his companion.
WUTHERIXG HEIGHTS. I07
*'Half-a-dozen nephews shall erase her title, please Heaven !
Abstract your mind from the subject at present : you are too
prone to covet your neighbour's goods ; remember this neigh-
bour's goods are mine. "
" If they were vihie, they would be none the less that, " said
Heathcliff ; " but though Isabella Linton may be silly, she is
scarcely mad ; and, in short, we'll dismiss the matter, as you
advise. "
From their tongues they did dismiss it ; and Catherine, pro-
bably, from her thoughts. The other, I felt certain, recalled it
often in the course of the evening. I saw him smile to himself
— grin rather — and lapse into ominous musing whenever Mrs.
Linton had occasion to be absent from the apartment.
I determined to watch his movements. Aly heart invariably
cleaved to the master's, in preference to Catherine's side : with
reason I imagined, for he was kind, and trustful, and honourable ;
and she — she could not be called the opposite, yet she seemed to
allow herself such wide latitude, that I had little faith in her
principles, and still less sympathy for her feelings. I wanted
something to happen which might have the effect of freeing both
Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Mr. Heathcliff, quietly ;
leaving us as we had been prior to his advent. His visits were a
continual nightmare to me ; and, I suspected, to my master also.
His abode at the Heights was an oppression past explaining. I
felt that God had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own
wicked wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and
the fold, waiting his time to spring and destroy.
CHAPTER XI.
Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, I've
got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how
all was at the farm. I've persuaded my conscience that it was
a duty to warn him how people talked regarding his ways ; and
then I've recollected his confirmed bad habits, and. hopeless
of benefiting him, have flinched from re-entering the dismal
house, doubting if I could bear to be taken at my wCrd.
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a
journey to Gimmerton. It was about the period that my narra-
tive has reached : a bright frosty afternoon ; the ground bare,
lo8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and the road hard and dry. I came to a stone where the high-
way branches off on to the moor at your left hand ; a rough sand-
pillar, with the letters W. H. cut on its north side, on the east,
G., and on the south-west, T. G. It serves as a guide-post to
the Grange, the Heights, and village. The sun shone yellow on
its grey head, reminding me of summer ; and I cannot say why,
but all at once, a gush of child's sensations flowed into my heart.
Hindley and I held it a favourite spot twenty years before. I
gazed long at the weather-worn block, and, stooping down, per-
ceived a hole near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles,
which we were fond of storing there with more perishable things ;
and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I beheld my early play-
mate seated on the withered turf : his dark, square head bent
forward, and his little hand scooping out the earth with a piece
of slate. " Poor Hindley! " I exclaimed involuntarily. I
started : my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary belief
that the child hfted its face and stared straight into mine ! It
vanished in a twinkling ; but immediately I felt an irresistible
yearning to be at the Heights. Superstition urged me to comply
with this impulse : supposing he should be dead ! I thought —
or should die soon ! — supposing it were a sign of death ! The
nearer I got to the house the more agitated I grew ; and on
catching sight of it I trembled every limb. The apparition had
outstripped me : it stood looking through the gate. That was
my first idea on observing an elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting
his ruddy countenance against the bars. Further reflection
suggested this must be Hareton, my Hareton, not altered greatly
since I left him, ten months since.
" God bless thee, darling ! " I cried, forgetting instantaneously
my foolish fears. " Hareton, it's Nelly ! Nelly, thy nurse. "
He retreated out of arm's length, and picked up a large flint.
" I am come to see thy father, Hareton, " I added, guessing
from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all,
was not recognised as one with me.
He raised his missile to hurl it ; I commenced a soothing
speech, but could not stay his hand : the stone struck my
bonnet ; and then ensued, from the stammering lips of the little
fellow, a string of curses, which, whether he comprehended them
or not, were delivered with practised emphasis, and distorted his
baby features into a shocking expression of mahgnity. You may
be certain this grieved more than angered me. Fit to cry, I took
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I09
an orange from my pocket, and offered it to propitiate him. He
hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold ; as if he fancied
I only intended to tempt and disappoint him. I showed another,
keeping it out of his reach.
" Who has taught you those fine words, my bairn? " I
inquired.''The curate ? "
" Damn the curate, and thee ! Gie me that, " he replied.
" Tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it, "
said I. " Who's your master? "
" Devil daddy, " was his answer.
" And what do you learn from daddy? " I continued.
He jumped at the fruit ; I raised it higher. " What does he
teach you? " I asked.
" Naught, " said he, " but to keep out of his gait. Daddy
cannot bide me, because I swear at him. "
" Ah ! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy? " I observed.
" Ay— nay, " he drawled.
" Who, then? "
" Heathcliff. "
I asked if he liked Mr. Heathcliff.
" Ay ! " he answered again.
Desiring to have his reasons for liking him, I could only gather
the sentences —''I known't : he pays dad back what he gies to me
— he curses daddy for cursing me. He says I mun do as I will. "
" And the curate does not teach you to read and write then ? "
I pursued.
" No, I was told the curate should have his teeth dashed
down his throat, if he stepped over the threshold — Heathcliff
had promised that ! "
I put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that
a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to speak with him, by
the garden gate. He went up the walk, and entered the house ;
but, instead of Hindley, Heathcliff appeared on the door stones ;
and I turned directly and ran down the road as hard as ever I
could race, making no halt till I gained the guide-post, and
feeling as scared as if I had raised a goblin. This is not much
connected with Miss Isabella's affair : except that it urged me
to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and doing my
utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the Grange :
even though I should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting
Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
no WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
The next time Heathcliff came, my young lady chanced to be
feeding some pigeons in the court. She had never spoken a word
to her sister-in-law for three days ; but she had likewise dropped
her fretful complaining, and we found it a great comfort. Heath-
cliff had not the habit of bestowing a single unnecessary civiHty
on Miss Linton, I knew. Now, as soon as he beheld her, his
first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the house-front.
I was standing by the kitchen window, but I drew out of sight.
He then stepped across the pavement to her, and said something :
she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away ; to prevent
it, he laid his hand on her arm. She averted her face : he appar-
ently put some question which she had no mind to answer. There
was another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself
unseen, the scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.
" Judas ! traitor 1 " I ejaculated. " You are a hypocrite, too,
are you? A deliberate deceiver. "
" Who is, Nelly? " said Catherine's voice at my elbow : I had
been over intent on watching the pair outside to mark her
entrance.
" Your worthless friend ! " I answered warmly : " the sneaking
rascal yonder. Ah, he has caught a glimpse of us— he is coming
in ! I wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse
for making love to Miss, when he told you he hated her? "
Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself free, and run into the
garden ; and a minute after, Heathcliff opened the door. I
couldn't withhold giving some loose to my indignation ; but
Catherine angrily insisted on silence, and threatened to order
me out of the kitchen, if I dared to be so presumptuous as to
put in my insolent tongne.
" To hear you, people might think you were the mistress ! "
she cried.''You want setting down in your right place ! Heath-
cliff, what are you about, raising this stir? I said you must let
Isabella alone ! — I beg you will, unless you are tired of being re-
ceived here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts against you ! "
" God forbid that he should try ! " answered the black villain.
I detested him just then. " God keep him meek and patient !
Every day I grow madder after sending him to heaven ! "
" Hush! " said Catherine, shutting the inner door. " Don't
vex me. Why have you disregarded my request? Did she
come across you on purpose? "
" What is it to you? " he growled. " I have a right to kiss
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Ill
her, if she chooses ; and you have no right to object. I am not
your husband : you needn't be jealous of me ! "
" I'm not jealous ^you ; " replied the mistress, " I'm jealous
for you. Clear your face : you shan't scowl at me ! If you like
Isabella, you shall marry her. But do you like her? Tellthetruth,
Heathcliff ! There, you won't answer. I'm certain you don't I "
''And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying that
man? " I inquired.
" Mr. Linton should approve, " returned my lady decisively.
" He might spare himself the trouble, " said Heathcliff: " I
could do as well without his approbation. And as to you,
Catherine, I have a mind to speak a few words now, while we are
at it. I want you to be aware that I know you have treated me
infernally — infernally ! Do you hear? And if you flatter your-
self that I don't perceive it, you are a fool ; and if you think I can
be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot ; and if you fancy I'll
suffer unrevenged, I'll convince you of the contrary, in a very little
while ! ^Meantime, thank you for telling me your sister-in-law's
secret : I swear I'll make the most of it. And stand you aside ! "
" What new phase of his character is this? " exclaimed Mrs.
Linton, in amazement. " I've treated you infernally — and you'll
take your revenge! How will you take it, ungrateful brute?
How have I treated you infernally ? "
" I seek no revenge on you, " replied Heathcliff less vehemently.
" That's not the plan. The tyrant grinds down his slaves and
they don't turn against him ; they crush those beneath them.
You are welcome to torture me to death for your amusement,
only allow me to amuse myself a little in the same style, and
refrain from insult as much as you are able. Having levelled my
palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire your own
charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you really
wished me to marry Isabel, I'd cut my throat ! "
" Oh, the evil is that I am 7Z(?/ jealous, is it? " cried Catherine.
" Well, I won't repeat my offer of a wife : it is as bad as offering
Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery.
Y^'ou prove it. Edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way
to at your coming ; I begin to be secure and tranquil ; and
you, restless to know us at peace, appear resolved on " exciting a
quarrel. Quarrel with Edgar, if you please, Heathchff, and
deceive his sister : you'll hit on exactly the most efficient method
of revenging yourself on me. "
112 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
The conversation ceased. Mrs. Linton sat down by the fire,
flushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her was growing
intractable : she could neither lay nor control it. He stood on
the hearth with folded arms, brooding on his evil thoughts ; and
in this position I left them to seek the master, who was wonder-
ing what kept Catherine below so long.
" Ellen, " said he, when I entered, " have you seen your
mistress? "
" Yes; she's in the kitchen, sir, " I answered. " She's sadly
put out by Mr. Heathcliff's behaviour : and, indeed, I do think
it's time to arrange his visits on another footing. There's harm
in being too soft, and now it's come to this " And I related
the scene in the court, and, as near as I dared, the whole subse-
quent dispute. I fancied it could not be very prejudicial to Mrs.
Linton ; unless she made it so afterwards, by assuming the de-
fensive for her guest. Edgar Linton had difficulty in hearing me
to the close. His first words revealed that he did not clear his
wife of blame.
" This is insufferable ! " he exclaimed. " It is disgraceful that
she should own him for a friend, and force his company on me !
Call me two men out of the hall, Ellen. Catherine shall lingei
no longer to argue with the low ruffian — I have humoured hei
enough. "
He descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage,
went, followed by me, to the kitchen. Its occupants had re-
commenced their angry discussion : Mrs. Linton, at least, was
scolding with renewed vigour ; Heathcliff had moved to the
window, and hung his head, somewhat cowed by her violent
rating apparently. He saw the master first, and made a hasty
motion that she should be silent ; which she obeyed, abruptly,
on discovering the reason of his intimation,
" How is this? " said Linton, addressing her ; " what notion
of propriety must you have to remain here, after the language
which has been held to you by that blackguard ? I suppose,
because it is his ordinary talk, you think nothing of it ; you are
habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps, imagine I can get used
to it too ! "
" Have you been listening at the door, Edgar? " asked the
mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her hus-
band, implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation.
Heathcliff, who had raised his eyes at the former speech, gave
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. II3
a sneering laugh at the latter ; on purpose, it seemed, to draw
Mr. Linton's attention to him. He succeeded ; but Edgar did
not mean to entertain him with any high flights of pas-
sion.
" I have been so far forbearing with you, sir, " he said quietly ;
" not that I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded char-
acter, but I felt you were only partly responsible for that ; and
Catherine wishing to keep up your acquaintance, I acquiesced —
foolishly. Your presence is a moral poison that would con-
taminate the most virtuous : for that cause, and to prevent
worse consequences, I shall deny you hereafter admission into
this house, and give notice now that I require your instant de-
parture. Three minutes'delay will render it involuntary and
ignominious. "
Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker
with an eye full of derision.
" Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull ! " he said.
" It is in danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. By
God ! Mr, Linton, I'm mortally sorry that you are not worth
knocking down ! "
My master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to
fetch the men : he had no intention of hazarding a personal en-
counter. I obeyed the hint ; but Mrs. Linton, suspecting some-
thing, followed ; and when I attempted to call them, she pulled
me back, slammed the door to, and locked it.
" Fair means ! " she said, in answer to her husband's look of
angry surprise, " If you have not courage to attack him, make
an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will correct you
of feigning more valour than you possess. No, I'll swallow the
key before you shall get it ! I'm delightfully rewarded for my
kindness to each ! After constant indulgence of one's weak
nature, and the other's bad one, I earn for thanks two samples
of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity ! Edgar, I was defend-
ing you and yours ; and I wish Heathcliff may flog you sick, for
daring to think an evil thought of me ! "
It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect
on the master. He tried to wrest the key from Catherine's grasp,
and for safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire ; where-
upon Mr. Edgar was taken with a nervous trembling, and his
countenance grew deadly pale. For his life he could not avert
that excess of emotion : mingled anguish and humiliation over-
114 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
came him completely. He leant on the back of a chair, and
covered his face.
" Oh, heavens ! In old days this would win you knighthood ! "
exclaimed Mrs, Linton. " We are vanquished! we are van-
quished ! Heathcliff would as soon lift a finger at you as a king^
would march his army against a colony of mice. Cheer up ! you
shan't be hurt ! Your type is not a lamb, it's a sucking leveret. "
" I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy ! " said
her friend. " I compliment you on your taste. And that is the
slavering, shivering thing you preferred to me ! I would not
strike him with my fist, but I'd kick him with my foot, and
experience considerable satisfaction. Is he weeping, or is he
going to faint for fear? "
The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton
rested a push. He'd better have kept his distance ; my master
quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the throat a blow
that would have levelled a slighter man.'It took his breath for
a minute ; and while he choked, Mr. Linton walked out by the
back door into the yard, and from thence to the front en-
trance.
" There! you've done with coming here, " cried Catherine.
" Get away, now ; he'll return with a brace of pistols, and half-
a-dozen assistants. If he did overhear us, of course he'd never
forgive you. You've played me an ill turn, Heathcliff! But go
— make haste ! I'd rather see Edgar at bay than you. "
" Do you suppose I'm going with that blow burning in my
gullet? " he thundered. " By hell, no ! I'll crush his ribs in like
a rotten hazel-nut before I cross the threshold ! . If I don't floor
him now, I shall murder him some time ; so, as you value his
existence, let me get at him ! "
" He is not coming, " I interposed, framing a bit of a lie.
" There's the coachman and the two gardeners; you'll surely
not wait to be thrust into the road by them ! Each has a
bludgeon ; and master will, very likely, be watching from the
parlour windows, to see that they fulfil his orders, "
The gardeners and coachman were there ; but Linton was
with them. They had already entered the court. Heathcliff,
on second thoughts, resolved to avoid a struggle against the
three underling/s ; he seized the poker, smashed the lock from
the inner door, and made his escape as they tramped in.
Mrs, Linton, who was very mucla excited, bade me accompany
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 11$;
her upstairs. She did not know my share in contributing to the
disturbance, and I was anxious to keep her in ignorance.
" I'm nearly distracted, Nelly! " she exclaimed, throwing
herself on the sofa. " A thousand smiths'hammers are beating
in my head ! Tell Isabella to shun me ; this uproar is owing
to her ; and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at
present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to Edgar, if you see
him again to-night, that I'm in danger of being seriously ill.
I wish it may prove true. He has startled and distressed me
shockingly ! I want to frighten him. Besides, he might come
and begin a string of abuse or complainings ; I'm certain I
should recriminate, and God knows where we should end ! Will
you do so, my good Nelly ? You are aware that I am no way
blamable in this matter. What possessed him to turn listener?
Heathcliff's talk was outrageous, after you left us ; but I could
soon have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant nothing.
Now all is dashed wrong ; by the fool's craving to hear evil of
self, that haunts some people like a demon ! Had Edgar never
gathered our conversation, he would never have been the worse
for it. Really, when he opened on me in that unreasonable tone
of displeasure after I had scolded Heathcliff till I was hoarse for
him, I did not care, hardly, what they did to each other ; especi-
ally as I felt that, however the scene closed, we should all be
driven asunder for nobody knows how long ! Well, if I cannot
keep Heathcliff for my friend — if Edgar will be mean and jealous,
I'll try to break their hearts by breaking ray own. That will be
a prompt way of finishing all, when I am pushed to extremity !
But it's a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope ; I'd not take
Linton by surprise with it. To this point he has been discreet
in dreading to provoke me ; you must represent the peril of
quitting that pohcy, and remind him of my passionate temper,
verging, when kindled, on frenzy. I wish you could dismiss
that apathy out of that countenance, and look rather more
anxious about me. "
The stolidity with which I received these instructions was, no
doubt, rather exasperating : for they were delivered in perfect
sincerity ; but I believed a person who could plan the turning
of her fits of passion to account, beforehand, might, -by exerting
her will, manage to control herself tolerably, even while under
their influence ; and I did not wish to " frighten " her husband,
as she said, and multiply his annoyances for the purpose of
Il6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
serving her selfishness. Therefore I said nothing when I met
the master coming towards the parlour ; but I took the liberty
of turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel
together. He began to speak first.
" Remain where you are, Catherine, " he said; without any
anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. " I
shall not stay. I am neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled ;
but I wish just to learn whether, after this evening's events, you
intend to continue your intimacy with "
" Oh, for mercy's sake, " interrupted the mistress, stamping her
foot,''for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now ! Your
cold blood cannot be worked into a fever : your veins are full of
ice-water ; but mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness
makes them dance. "
" To get rid of me, answer my question, " persevered Mr. Linton.
" You jnust answer it ; and that violence does not alarm me. I
have found that you can be as stoical as any one, when you please.
Will you give up Heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me.
It is impossible for you to be my friend and his at the same
time ; and I absolutely require to know which you choose. "
" I require to be let alone ! " exclaimed Catherine furiously.
" I demand it ! Don't you see I can scarcely stand? Edgar,
you — you leave me ! "
She rang the bell till it broke with a twang ; I entered leisurely.
It was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked
rages ! There she lay dashing her head against the arm of the
sofa, and grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would
crash them to splinters ! Mr. Linton stood looking at her in
sudden compunction and fear. He told me to fetch some water.
She had no breath for speaking. I brought a glass full ; and
as she would not drink, I sprinkled it on her face. In a few
seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up her eyes,
while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the aspect
of death. Linton looked terrified.
" There is nothing in the world the matter, " I whispered. I
did not want him to yield, though I could not help being afraid
in my heart.
" She has blood on her lips ! " he said, shuddering.
" Never mind ! " I answered tartly. And I told him how she
had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of frenzy.
I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she heard me ; for
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 11/
she started up — her hair flying over her shoulders, her eyes
flashing, the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preter-
naturally. I made up my mind for broken bones, at least ; but
she only glared about her for an instant, and then rushed from
the room. The master directed me to follow ; I did, to her
chamber door: she hindered me from going further by securing
it against me.
As she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I
went to ask whether she would have some carried up. " No ! "
she replied peremptorily. The same question was repeated at
dinner and tea ; and again on the morrow after, and received
the same answer. Mr. Linton, on his part, spent his time in the
library, and did not inquire concerning his wife's occupations.
Isabella and he had had an hour's interview, during which he
tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper horror for
Heathcliff's advances : but he could make nothing of her evasive
replies, and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily ;
adding, however, a solemn warning, that if she were so insane
as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds
of relationship between herself and him.
CHAPTER XII.
While Miss Linton moped about the park and garden, always
silent, and almost always in tears ; and her brother shut himself
up among books that he never opened — wearying, I guessed,
with a continual vague expectation that Catherine, repenting her
conduct, would come of her own accord to ask pardon, and seek
a reconciliation — and she fasted pertinaciously, under the idea,
probably, that at every meal, Edgar was ready to choke for her
absence, and pride alone held him from running to cast himself
at her feet : I went about my household duties, convinced that
the Grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged
in my body. I wasted no condolences on Miss, nor any expos-
tulations on my mistress ; nor did I pay much attention to the
sighs of my master, who yearned to hear his lady's name, since
he might not hear her voice. I determined they should come
about as they pleased for me ; and though it was a tiresomely
slow process, I began to rejoice at length in a faint dawn of its
progress : as I thought at first.
Il8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Mrs. Linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and having
finished the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired a renewed
supply, and a basin of gruel, for she beheved she was dying.
That I set down as a speech meant for Edgar's ears ; I beUeved
no such thing, so I kept it to myself and brought her some tea
and dry toast. She ate and drank eagerly ; and sank back on
her pillow again clenching her hands and groaning. " Oh, I
will die, " she exclaimed, " since no one cares anything about me.
I wish I had not taken that. " Then a good while after I heard
her murmur, " No, I'll not die — he'd be glad — he does not love
me at all — he would never miss me ! "
" Did you want anything, ma'am? " I inquired, still preserving
my external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and
strange exaggerated manner.
" What is that apathetic being doing? " she demanded, pushing
the thick entangled locks from her wasted face.''Has he fallen
into a lethargy, or is he dead? "
" Neither, " replied I; " if you mean Mr. Linton. He's
tolerably well, I think, though his studies occupy him rather
more than they ought : he is continually among his books, since
he has no other society. "
I should not have spoken so, if I had known her true con-
•dition, but I could not get rid of the notion that she acted a
part of her disorder.
" Among his books ! " she cried, confounded. " And I dying !
I on the brink of the grave ! My God ! does he know how I'm
altered? " continued she, staring at her reflection in a mirror
hanging against the opposite wall, " Is that Catherine Linton !
He imagines me in a pet — in play, perhaps. Cannot you in-
form him that it is frightful earnest? Nelly, if it be not too late,
as soon as I learn how he feels, I'll choose between these two ;
either to starve at once — that would be no punishment unless he
had a heart— or to recover, and leave the country. Are you
speaking the truth about him now? Take care. Is he actually
so utterly indifferent for my life ? "
" Why, ma'am, " I answered, " the master has no idea of your
being deranged ; and of course he does not fear that you will let
yourself die of hunger. "
" You think not? Cannot you tell him I will? " she returned.
" Persuade him ! speak of your own mind : say you are certain
I will! "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I 19
" No, you forget, Mrs. Linton, " I suggested, " that you have
eaten some food with a rehsh this evening, and to-morrow you
will perceive its good effects. "
" If I were only sure it would kill him, " she interrupted, " I'd
kill myself directly ! These three awful nights, I've never closed
my lids — and oh, I've been tormented ! I've been haunted, Nelly !
But I begin to fancy you don't like me. How strange ! I thought,
though everybody hated and despised each other, they could not
avoid loving me. And they have all turned to enemies in a few
hours : they have, I'm positive ; the people here. How dreary to
meet death, surrounded by their cold faces ! Isabella, terrified
and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be so dreadful to
watch Catherine go. And Edgar standing solemnly by to see it
over ; then offering prayers of thanks to God for restoring peace
to his house, and going back to his books ! What in the name of
all that feels has he to do with books, when I am dying? "
She could not bear the notion which I had put into her head
of Mr. Linton's philosophical resignation. Tossing about, she
increased her feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the
pillow with her teeth ; then raising herself up all burning,
desired that I would open the window\ We were in the middle
of winter, the wind blew strong from the north-east, and I
objected. Both the expressions flitting over her face, and the
changes of her moods, began to alarm me terribly ; and brought
to my recollection her former illness, and the doctor's injunction
that she should not be crossed. A minute previously she was
violent ; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal
to obey her, she seemed to find childish diversion in puUing the
feathers from the rents she had just made, and ranging them
on the sheet according to their different species " : her mind had
strayed to other associations.
" That's a turkey's, " she murmured to herself; " and this is a
wild duck's ; and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they put pigeons'
feathers in the pillows — no wonder I couldn't die ! Let me
take care to throw it on the floor when I lie down. And here is
a moor-cock's ; and this — I should know it among a thousand —
it's a lapwing's. Bonny bird ; wheeling over our heads in the
middle of the moor. It wanted to get to its nest, for the clouds
had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. This feather
was picked up from the heath, the bird w-as not shot : we saw
its nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. Heathcliff set a
129 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
trap over it, and the old ones dare not come. I made him
promise he'd never shoot a lapwing after that, and he didn't.
Yes, here are more! Did he shoot my lapwings, Nelly? Are
they red, any of them ! Let me look. "
" Give over with that baby-work! " I interrupted, dragging
the pillow away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for
she was removing its contents by handfuls. " Lie down and
shut your eyes : you're wandering. There's a mess ! The down
is flying about like snow. "
I went here and there collecting it.
" I see in you, Nelly, " she continued dreamily, " an aged
woman : you have grey hair and bent shoulders. This bed is
the fairy cave under Peniston Crag, and you are gathering elf-
bolts to hurt our heifers ; pretending, while I am near, that they
are only locks of wool. That's what you'll come to fifty years
hence : I know you are not so now. I'm not wandering : you're
mistaken, or else I should believe you really were that withered
hag, and I should think I 7vas under Peniston Crag ; and I'm
conscious it's night, and there are two candles on the table
making the black press shine like jet. "
" The black press? where is that? " I asked. " You are talk-
ing in your sleep ! "
" It's against the wall, as it always is, " she replied. " It does
appear odd — I see a face in it ! "
" There's no press in the room, and never was, " said I, resuming
my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch her.
" Don't j < 3?i; see that face? " she inquired, gazing earnestly at
the mirror.
And say what I could, I was incapable of making her compre-
hend it to be her own ; so I rose and covered it with a shawl.
" It's behind there still ! " she pursued anxiously. " And it
stirred. Who is it? I hope it will not come out when you are gone !
Oh ! Nelly, the room is haunted ! I'm afraid of being alone ! "
I took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed : for a
succession of shudders convulsed her frame, and she would keep
straining her gaze towards the glass.
" There's nobody here ! " I insisted. " It was yourself, Mrs,
Linton : you knew it a while since. "
" Myself! " she gasped, " and the clock is striking twelve!
It's true, then ! that's dreadful ! "
Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 121
eyes. I attempted to steal to the door with an intention of
calling her husband ; but I was summoned back by a piercing
shriek — the shawl had dropped from the frame.
''Why, what is the matter ? " cried I.''Who is coward now ?
Wake up ! That is the glass — the mirror, Mrs. Linton ; and
you see yourself in it, and there am I too, by your side. "
Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the horror
gradually passed from her countenance ; its paleness gave place
to a glow of shame.
" Oh, dear! I thought I was at home, " she sighed. " I
thought I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Height?.
Because I'm weak, my brain got confused, and I screamed un-
consciously. Don't say anything ; but stay with me. I dread
sleeping : my dreams appal me. "
" A sound sleepwould do you good, ma'am, " I answered ; " and
I hope this suffering will prevent your trying starving again. "
" Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house ! " she
went on bitterly, wringing her hands. " And that wind sound-
ing in the firs by the lattice. Do let me feel it — it comes straight
down the moor — do let me have one breath ! "
To pacify her, I held the casement ajar a few seconds. A
cold blast rushed through ; I closed it, and returned to my post.
She lay still now, her face bathed in tears. Exhaustion of body
had entirely subdued her spirit : our fiery Catherine was no
better than a wailing child.
" How long is it since I shut myself in here? " she asked,
suddenly reviving.
" It was Monday evening, " I replied, " and this is Thursday
night, or rather Friday morning, at present. "
" What! of the same week? " she exclaimed. " Only that
brief time? "
" Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-
temper, " observed I.
" Well, it seems a weary number of hours, " she muttered
doubtfully : " it must be more. I remember being in the parlour
after they had quarrelled, and Edgar being cruelly provoking,
and me running into this room desperate. As soon as ever I
had barred the door, utter blackness overwhelmed me, " and I fell
on the floor. I couldn't explain to Edgar how certain I felt of
having a fit, or going raging mad, if he persisted in teasing me !
I had no command of tongue, or brain, and he did not guess my
122 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
agony, perhaps : it barely left me sense to try to escape from him
and his voice. Before I recovered sufficiently to see and hear, it
began to be dawn, and, Nelly, I'll tell you what I thought, and
what has kept recurring and recurring till I feared for my reason.
I thought as I lay there, with my head against that table leg,
and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window,
that I was enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home ; and my
heart ached with some great grief which, just waking, I could
not recollect. I pondered, and worried myself to discover what
it could be, and, most strangely, the whole last seven years of
my life grew a blank ! I did not recall that they had been at all.
I was a child ; my father was just buried, and my misery arose
from the separation that Hindley had ordered between me and
Heathcliff. I was laid alone, for the first time ; and, rousing
from a dismal doze after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to
push the panels aside : it struck the table-top ! I swept it along
the carpet, and then memory burst in : my late anguish was
swallowed in a paroxysm of despair. I cannot say why I felt so
wildly wretched : it must have been temporary derangement ; for
there is scarcely cause. But, supposing at tv/elve years old I had
been wrenched from the Heights, and every early association, and
my all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, and been converted
at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the lady of Thrushcross Grange,
and the wife of a stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth,
from what had been my world. You may fancy a glimpse of the
abyss where I grovelled ! Shake your head as you will, Nelly,
you have helped to unsettle me ! You should have spoken to
Edgar, indeed you should, and compelled him. to leave me quiet !
Oh, I'm burning ! I wish I were out of doors ! I wish I were
a girl again, half savage and hardy, and free ; and laughing at
injuries, not maddening under them ! Why am I so changed?
why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words ?
I'm sure I should be myself were I once among the heather on
those hills. Open the window again wide : fasten it open !
Quick, why don't you move? "
" Because I won't give you your death of cold, " I answered.
" You won't give me a chance of life, you mean, " she said
sullenly. " However, I'm not helpless, yet : I'll open it myself. "
And sliding from the bed before I could hinder her, she crossed
the room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out,
careless of the frosty air that cut about her shoulders as keen as
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 23
a knife. I entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire.
But I soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she
was delirious, I became convinced by her subsequent actions and
ravings). There was no moon, and everything beneath lay in
misty darkness : not a light gleamed from any house, far or
near — all had been extinguished long ago ; and those at Wuther-
ing Heights were never visible — still she asserted she caught their
shining.
" Look ! " she cried eagerly, " that's my room with the candle
in it, and the trees swaying before it : and the other candle is in
Joseph's garret. Joseph sits up late, doesn't he ? He's waiting
till I come home that he may lock the gate. Well, he'll wait a
while yet. It's a rough journey, and a sad heart to travel it ;
and we must pass by Gimmerton Kirk, to go that journey !
We've braved its ghosts often together, and dared each other to
stand among the graves and ask them to come. But, Heathcliff,
if I dare you now, will you venture ? If you do, I'll keep you.
I'll not lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet
deep, and throw the church down over me, but I won't rest till
you are with me. I never will ! "
She paused, and resumed with a strange smile. " He's con-
sidering — he'd rather I'd come to him ! Find a way, then ! not
through that kirkyard. You are slow ! Be content, you always
followed me ! "
Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was planning
how I could reach something to wrap about her, without quitting
my hold of herself (for I could not trust her alone by the gaping
lattice), when, to my consternation, I heard the rattle of the
door-handle, and Mr. Linton entered. He had only then come
from the library ; and, in passing through the lobby, had noticed
our talking and been attracted by curiosity, or fear, to examine
what it signified, at that late hour.
" Oh, sir! " I cried, checking the exclamation risen to his
lips at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of
the chamber. " My poor mistress is ill, and she quite masters
me : I cannot manage her at all ; pray, come and persuade her
to go to bed. Forget your anger, for she's hard to guide any
■way but her own. "
''Catherine ill ? " he said, hastening to us.''Shut the window,
Ellen! Catherine! why "
He was silent. The haggardness of Mrs. Linton's appearance
124 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
smote him speechless, and he could only glance from her to me
in horrified astonishment.
" She's been fretting here, " I continued, " and eating scarcely
anything, and never complaining ; she would admit none of us
till this evening, and so we couldn't inform you of her state as
we were not aware of it ourselves ; but it is nothing. "
I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly ; the master
frowned. " It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean? he said sternly.
" You shall account more clearly for keeping me ignorant of
this! " And he took his wife in his arms, and looked at her
with anguish.
At first she gave him no glance of recognition ; he was in-
visible to her abstracted gaze. The delirium was not fixed, how-
ever ; having weaned her eyes from contemplating the outer
darkness, by degrees she centred her attention on him, and
discovered who it was that held her.
" Ah! you are come, are you, Edgar Linton? " she said,
with angry animation. " You are one of those things that are
ever found when least wanted, and when you are wanted, never !
I suppose we shall have plenty of lamentations now — I see we
shall — but they can't keep me from my narrow home out yonder :
my resting-place, where I'm bound before spring is over ! There
it is : not among the Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof, but
in the open air, with a head-stone ; and you may please yourself,
whether you go to them or come to me ! "
" Catherine, what have you done? " commenced the master,
" Am I nothing to you any more? Do you love that wretch
Heath "
" Hush! " cried Mrs. Linton. " Hush, this moment! You
mention that name and I end the matter instantly, by a spring
from the window ! What you touch at present you may have ;
but my soul will be on that hill-top before you lay hands on
me again. I don't want you, Edgar : I'm past wanting you.
Return to your books. I'm glad you possess a consolation, for
all you had in me is gone. "
" Her mind wanders, sir, " I interposed. " She has been talk-
ing nonsense the whole evening ; but let her have quiet, and
proper attendance, and she'll rally. Hereafter, we must be
cautious how we vex her. "
" I desire no further advice from you, " answered Mr. Linton.
" You knew your mistress's nature, and you encouraged me to
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
125
harass her. And not to give me one hint of how she has been
these three days ! It was heartless ! Months of sickness could
not cause such a change ! "
I began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for
another's wicked waywardness. " I knew Mrs. Linton's nature
to be headstrong and domineering, " cried I ; " but I didn't
know that you wished to foster her fierce temper ! I didn't
know that, to humour her, I should wink at Mr. HeathclifF. I
performed the duty of a faithful servant in telling you, and I
have got a faithful servant's wage's ! Well, it will teach me to
be careful next time. Next time you may gather intelligence for
yourself! "
" The next time you bring a tale to me, you shall quit my
service, Ellen Dean, " he replied.
" You'd rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then, Mr.
Linton? " said L " Heathcliff has your permission to come a
courting to miss, and to drop in at every opportunity your
absence offers, on purpose to poison the mistress against you ?'
Confused as Catherine was, her wits were alert at applying
our conversation.
'^Ah! Nelly has played traitor, " she exclaimed passionately.
Nelly is my hidden enemy. You witch ! So you do seek elf-
bolts to hurt us ! Let me go, and I'll make her rue ! I'll make
her howl a recantation ! "
A maniac's fury kindled under her brows ; she struggled des-
perately to disengage herself from Linton's arms. I felt no in-
clination to tarry the event ; and, resolving to seek medical aid
on my own responsibility, I quitted the chamber.
In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a
oridle hook is driven into the wall, I saw something white moved
irregularly, evidently by another agent than the wind. Not-
withstanding my hurry, I stayed to examine it, lest ever after
[ should have the conviction impressed on my imagination that
t was a creature of the other world. My surprise and perplexity
.vere great on discovering, by touch more than vision. Miss
Isabella's springer, Fanny, suspended by a handkerchief, and
learly at its last gasp. I quickly released the animal, and lifted
t into the garden. I had seen it follow its mistress upstairs
,vhen she went to bed ; and wondered much how it could have
jot out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
vVhile untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me that I
126 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
repeatedly caught the beat of horses'feet galloping at some
distance ; but there were such a number of things to occupy my
reflections that I hardly gave the circumstance a thought :
though it was a strange sound, in that place, at two o'clock
in the morning.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to
see a patient in the village as I came up the street ; and my
account of Catherine Linton's malady induced him to accompany
me back immediately. He was a plain rough man ; and he
made no scruple to speak his doubts of her surviving this second
attack ; unless she were more submissive to his directions than
she had shown herself before.
" Nelly Dean, " said he, " I can't help fancying there's an
extra cause for this. What has there been to do at the Grange ?
We've odd reports up here. A stout, hearty lass like Catherine,
does not fall ill for a trifle ; and that sort of people should not
either. It's hard work bringing them through fevers, and such
things. How did it begin? "
" The master will inform you, " I answered; " but you are
acquainted with the Earnshaws'violent dispositions, and Mrs.
Linton caps them all. I may say this ; it commenced in a
quarrel. She was struck during a tempest of passion with a kind
of fit. That's her account, at least ; for she flew off in the height
of it, and locked herself up. Afterwards, she refused to eat, and
now she alternately raves and remains in a half dream ; know-
ing those about her, but having her mind filled with all sorts
of strange ideas and illusions. "
" Mr. Linton will be sorry? " observed Kenneth interrogatively.
" Sorry? he'll break his heart should anything happen 1 " J
replied. " Don't alarm him more than necessary. "
" Well, I told him to beware, " said my companion ; " and he
must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning ! Hasn't
he been intimate with Jvlr. Keathcliff, lately? "
" Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grange, " answered I,
" though more on the strength of the mistress having known
him when a boy, than because the master likes his company.
At present, he's discharged from the trouble of calling ; owing
to some presumptuous aspirations after Miss Linton which he
manifested. I hardly think he'll be taken in again. "
" And docs Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on him? " was
the doctor's next question.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 27
" I'm not in her confidence, " returned I, reluctant to continue
the subject
" No, she's a sly one, " he remarked, shaking his head. " She
keeps her own counsel ! But she's a real little fool. I have
it from good authority, that, last night (and a pretty night it
was !) she and Heathcliff were walking in the plantation at
the back of your house, above two hours ; and he pressed her
not to go in again, but just mount his horse and away with him !
My informant said she could only put him off by pledging her
word of honour to be prepared on their first meeting after that :
when it was to be, he didn't hear ; but you urge Mr. Linton to
look sharp ! "
This news filled me with fresh fears ; I outstripped Kenneth,
and ran most of the way back. The little dog was yelping in
the garden yet. I spared a minute to open the gate for it, but
instead of going to the house door, it coursed up and down
snuffing the grass, and would have escaped to " the road, had I
not seized and conveyed it in with me. On ascending to
Isabella's room, my suspicions were confirmed : it was empty.
Had I been a few hours sooner. Airs. Linton's illness might have
arrested her rash step. But what could be done now ? There
was a bare possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly.
/ could not pursue them, however ; and I dare not rouse the
family, and fill the place with confusion ; still less unfold the
business to my master, absorbed as he was in his present cala-
mity, and having no heart to spare for a second grief! I saw
nothing for it but to hold my tongue, and suffer matters to take
their course ; and Kenneth being arrived, I went with a badly
composed countenance to announce him, Catherine lay in a
troubled sleep : her husband had succeeded in soothing the
excess of frenzy : he now hung over her pillow, watching every
shade, and every change of her painfully expressive features.
The doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hope-
fully to him of its having a favourable termination, if we could
only preserve around her perfect and constant tranquillity. To
me, he signified the threatening danger was not so much death,
as permanent alienation of intellect.
I did not close my ej'es that night, nor did Mr. ^ Linton :
indeed, we never went to bed ; and the servants were all up long
before the usual hour, moving through the house with stealthy
tread, and exchanging whispers as they encountered each other
128 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
in their vocations. Every one was active, but Miss Isabella ;
and they began to remark how sound she slept : her brother, too,
asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient for her presence,
and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her sister-in-law.
I trembled lest he should send me to call her ; but I was spared
the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight. One of the
maids, a thoughtless girl, who had been on an early errand to
Gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open mouthed, and dashed
into the chamber, crying —
" Oh, dear, dear! What mun we have next? Jslaster,
master, our young lady "
" Hold your noise ! " cried I hastily, enraged at her clamorous
manner.
" Speak lower, Mary — What is the matter? " said Mr. Linton.
''What ails your young lady ? "
" She's gone, she's gone ! Yon'Heathcliff's run off wi'her ! "
gasped the girl.
" That is not true! " exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation.
" It cannot be: how has the idea entered your head? Ellen
Dean, go and seek her. It is incredible : it cannot be. "
As he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then repeated
his demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
" Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here, " she
stammered, " and he asked whether we weren't in trouble at the
Grange. I thought he meant for missis's sickness, so I answered,
yes. Then says he,'There's somebody gone after'em, I guess ?'
I stared. He saw I knew nought about it, and he told how a
gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse's shoe fastened
at a blacksmith's shop, two miles out of Gimmerton, not very
long after midnight ! and how the blacksmith's lass had got up
to spy who they were : she knew them both directly. And she
noticed the man — Heathcliff it was, she felt certain : nob'dy
could mistake him, besides — put a sovereign in her father's hand
for payment. The lady had a cloak about her face ; but having
desired a sup of water, while she drank, it fell back, and she saw
her very plain. Heathcliff held both bridles as they rode on,
and they set their faces from the village, and went as fast as the
rough roads would let them. The lass said nothing to her father,
but she told it all over Gimmerton this morning. "
I ran and peeped, for form's sake, into Isabella's room ; con-
firming, when I returned, the servant's statement. Mr. Linton
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 29
had resumed his seat by the bed ; on my re-entrance, he raised
his eyes read the meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped
them without giving an order, or uttering a word
" Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringino-
her back? I inquired. " How should we do ? " " *
''She went of her own accord. " answered the master; " she
had a nght to go if she pleased. Trouble me no more about
her. Hereafter she is only my sister in name : not because I
disown her, but because she has disowned me "
And that was all he said on the subject : he did not make
a single inquiry further, or mention her in any way, except
directing me to send what property she had in the house to her
tresh home, wherever it was. when I knew it.
CHAPTER Xni.
For two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two
months. Mrs. Linton encountered and conquered the worst shock
of what was denominated a brain fever. No mother could have
•nursed an only child more devotedly than Edgar tended her
Uay and night he was watching, and patiently enduring all the
annoyances that irritable nerves and a shaken reason could
inflict ; and, though Kenneth remarked that what he saved from
the grave would only recompense his care by forming the source
of constant future anxiety-in fact, that his health and stren-th
were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity-he
knew no hmits in gratitude and joy when Catherine's life was
declared out of danger ; and hour after hour he would sit beside
her, tracing the gradual return to bodily health, and flatterin*
his too sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would
settle back to its right balance also, and she would soon be
entirely her former self.
The first time she left her chamber was at the commencement
of the following March. Mr. Linton had put on her pillow, in
the morning, a handful of golden crocuses ; her eye, long stran < rer
to any gleam of pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone
delighted as she gathered them eagerly together
^^ " These are the earliest flowers at the Heights, " she exclaimed.
Ihey remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and
E
130 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
nearly melted snow. Edgar, is there not a south wind, and is
not the snow almost gone ? "
" The snow is quite gone down here, darhng, " rephed her
husband ;''and I only see two white spots on the whole range
of moors : the sky is blue, and the larks are singing, and the
becks and brooks are all brim full, Catherine, last spring at
this time, I was longing to have you under this roof, now, I wish
you were a mile or two up those hills : the air blows so sweetly,
I feel that it would cure you. "
" I shall never be there but once more, " said the invalid;
" and then you'll leave me, and I shall remain for ever. Next
spring you'll long again to have me under this roof, and you'll
look back and think you were happy to-day. "
Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer
her by the fondest words ; but, vaguely regarding the flowers,
she let the tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks
unheeding. We knew she was really better, and, therefore,
decided that long confinement to a single place produced much
of this despondency, and it might be partially removed by a
change of scene. The master told me to light a fire in the many-
weeks-deserted parlour, and to set an easy-chair in the sunshine
by the window ; and then he brought her down, and she sat a
long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected, revived
by the objects round her : which, though familiar, were free from
the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber. By
evening, she seemed greatly exhausted ; yet no arguments could
persuade her to return to that apartment, and I had to arrange
the parlour sofa for her bed, till another room could be prepared.
To obviate the fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs,
we fitted up this, where you lie at present : on the same floor
with the parlour ; and she was soon strong enough to move from
one to the other, leaning on Edgar's arm. Ah, I thought myself
she might recover, so waited on as she was. And there was
double cause to desire it, for on her existence depended that
of another : we cherished the hope that in a little while, Mr.
Linton's heart would be gladdened, and his lands secured from
a stranger's gripe, by the birth of an heir.
I should mention that Isabella sent to her brother, some six
weeks from her departure, a short note, announcing her marriage
with Heathcliff. It appeared dry and cold ; but at the bottom
was dotted in with pencil an obscure apology, and an entreaty
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 13I
for kind remembrance and reconciliation, if her proceeding had
offended him : asserting that she could not help it then, and being
done, she had now no power to repeal it. Linton did not reply-
to this, I believe ; and, in a fortnight more, I got a long letter
which I considered odd, coming from the pen of a bride just out
of the honeymoon. I'll read it : for I keep it yet. Any relic of
the dead is precious, if they were valued living.
Dear Ellen, it begins,—
I came last night to Wuthering Heights, and heard, for the
first time, that Catherine has been, and is yet, very ill. I must
not write to her, I suppose, and my brother is either too angry or
too distressed to answer what I sent him. Still, I must write to
somebody, and the only choice left me is you.
Inform Edgar that I'd give the world to see his face again —
that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four
hours after I left it, and is there at this moment, full of warm
feelings for him, and Catherine ! / ca7it follow it, though —
(those words are underlined) they need not expect me, and they
may di*aw what conclusions they please ; taking care, however,
to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient affection.
The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I want to
ask you two questions : the first is, — How did you contrive to
preserve the common sympathies of human nature when you
resided here? I cannot recognise any sentiment which those
around share with me.
The second question, I have great interest in ; it is this — Is
Mr. Heathcliff a man? If so, is he mad? And if not, is he a
devil? I shan't tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but, I
beseech you to explain, if you can, what I have married : that is,
when you call to see me ; and you must call, Ellen, very soon.
Don't write, but come, and bring me something from Edgar.
Now, you shall hear how I have been received in my new home,
as I am led to imagine the Heights will be. It is to amuse
myself that I dwell on such subjects as the lack of external com-
forts: they never occupy my thoughts, except at the moment
when I miss them. I should laugh and dance for joy, if I found
their absence was the total of my miseries, and the rest was an
unnatural dream !
The sun set behind the Grange, as we turned 6n to the moors;
by that, I judged it to be six o'clock; and my companion halted
132 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
half-an-hour, to inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably,
the place itself, as well as he could ; so it was dark when we dis-
mounted in the paved yard of the farm-house, and your old fellow-
servant, Joseph, issued out to receive us by the light of a dip
candle. He did it with a courtesy that redounded to his credit.
His first act was to elevate his torch to a level with my face,
squint malignantly, project his under lip, and turn away. Then
he took the two horses, and led them into the stables; reappear-
ing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in an
ancient castle.
Heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and I entered the kitchen
— a dingy, untidy hole ; I dare say you would not know it, it is
so changed since it was in your charge. By the fire stood a
ruffianly child, strong in limb and dirty in garb, with a look of
Catherine in his eyes and about his mouth.
" This is Edgar's legal nephew, " I reflected — " mine in a
manner ; I must shake hands, and — yes — I nmst kiss him. It
is right to establish a good understanding at the beginning, "
I approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said —
" How do you do, my dear ? "
He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
" Shall you and I be friends, Hareton ? " was my next essay at
conversation.
An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not
" frame off, " rewarded my perseverance.
" Hey, Throttler, lad ! " whispered the little wretch, rousing a
half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a corner. " Now, wilt thou
be ganging? " he asked authoritatively.
Love for my life urged a compliance ; I stepped over the
threshold to wait till the others should enter. Mr. Heathcliff
was nowhere visible ; and Joseph, whom I followed to the
stables, and requested to accompany me in, after staring and
muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and replied —
" Mim ! mim ! mim ! Did iver Christian body hear aught
like it? Minching un'munching! How can I tell whet ye
say? "
" I say, I wish you to come with me into the house ! " I cried,
thinking him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
" None o'me! I getten summut else to do, " he answered,
and continued his work ; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile,
and surveying my dress and countenance (the former a great
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I33
deal too fine, but the latter. I'm sure, as sad as he could desire)
with sovereign contempt.'
I walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another
door, at which I took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some
more civil servant might show himself. After a short suspense
- H was opened by a tall, gaunt man, without neckerchief, and
otherwise extremely slovenly ; his features were lost in masses of
haggy hair that hung on his shoulders ; and Jus eyes, too. were
hke a ghostly Catherines with ail their beauty annihilated.
are yout''''°'''''"'^ "'''''''''" ^'^'" ^^^^^^ SnmlY- " Who
•'My name w. Isabella Linton. " I replied. " You've seen me
before sir. I'm lately married to Mr. Heathcliff. and he has
, brought me here-I suppose by your permission. "
hungry wolf! "''''''^''^'" ^^'^'''''^^^ " ^^^'^^^- " ^^ ^^^- -
<'Yes-we came just now. " I said ; " but he left me by the
kitchen door , and when I would have gone in. vour little bov
ot/ltlir:. "'" ^ ^'^ ^^^^^'-^^^^^-htened m; off by the hdp'
" It's welUhe hellish villain has kept his word ! " growled mv
fu are host, searching the darkness beyond me in ex^ecTa fon o'f
d^covering Heathcliff; and then he indulged in a Li oquy of
•S'Tec -^^r " ^'-'" -'''-^ -- ^- " "
indined t^slin " " ^^'tf''?'''° " ^ ^ " ^^^ "'^^'^ " ^ -^^ ^'-o^^t
inchned to slip away before he finished cursing, but ere I could
Tdto The "'° "''^ °^'^ " ^ " ^^ ^ "'-^ ^^-^ -^ - " iten d
the door. There was a great fire, and that was all the li^ht in
e one " hT " "''"'°^'^°°^''^^ S--- - --form gre/; and
he once brilhan pewter dishes, which used to attract my Tze
S andTus^'l'''^^°°'7':'''''''''°^^^ " ^'^ >'- created byfar-
conducted J'n.ight call the maid and
ansrr He ul^L H ^^-'^r/ " "''■ ^^^ " ^^^^'^^ vouchsafed no
answer. He walked up and down, with his hands in his Docl-et.
again.
^.^.^,,,^ iaiiji again.
leslTeL^^'-^'" " " " ^ "'" f'^'^'"'^^ " ^^ ^^^^'" ^ particularly cheer-
134
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
containing the only people I loved on earth ; and there might as
well be the Atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles : I
could not overpass them ! I questioned with myself— where
must I turn for comfort? and— mind you don't tell Edgar, or
Catherine— above every sorrow beside, this rose pre-eminent :
despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally against
Heathcliff ! I had sought shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost
gladly, because I was secured by that arrangement from living
Slone with him; but he knew the people we were coming
amongst, and he did not fear their intermeddling.
I sat and thought a doleful time : the clock struck eight, and
nine, and still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on
his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejacu-
lation forced itself out at intervals. I listened to detect a
woman's voice in the house, and filled the interim with wild
regrets and dismal anticipations, which, at last, spoke audibly in'
irrepressible sighing and weeping. I was not aware how openly
I grieved, till Earnshaw halted opposite, in his measured walk,
an'd gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise. Taking
advantage of his recovered attention, I exclaimed—
" I'm tired with my journey, and I want to go to bed!
Where is the maid-servant? Direct me to her, as she won't
come to me ! "
" We have none, " he answered ; " you must wait on yourself!'
''Where must I sleep, then ? " I sobbed ; I was beyond regard-
ing self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.
" Joseph will show you Heathcliff's chamber, " said he ; " open
that door— he's in there. "
I was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added
in the strangest tone —
" Be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your bolt— don't
omit it ! "
" Well! " Isaid. " But why, Mr. Earnshaw? " Ididnotrehsh
the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with Heathcliff.
''Look here ! " he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a curiously
constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife attached
to the barrel. " That's a great tempter to a desperate man, is
it not? I cannot resist going up with this every night, and
trying his door. If once I find it open he's done for ! I do it
invariably, even though the minute before I have been recalling
a hundred reasons that should make me refrain : it is some devil
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 13$
that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killing him. You
fight against that devil for love as long as you may ; when the
time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall save him ! "
I surveyed the weapon inquisitively. A hideous notion struck
me : how powerful I should be possessing such an instrument !
I took it from his hand, and touched the blade. He looked
astonished at the expression my face assumed during a brief
second : it was not horror, it was covetousness. He snatched the
pistol back, jealously ; shut the knife, and returned it to its
concealment.
" I don't care if you tell him, " said he. " Put him on his
guard, and watch for him. You know the terms we are on, I
see : his danger does not shock you. "
" What has Heathcliff done to you? " I asked. " In what
has he wronged you, to warrant this appalling hatred ?
Wouldn't it be wiser to bid him quit the house ? "
" No ! " thundered Earnshaw, " should he offer to leave me,
he's a dead man : persuade him to attempt it, and you are a
murderess ! Am I to lose all, without a chance of retrieval ? Is
Hareton to be a beggar ? Oh, damnation ! I will have it back :
and I'll have his gold too ; and then his blood ; and hell shall
have his soul ! It will be ten times blacker with that guest than
ever it was before ! "
You've acquainted me, Ellen, with your old master's habits.
He is clearly on the verge of madness : he was so last night at
least. I shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant's
ill-bred moroseness as comparatively agreeable. He now re-
commenced his moody walk, and I raised the latch, and escaped
into the kitchen. Joseph was bending over the fire, peering into
a large pan that swung above it ; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal
stood on the settle close by. The contents of the pan began to
boil, and he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl ; I conjec-
tured that this preparation was probably for our supper, and, being
hungry, I resolved it should be eatable ; so, crying out sharply,
" ril make the porridge ! " I removed the vessel out of his reach,
and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit. " Mr. Earn-
shaw, " I continued, " directs me to wait on myself: I will. I'm
not going to act the lady among you, for fear I should starve. "
" Gooid Lord ! " he muttered, sitting down, and stroking his
ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle. " If there's to be
fresh ortherings — ^just when I getten used to two maisters, if I mun
136 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
hev a mistress set o'er my heead, it's like time to be flitting. I
niver did think to see t'day that I mud lave th'owld place— but
I doubt it's nigh at hand ! "
This lamentation drew no notice from me : I went briskly to
work, sighing to remember a period when it would have been all
merry fun ; but compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance.
It racked me to recall past happiness and the greater peril there
was of conjuring up its apparition, the quicker the thible ran
round, and the faster the handfuls of meal fell into the water.
Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indignation.
" Thear! " he ejaculated. " Hareton, thou willn't sup thy
porridge to-neeght ; they'll be naught but lumps as big as my
neive. Thear, agean ! I'd fling in bowl un all, if I wer ye !
There, pale t'guilp off, un'then ye'U hae done wi't. Bang,
bang. It's a mercy t'bothom isn't deaved out ! "
It was rather a rough mess, I own, when poured into the basins ;
four had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new milk was
brought from the dairy, which Hareton seized and commenced
drinking and spilling from the expansive lip. I expostulated, and
desired that he should have his in a mug ; affirming that I could
not taste the liquid treated so dirtily. The old cynic chose to
be vastly offended at this nicety ; assuring me, repeatedly, that
" the barn was every bit as good " as I, " and every bit as
wollsome, " and wondering how I could fashion to be so conceited.
Meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking ; and glowered
up at me defyingly, as he slavered into the jug.
" I shall have my supper in another room, " I said. " Have
you no place you call a parlour? "
" Parlour / " he echoed sneeringly, " parlour ! Nay,'we've noa
parlours. If yah dunnut loike wer company, there's maister's ;
un'if yah dunnut loike maister, there's us. "
" Then I shall go upstairs, " I answered ; " show me a chamber. "
I put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch some more
milk. With great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded me
in my ascent : we mounted to the garrets ; he opened a door,
now and then, to look into the apartments we passed.
" Here's a rahm, " he said, at last, flinging back a cranky board
on hinges. " It's weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in. There's
a pack o'com i " t'corner, thear, meeterly clane ; if ye're feared o'
muckying yer grand silk does, spread yer hankerchiro't'topon't. "
The " rahm " was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I 37
malt and grain ; various sacks of which articles were piled around,
leaving a wide, bare space in the middle.
" Why, man! " I exclaimed, facing him angrily, " this is not
a place to sleep in. I wish to see my bed-room. "
" Bed-rujne / " he repeated, in a tone of mockery. " Yah's see
all t'bed-ritmes thear is — yon's mine. "
He pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first
in being more naked about the walls, and having a large low,
curtainless bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt at one end.
" What do I want with yours? " I retorted. " I suppose Mr.
Heathcliff does not lodge at the top of the house, does he? "
" Oh ! it's Maister Hathecliff's ye're wanting? " cried he, as if
making a new discovery. " Couldn't ye ha'said soa, at onst?
un then, I mud ha'telled ye, baht all this wark, that that's just
one ye cannut see — he alias keeps it locked, un nob'dy iver
mells on't but hisseln. "
" You've a nice house, Joseph, " I could not refrain from
observing, " and pleasant inmates ; and I think the concentrated
essence of all the madness in the world took up its abode in my
brain the day I linked my fate with theirs ! However, that is
not to the present purpose — there are other rooms. For Heaven's
sake be quick, and let me settle somewhere ! "
He made no reply to this adjuration ; only plodding doggedly
down the wooden steps, and halting before an apartment which,
from that halt and the superior quality of its furniture, I con-
jectured to be the best one. There was a carpet : a good one,
but the pattern was obliterated by dust ; a fireplace hung with
cut paper, dropping to pieces ; a handsome oak bedstead with
ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material and modern
make ; but they had evidently experienced rough usage : the
valances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron
rod supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the
drapery to trail upon the floor. The chairs were also damaged,
many of them severely ; and deep indentations deformed the panels
of the walls. I was endeavouring to gather resolution for enter-
ing and taking possession, when my fool of a guide announced,
" This here is t'maister's. " My supper by this time was cold, my
appetite gone, and my patience exhausted. I insisted " on being
provided instantly with a place of refuge, and means of repose.
" Whear the divil? " began the religious elder. " The Lord
bless us ! The Lord forgie us ! Whear the hell wold ye gang ?
138 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ye marred, wearisome nowt ! Ye've seen all but Hareton's bit of a
cham'er. There's not another hoile to lig down in i'th'hahse ! "
I was so vexed, I flung my tray and its contents on the ground ;
and then seated myself at the stairs-head, hid my face in my
hands, and cried.
" Ech ! ech ! " exclaimed Joseph. " Weel done, Miss Cathy !
weel done. Miss Cathy ! Howsiver, t'maister sail just tum'le o'er
them brocken pots ; un'then we's hear summut ; we's hear how
it's to be. Gooid-for-naught madling ! ye desarve pining fro'
this to Churstmas, flinging t'precious gifts o'God under fooit i'
yer flaysome rages ! But, I'm mista'en if ye show yer sperrit lang.
Will Hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye? I nobbutwish
he may catch ye i'that plisky, I nobbut wish he may. "
And so he went on scolding to his den beneath, taking the
candle with him ; and I remained in the dark. The period of
reflection succeeding this silly action, compelled me to admit
the necessity of smothering my pride and choking my wrath,
and bestirring myself to remove its effects. An unexpected aid
presently appeared in the shape of Throttler, whom I now re-
cognised as a son of our old Skulker : it had spent its whelphood
at the Grange, and was given by my father to Mr. Hindley. I
fancy it knew me : it pushed its nose against mine by way of salute,
and then hastened to devour the porridge ; while I groped from
step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the
spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief.
Our labours were scarcely over when I heard Earnshaw's tread in
the passage ; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to the
wall ; I stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's endeavour to
avoid him was unsuccessful ; as I guessed by a scutter downstairs,
and a prolonged, piteous yelping. I had better luck ! he passed
on, entered his chamber, and shut the door. Directly after Joseph
came up with Hareton, to put him to bed. I had found shelter
in Hareton's room, and the old man on seeing me, said —
" They's rahm for boath ye un yer pride, now, I sud think, i'
the hahse. It's empty ; ye may hev it all to yerseln, un Him as
alias maks a third, i'sich ill company ! "
Gladly did I take advantage of this intimation ; and the minute
I flung myself into a chair, by the fire, I nodded, and slept.
My slumber was deep and sweet, though over far too soon. Mr.
Heathcliff awoke me ; he had just come in, and demanded, in
his loving manner, what I was doing there ? I told him the cause
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 39
of my staying up so late — that he had the key of our room in
his pocket. The adjective our gave mortal offence. He swore
it was not, nor ever should be, mine ; and he'd — But I'll not
repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct : he is
ingenious and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence ! I
sometimes wonder at him with an intensity that deadens my
fear : yet, I assure you, a tiger or a venomous serpent could not
rouse terror in me equal to that which he wakens. He told me
of Catherine's illness, and accused my brother of causing it ;
promising that I should be Edgar's proxy in suffering, till he
could get hold of him.
I do hate him — I am wretched — I have been a fool ! Beware
of uttering one breath of this to any one at the Grange. I shall
expect you every day — don't disappoint me ! Isabella.
CHAPTER XIV.
As soon as I had perused this epistle, I went to the master,
and informed him that his sister had arrived at the Heights,
and sent me a letter -expressing her sorrow for Mrs. Linton's
situation, and her ardent desire to see him ; with a wish that
he would transmit to her, as early as possible, some token of
forgiveness by me.
" Forgiveness! " said Linton. " I have nothing to forgive
her, Ellen. You may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon,
if you like, and say that I am not angry, but I'm sorry to have
lost her ; especially as I can never think she'll be happy. It is
cut of the question my going to see her, however: we are
eternally divided ; and should she really wish to oblige me, let
her persuade the villain she has married to leave the country. "
" And you won't write her a httle note, sir? " I asked im-
ploringly.
" No, " he answered. " It is needless. My communication
with Heathcliff's family shall be as sparing as his with mine.
It shall not exist ! "
Mr. Edgar's coldness depressed me exceedingly ; -and all the
way from the Grange I puzzled my brains how to put more heart
into what he said, when I repeated it ; and how to soften his
refusal of even a few lines to console Isabella. I dare say she
I40 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
had been on the watch for me since morning : I saw her looking
through the lattice, as I came up the garden causeway, and I
nodded to her ; but she drew back, as if afraid of being observed.
I entered without knocking. There never was such a dreary,
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented ! I must
confess, that if I had been in the young lady's place, I would,
at least, have swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a
duster. But she already partook of the pervading spirit of
neglect which encompassed her. Her pretty face was wan and
listless ; her hair uncurled : some locks hanging lankly down,
and some carelessly twisted round her head. Probably she had
not touched her dress since yester evening. Hindley was not
there. Mr. Heathchff sat at a table, turning over some papers
in his pocket-book ; but he rose when I appeared, asked me how I
did, quite friendly, and offered me a chair. He was the only thing
there that seemed decent : and I thought he never looked better.
So much had circumstances altered their positions, that he would
certainly have struck a stranger as a born and bred gentleman ;
and his wife as a thorough little slattern ! She came forward
eagerly to greet me ; and held out one hand to take the expected
letter. I shook my head. She wouldn't understand the hint,
but followed me to a sideboard, where I went to lay my bonnet,
and importuned me in a whisper to give her directly what I had
brought. Heathcliff guessed the meaning of her manoeuvres,
and said — ■
" If you have got anything for Isabella (as no doubt you have,
Nelly), give it to her. You needn't make a secret of it ! we have
no secrets between us. "
" Oh, I have nothing, " I replied, thinking it best to speak the
truth at once. " My master bid me tell his sister that she must
not expect either a letter or a visit from him at present. He
sends his love, ma'am, and his wishes for your happiness, and
his pardon for the grief you have occasioned ; but he thinks that
after this time, his household and the household here should drop
intercommunication, as nothing could come of keeping it up. "
Mrs. Heathcliff's lip quivered slightly, and she returned to
her seat in the window. Her husband took his stand on the
hearthstone, near me, and began to put questions concerning
Catherine. I told him as much as I thought proper of her
illness, and he extorted from me, by cross-examination, most
of the facts connected with its origin. I blamed her, as she
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I4I
deserved, for bringing it all on herself ; and ended by hoping
that he would follow Mr. Linton's example and avoid future
interference with his family, for good or evil.
" Mrs. Linton is now just recovering, " I said ; " she'll never
be like she was, but her life is spared ; and if you really have a
regard for her, you'll shun crossing her way again : nay, you'll
move out of this country entirely ; and that you may not regret
it, I'll inform you Catherine Linton is as different now from
your old friend Catherine Earnshaw, as that young lady is
different from me. Her appearance is changed greatly, her
character much more so; and the person who is compelled, of
necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his affection
hereafter by the remembrance of what she once was, by common
humanity, and a sense of duty ! "
" That is quite possible, " remarked Heathcliff, forcing himself
to seem calm: " quite possible that your master should have
nothing but common humanity and a sense of duty to fall back
upon. But do you imagine that I shall leave Catherine to his
duty and hutnanity ? and can you compare my feelings respecting
Catherine to his ? Before you leave this house, I must exact a
promise from you, that you'll get me an interview with her :
consent or refuse, I will see her ! What do you say? "
" I say, Mr. Heathcliff, " I replied, " you must not : you never
shall, through my means. Another encounter between you and
the master would kill her altogether. "
" With your aid, that may be avoided, " he continued; and
should there be danger of such an event — should he be the
cause of adding a single trouble more to her existence — why, I
think I shall be justified in going to extremes ! I wish you had
sincerity enough to tell me whether Catherine would suffer greatly
from his loss : the fear that she would restrains me. And there
you see the distinctions between our feelings : had he been in
my place, and I in his, though I hated him with a hatred that
turned my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against
him. You may look incredulous, if you please I I never would
have banished him from her society as long as she desired his.
The moment her regard ceased, I would have torn his heart out,
and drunk his blood ! But, till then— if you don't believe me,
you don't know me — till then, I would have died by inches
before I touched a single hair of his head ! "
'• And yet, " I interrupted,''you have no scruples in completely
143 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ruining all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself
into her remembrance now, when she has nearly forgotten you,
and involving her in a new tumult of discord and distress. "
" You suppose she has nearly forgotten me? " he said. " Oh,
Nelly ! you know she has not ! You know as well as I do, that
for every thought she spends on Linton, she spends a thousand
on me ! At a most miserable period of my life, I had a notion
of the kind : it haunted me on my return to the neighbourhood
last summer ; but only her own assurance could make me admit
the horrible idea again. And then, Linton would be nothing,
nor Hindley, nor all the dreams that ever I dreamt. Two words
would comprehend my future — death and hell : existence, after
losing her, would be hell. Yet I was a fool to fancy for a
moment that she valued Edgar Linton's attachment more than
mine. If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he
couldn't love as nmch in eighty years as I could in a day. And
Catherine has a heart as deep as I have: the sea could be as
readily contained in that horse-trough, as her whole affection
be monopolised by him ! Tush ! He is scarcely a degree
dearer to her than her dog, or her horse. It is not in him to
be loved like me : how can she love in him what he has
not! "
" Catherine and Edgar are as fond of each other as any two
people can be, " cried Isabella, with sudden vivacity. " No one
has a right to talk in that manner, and I won't hear my brother
depreciated in silence ! "
" Your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn't he? " ob-
served Heathcliff scornfully.''He turns you adrift on the
world with surprising alacrity. "
" He is not aware of what I suffer, " she replied.''I didn't tell
him that. "
''You have been telling him something, then : you have
written, have you? "
" To say that I was married, I did write — you saw the note. "
''And nothing since ? "
" No. "
" My young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of
condition, " I remarked. " Somebody's love comes short in her
case, obviously : whose, I may guess ; but, perhaps, I shouldn't,
say. "
" I should guess it was her own, " said Heathchff. " She de-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 145
generates into a mere slut ! She is tired of trying to please me
uncommonly early. You'd hardly credit it, but the very morrow
of our wedding, she was weeping to go home. However, she'll
suit this house so much the better for not being over nice, and
I'll take care she does not disgrace me by rambling abroad. "
" Well, sir, " returned I, " I hope you'll consider that Mrs.
Heathcliff is accustomed to be looked after and waited on ; and
that she has been brought up like an only daughter, whom every
one was ready to serve. You must let her have a maid to keep
things tidy about her, and you must treat her kindly. Whatever
be your notion of Mr. Edgar, you cannot doubt that she has a
capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn't have abandoned
the elegances, and comforts, and friends of her former home, to
fix contentedly, in such a wilderness as this, with you. "
" She abandoned them under a delusion, " he answered;
" picturing in me a hero of romance, and expecting unlimited
indulgences from my chivalrous devotion. I can hardly regard
her in the light of a rational creature, so obstinately has she per-
sisted in forming a fabulous notion of my character and acting
on the false impressions she cherished. But, at last, I think
she begins to know me : I don't perceive the silly smiles and
grimaces that provoked me at first ; and the senseless incapa-
bility of discerning that I was in earnest when I gave her my
opinion of her infatuation and herself. It was a marvellous effort
of perspicacity to discover that I did not love her. I believed,
at one time, no lessons could teach her that ! And yet it is poorly
learnt ; for this morning she announced, as a piece of appalling
intelligence, that I had actually succeeded in making her hate
me ! A positive labour of Hercules, I assure you ! If it be
achieved, I have cause to return thanks. Can I trust your asser-
tion, Isabella? Are you sure you hate me? If I let you alone
for half a day, won't you come sighing and wheedling to me
again ? I dare say she would rather I had seemed all tenderness
before you : it wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed.
But I don't care who knows that the passion was wholly on one
side ; and I never told her a lie about it. She cannot accuse me
of showing one bit of deceitful softness. The first thing she saw
me do, on coming out of the Grange, was to hang'up her little
dog ; and when she pleaded for it, the first words I uttered were
a wish that I had the hanging of every being belonging to her,
except one : possibly she took that exception for herself. But no
144 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
brutality disgusted her : I suppose she has an innate admiration
of it, if only her precious person were secure from injury ! Now,
was it not the depth of absurdity— of genuine idiocy, for that
pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that I could love
her? Tell your master, Nelly, that I never, in all my life, met
with such an abject thing as she is. She even disgraces the
name of Linton ; and I've sometimes relented, from pure lack of
invention, in my experiments on what she could endure, and
still creep shamefully cringing back ! But tell him, also, to set
his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease : that I keep strictly
within the limits of the law. I have avoided, up to this period,
giving her the slightest right to claim a separation ; and, what's
more, she'd thank nobody for dividng us. If she desired to go,
she might : the nuisance of her presence outweighs the gi'ati-
iication to be derived from tormenting her ! "
" Mr. Heathcliff, " said I, " this is the talk of a madman ; your
wife, most likely, is convinced you are mad ; and, for that reason,
she has borne with you hitherto : but now that you say she may
go, she'll doubtless avail herself of the permission. You are not
so bewitched, ma'am, are you, as to remain with him of your
own accord ? "
" Take care, Ellen! " answered Isabella, her eyes sparkling
irefully ; there was no misdoubting by their expression the full
success of her partner's endeavours to make himself detested.
''Don't put faith in a single word he speaks. He's a lying fiend !
a monster, and not a human being ! I've been told I might
leave him before; and I've made the attempt, but I dare not re-
peat it ! Only, Ellen, promise you'll not mention a syllable of
his infamous conversation to my brother or Catherine. What-
ever he may pretend, he wishes to provoke Edgar to desperation:
he says he has married me on purpose to obtain power over him ;
and he shan't obtain it — I'll die first ! I just hope, I pray, that
he may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me ! The single
pleasure I can imagine is to die or to see him dead ! "
" There — that will do for the present ! " said Heathcliff. " If
you are called upon in a court of law, you'll remember her
language, Nelly ! And take a good look at that countenance :
she's near the point which would suit me. No ; you're not fit
to be your own guardian, Isabella, now ; and I, being your legal
protector, must retain you in my custody, however distasteful
the obligation may be. Go upstairs ; I have something to say
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. ]f{.
to Ellen Dean in private. That's not the way : upstairs, i tell
you ! Why, this is the road upstairs, child ! "
He seized, and thrust her from the room ; and returned
muttering —
''I have no pity ! I have no pity ! The more the worms writhe,
the more I yearn to crush out their entrails! It is a moral teeth-
ing ; and I grind with greater energy, in proportion to the in-
crease of pain. "
" Do you understand what the word pity means? " I said,
hastening to resume my bonnet. " Did you ever feel a touch of
it in your life? "
" Put that down ! " he interrupted, perceiving my intention to
depart. " You are not going yet. Come here now, Nelly: I
must either persuade or compel you to aid me in fulfilling my
determination to see Catherine, and that without delay. I swear
that I meditate no harm: I don't desire to cause any disturbance,
or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton ; I only wish to hear from
herself how she is, and why she has been ill ; and to ask if any-
thing that I could do would be of use to her. Last night, I was
in the Grange garden six hours, and I'll return there to-night ;
and every night I'll haunt the place, and every day, till I find an
opportunity of entering. If Edgar Linton meets me, I shall not
hesitate to knock him down, and give him enough to insure his
quiescence while I stay. If his servants oppose me, I shall
threaten them off with these pistols. But wouldn't it be better
to prevent my coming in contact with them, or their master?
And you could do it so easily. I'd warn you when I came, and
then you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she was alone,
and watch till I departed, your conscience quite calm : you
would be hindering mischief. "
I protested against playing that treacherous part in my em-
ployer's house: and, besides, I urged the cruelty and selfishness
of his destroying Mrs. Linton's tranquilhty for his satisfaction.
" The commonest occurrence startles her painfully, " I said.
" She's all nerves, and she couldn't bear the surprise, I'm positive.
Don't persist, sir ! or else, I shall be obliged to inform my master
of your designs; and he'll take measures to secure his house and
its inmates from any such unwarrantable intrusions ! "
" In that case, I'll take measures to secure you, woman! " ex-
claimed Heathcliff ; " you shall not leave Wuthering Heights till
to-morrow morning. It is a foolish story to assert that Catherine
li^ WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
could not bear to see me ; nnd as to surprising her, I don't desire
it : you must prepare her — ask her if I may come. You say she
never mentions my name, and that I am never mentioned to her.
To whom should she mention me if I am a forbidden topic in
the house ? She thinks you are all spies for her husband. Oh,
I've no doubt she's in hell among you ! I guess by her silence,
as much as anything, what she feels. You say she is often rest-
less, and anxious-looking: is that a proof of tranquillity? You
talk of her mind being unsettled. How the devil could it be
otherwise in her frightful isolation? And that insipid, paltry
creature attending her from duty and hmnanity ! Yxoxa pity
and charity ! He might as well plant an oak in a flower-pot, and
expect it to thrive, as imagine he can restore her to vigour in the
soil of his shallow cares ! Let us settle it at once : will you stay
here, and am I to fight my way to Catherine over Linton and
his footman ? Or will you be my friend, as you have been
hitherto, and do what I request ? Decide ! because there is no
reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your
stubborn ill-nature ! "
Well, Mr. Lockwood, I argued and complained, and flatly
refused him fifty times ; but in the long run he forced me to an
agreement. I engaged to carry a letter from him to my mistress ;
and should she consent, I promised to let him have intelligence
of Linton's next absence from home, when he might come, and
get in as he was able : I wouldn't be there, and my fellow-
servants should be equally out of the way. Was it right or
wrong? I fear it was wrong, though expedient, I thought I
prevented another explosion by my compliance ; and I thought,
too, it might create a favourable crisis in Catherine's mental ill-
ness : and then I remembered Mr. Edgar's stern rebuke of my
carrying tales ; and I tried to smooth away all disquietude on the
subject, by affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal
of trust, if it merited so harsh an appellation, should be the
last. Notwithstanding, my journey homeward was sadder than
my journey thither ; and many misgivings I had, ere I could
prevail on myself to put the missive into Mrs, Linton's hand.
But here is Kenneth ; I'll go down, and tell him how much
better you are. My history is dree, as we say, and will serve to
while away another morning.
Dree, and dreary ! I reflected as the good woman descended
to receive the doctor ; and not exactly of the kind which I should
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 47
have chosen to amuse me. But never mind ! I'll extract whole-
some medicines from Mrs. Dean's bitter herbs ; and firstly, let
me beware the fascination that lurks in Catherine Heathchff's
brilliant eyes. I should be in a curious taking if I surrendered
my heart to that young person, and the daughter turned out a
second edition of the mother !
CHAPTER XV.
Another week over — and I am so many da3'S nearer health, and
spring ! I have now heard all my neighbour's history, at dif-
ferent sittings, as the housekeeper could spare time from more
important occupations, I'll continue it in her own words, only
a Uttle condensed. She is, on the whole, a very fair narrator,
and I don't think I could improve her style.
In the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the Heights,
I knew, as well as if I saw him, that'Mr. Heathcliff was about
the place ; and I shunned going out, because I still carried his
letter in my pocket, and didn't want to be threatened or teased
any more. I had made up my mind not to give it till my master
went somewhere, as I could not guess how its receipt would
affect Catherine. The consequence was, that it did not reach
her before the lapse of three days. The fourth was Sunday, and
I brought it into her I'oom after the family were gone to church.
There was a man-servant left to keep the house with me, and we
generally made a practice of locking the doors during the hours
of service ; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and
pleasant that I set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement,
as I knew who would be coming, I told my companion that the
mistress wished very much for some oranges, and he must run
over to the village and get a few, to be paid for on the morrow.
He departed, and I went upstairs.
Mrs. Linton sat in a loose, white dress, with a light shawl
over her shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual.
Her thick, long hair, had been partly removed at the beginning
of her illness, and now she wore it simply combed in its natural
tresses over her temples and neck. Her appearance wag altered,
as I had told Heathcliff; but when she was calm, there seemed
unearthly beauty in the change. The flash of her eyes had been
succeeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness ; they no longer
148 WUTHERING HEIGHTS,
gave the impression of looking at the objects around her : they
appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond — you would
have said out of this world. Then the paleness of her face — its
haggard aspect having vanished as she recovered flesh — and the
peculiar expression arising from her mental state, though pain-
fully suggestive of their causes, added to the touching interest
which she awakened ; and — invariably to me, I know, and to
any person who saw her, I should think — refuted more tangible
proofs of convalescence, and stamped her as one doomed to
decay.
A book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely
perceptible wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. I believe
Linton had laid it there : for she never endeavoured to divert
herself with reading, or occupation of any kind, and he would
spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to some
subject which had formerly been her amusement. She was
conscious of his aim, and in her better moods endured his
efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and then
suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking him at last with the
saddest of smiles and kisses. At other times, she would turn
petulantly away, and hide her face in her hands, or even push
him off angrily ; and then he took care to let her alone, for he
was certain of doing no good.
Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing ; and the full,
mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothingly on the
ear. It was a sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the
summer foliage, which drowned that music about the Grange
when the trees were in leaf. At Wuthering Heights it always
sounded on quiet days following a great thaw or a season of
steady rain. And of Wuthering Heights Catherine was think-
ing as she listened : that is, if she thought or listened at all ;
but she had the vague, distant look I mentioned before,
which expressed no recognition of material things either by
ear or eye.
" There's a letter for you, Mrs. Linton, " I said, gently in-
serting it in one hand that rested on her knee. " You must
read it immediately, because it wants an answer. Shall I break
the seal? " " Yes, " she answered, without altering the direction
of her eyes. I opened it— it was very short. " Now, " I con-
tinued, " read it. " She drew away her hand, and let it fall, I
replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it should please her
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I49
to glance down ; but that movement was so long delayed that at
last I resumed —
" Must I read it, ma'am? It is from Mr. Heathcliff. "
There was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a
struggle to arrange her ideas. She lifted the letter, and seemed
to peruse it ; and when she came to the signature she sighed :
yet still I found she had not gathered its import, for, upon my
desiring to hear her reply, she merely pointed to the name, and
gazed at me with mournful and questioning eagerness.
" Well, he wishes to see you, " said I, guessing her need of an
interpreter. " He's in the garden by this time, and impatient to
know what answer I shall bring. "
As I spoke, I observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass
beneath raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing
them back, announce, by a wag of the tail, that some one ap-
proached whom it did not consider a stranger. Mrs. Linton
bent forward, and listened breathlessly. The minute after a
step traversed the hall ; the open house was too tempting for
Heathcliff to resist walking in : most likely he supposed that I
was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his
own audacity. With straining eagerness Catherine gazed to-
wards the entrance of her chamber. He did not hit the right
room directly, she motioned me to admit him, but he found it
out ere I could reach the door, and in a stride or two was at her
side, and had her grasped in his arms.
He neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes,
during which period he bestowed more kisses than ever he gave
in his life before, I dare say : but then my mistress had kissed
him first, and I plainly saw that he could hardly bear, for down-
right agony, to look into her face ! The same conviction had
stricken him as me, from the instant he beheld her, that there
was no prospect of ultimate recovery there — she was fated, sure
to die.
" Oh, Cathy ! Oh, my life ! how can I bear it ? " was the first
sentence he uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise his
despair. And now he stared at her so earnestly that I thought
the very intensity of his gaze would bring tears into his eyes ;
but they burned with anguish : they did not melt.
" What now? " said Catherine, leaning back, and returning
his look with a suddenly clouded brow : her humour was a mere
vane for constantly varying caprices. " You and Edgar have
1)0 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
broken my heart, Heathcliff ! And you both come to bewail the
deed to me, as if you were the people to be pitied ! I shall not
pity you, not I. You have killed me — and thriven on it, I think.
How strong you are ! How many years do you mean to live
after I am gone? "
Heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her ; lie at-
tempted to rise, but she seized his hair, and kept him down.
" I wish I could hold you, " she continued bitterly, " till we
were both dead ! I shouldn't care what you suffered. I care
nothing for your sufferings. Why shouldn't j'cz^ suffer? I do !
Will you forget me? Will you be happy when I am in the
earth ? Will you say twenty years hence,'That's the grave of
Catherine Earnshaw. I loved her long ago, and was wretched
to lose her ; but it is past. I've loved many others since : my
children are dearer to me than she was ; and at death, I shall
not rejoice that I am going to her : I shall be sorry that I must
leave them !'Will you say so, Heathcliff ? "
" Don't torture me till I'm as mad as yourself, " cried he,
wrenching his head free, and grinding his teeth.
The two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful pic-
ture. Well might Catherine deem that heaven would be a land
of exile to her, unless with her mortal body she cast away her
moral character also. Her present countenance had a wild vin-
dictiveness in its white cheek, and a bloodless lip and scintillating
eye ; and she retained in her closed fingers a portion of the locks
she had been grasping. As to her companion, while raising him-
self with one hand, he had taken her arm with the other ; and
so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the requirements of
her condition, that on his letting go I saw four distinct im-
pressions left blue in the colourless skin.
" Are you possessed with a devil, " he pursued savagely, " to
talk in that manner to me when you are dying? Do you reflect
that all those words will be branded in my memory, and eatinc
deeper eternally after you have left me ? You know you lie to
say I have killed you : and, Catherine, you know that I could as
soon forget you as my existence ! Is it not sufficient for your
infernal selfishness, that while you are at peace I shall writhe in
the torments of hell? "
" I shall not be at peace, " moaned Catherine, recalled to a
sense of physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of
her heart, which beat visibly and audibly under this excess of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 15I
agitation. She said nothing further till the paroxysm was over ;
then she continued, more kindly —
" I'm not wishing you greater torment than I have, Heathcliff.
I only wish us never to be parted : and should a word of mine
distress you hereafter, think I feel the same distress underground,
and for my own sake, forgive me ! Come here and kneel down
again ! You never harmed me in your life. Nay, if you nurse
anger, that will be worse to remember than my harsh words !
Won't you come here again ? Do ! "
Heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but
not so far as to let her see his face, which was livid with emo-
tion. She bent round to look at him ; he would not permit it :
turning abruptly, he walked to the fireplace, where he stood,
silent, with his back towards us. Mrs. Linton's glance followed
him suspiciously : every movement woke a new sentiment in her.
After a pause and a prolonged gaze, she resumed ; addressing
me in accents of indignant disappointment —
" Oh, you see, Nelly, he would not relent a moment to keep
me out of the grave. That is how I'm loved*! Well, never
mind. That is not my Heathcliff. I shall love mine yet ; and
take him with me : he's in my soul. And, " added she musingly,
" the thing that irks me most is this shattered prison, after all.
I'm tired of being enclosed here. I'm wearying to escape into
that glorious world, and to be always there : not seeing it dimly
through tears, and yearning for it through the walls of an aching
heart ; but really with it, and in it. Nelly, you think you are
better and more fortunate than I ; in full health and strength :
you are sorry for me — very soon that will be altered. I shall be
sorry for you. I shall be incomparably beyond and above you
all. I wonder he won't be near me ! " She went on to herself.
''I thought he wished it. Heathcliff, dear ! you should not be
sullen now. Do come to me, Heathcliff, "
In her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of
the chair. At that earnest appeal he turned to her, looking
absolutely desperate. His eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed
fiercely on her ; his breast heaved convulsively. An instant
they held asunder, and then how they met I hardly saw, but
Catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they were
locked in an embrace from which I thought my mistress would
never be released alive : in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly
insensible. He flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my
152 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, he gnashed
at me, and foamed hke a mad dog, and gathered her to him
with greedy jealousy. I did not feel as if I were in the company
of a creature of my own species : it appeared that he would not
understand, though I spoke to him ; so I stood off, and held
my tongue, in great perplexity.
A movement of Catherine's relieved me a little presently : she
put up her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his
as he held her ; while he, in return, covering her with frantic
caresses, said wildly —
" You teach me now how cruel you've been — cruel and false.
W/iy did you despise me? lV/i_y did you betray your own
heart, Cathy? I have not one word of comfort. You deserve
this. You have killed yourself. Yes, you may kiss me, and
cry ; and ring out my kisses and tears : they'll blight you —
they'll damn you. You loved me — then what r/^A^ had you to
leave me? What right — answer me — for the poor fancy you
felt for Linton? Because misery and degradation, and death,
and nothing that God or Satan could inflict would have parted
VLS.jou, of your own will, did it. I have not broken your heart
— yo2i have brolcen it ; and in breaking it, you have broken
mine. So much the worse for me, that I am strong. Do I
want to live? What kind of living will it be when you — oh,
God ! would jj/ < ?« like to live with your soul in the grave? "
" Let me alone. Let me alone, " sobbed Catherine, " If I've
done wrong, I'm dying for it. It is enough ! You left me too :
but I won't upbraid you ! I forgive you. Forgive me ! "
" It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel
those wasted hands, " he answered, " Kiss me again; and
don't let me see your eyes ! I forgive what you have done to
me. I love my murderer — but yonrs / How can I ? "
They were silent — their faces hid against each other, and
washed by each other's tears. At least, I suppose the weeping
was on both sides ; as it seemed Heathcliff coii/d weep on a
great occasion like this.
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile ; for the afternoon wore
fast away, the man whom I had sent off returned from his errand,
and I could distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the
valley, a concourse thickening outside Gimmerton chapel porch.
" Service is over, " I announced. " My master will be here
in half-an-hour. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 53
Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Catherine closer :
she never moved.
Ere long I perceived a group of the servants passing up the
road towards the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton was not far behind ;
he opened the gate himself and sauntered slowly up, probably
enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.
" Now he is here, " I exclaimed. " For Heaven's sake, hurry
down ! You'll not meet any one on the front stairs. Do be
quick ; and stay among the trees till he is fairly in. "
" I must go, Cathy, " said Heathcliff, seeking to extricate
himself from his companion's arms. " But if I live, I'll see you
again before you are asleep. I won't stray five yards from yoiu*
window. "
" You must not go ! " she answered, holding him as firmly as
her strength allowed. " You shall not, I tell you. "
" For one hour, " he pleaded earnestly.
" Not for one minute, " she replied.
" I must — Linton will be up immediately, " persisted the
alarmed intruder.
He would have risen, and unfi.xed her fingers by the act— she
clung fast, gasping : there was mad resolution in her face.
" No ! " she shrieked. " Oh, don't, don't go. It is the last
time ! Edgar will not hurt us. Heathcliff, I shall die ! I
shall die ! "
''Damn the fool ! There he is, " cried Heathcliff, sinking back
into his seat. " Hush, my darling! Hush, hush, Catherine!
ril stay. If he shot me so, I'd expire with a blessing on my lips. "
And there they were fast again. I heard my master mounting
the stairs — the cold sweat ran from my forehead : I was horrified.
" Are you going to listen to her ravings? " I said passionately.
''She does not know what she says. Will you ruin her, because
she has not wit to help herself? Get ap ! You could be free
instantly. That is the most diabolical deed that ever you did.
We are all done for — master, mistress, and servant. "
I wrung my hands, and cried out ; and Mr. Linton hastened
his step at the noise. In the midst of my agitation, I was
sincerely glad to observe that Catherine's arms had fallen
relaxed, and her head hung down.
" She's fainted or dead, " I thought: " so much the better.
Far better that she should be dead, than lingering a burden
and a misery-maker to all about her. "
154 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonish-
ment and rage. What he meant to do, I cannot tell ; however,
the other stopped all demonstrations, at once, by placing the
lifeless-looking form in his arms.
" Look there ! " he said ; " unless you be a fiend, help her first
— then you shall speak to me ! "
He walked into the parlour, and sat down. Mr. Linton
summoned me, and with great difficulty, and after resorting to
many means, we managed to restore her to sensation ; but she
was all bewildered ; she sighed, and moaned, and knew nobody.
Edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her hated friend, I did not.
I went, at the earhest opportunity, and besought him to depart ;
affirming that Catherine was better, and he should hear from me
in the morning how she passed the night.
" I shall not refuse to go out of doors, " he answered ; " but I
shall stay in the garden : and, Nelly, mind you keep your word
to-morrow. I shall be under those larch trees. Mind ! or I pay
another visit, whether Linton be in or not. "
He sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the
chamber, and, ascertaining that what I stated was apparently
true, delivered the house of his luckless presence.
CHAPTER XVL
About twelve o'clock that night, was born the Catherine you saw
at Wuthering Heights : a puny, seven months'child ; and two
hours after the mother died, having never recovered sufficient
consciousness to miss Heathcliff, or know Edgar. The latter's
distraction at his bereavement is a subject too painful to be dwelt
on ; its after effects showed how deep the sorrow sunk. A great
addition, in my eyes, was his being left without an heir. I be-
moaned that, as I gazed on the feeble orphan ; and I mentally
abused old Linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son's. An
unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing ! It might have wailed out
of life, and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of
existence. We redeemed the neglect afterwards ; but its begin-
ning was as friendless as its end is likely to be.
Next morning — bright and cheerful out of doors — stole softened
in through the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I55
and its occupant with a mellow, tender glow. Kdgar Linton
had his head laid on the pillow, and his eyes shut. His young
and fair features were almost as deathlike as those of the form
beside him, and almost as fixed : but his was the hush of exhausted
anguish, and hers of perfect peace. Her brow smooth, her lids
closed, her lips wearing the expression of a smile ; no angel in
heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared. And I par-
took of the infinite calm in which she lay : my mind was never in
a holier frame than while I gazed on that untroubled image of
Divine rest. I instinctively echoed the words she had uttered
a few hours before : " Incomparably beyond and above us alii
Whether still on earth or now in -heaven, her spirit is at home
with God ! "
I don't know if it be a peculiarity in me, but I am seldom
otherwise than happy while watching in the chamber of death,
should no frenzied or despairing mourner share the duty with me,
I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break, and I feel an
assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter — the Eternity
they have entered — where life is boundless in its duration, and
love in its sympathy, and joy in its fulness. I noticed on that
occasion how much selfishness there is even in a love like Mr.
Linton's, when he so regretted Catherine's blessed release ! To
be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward and impatient
existence she had led, whether she merited a haven of peace at
last. One might doubt in seasons of cold reflection ; but not
then, in the presence of her corpse. It asserted its own tranquillity,
which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitants.
Do you believe such people are happy in the other world, sir?
I'd give a great deal to know.
I declined answering Airs. Dean's question, which struck me
as something heterodox. She proceeded —
Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have nc^
right to think she is ; but we'll leave her with her Maker.
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sunrise to
quit the room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. The
servants thought me gone to shake off the drowsiness of my pro-
tracted watch ; in reality, my chief motive was seeing Mr. Heath-
cliff. If he had remained among the larches all night, he would
have heard nothing of the stir at the Grange ; unless, perhaps,
he might catch the gallop of the messenger going to Gimmerton.
If he had come nearer, he would probably be aware, from the
156 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of the
outer doors, that all was not right within. I wished, yet feared,
to find him. I felt the terrible news must be told, and I longed
to get it over ; but how to do it, I did not know. He was there
— at least a few yards further in the park ; leant against an old
ash tree, his hat off, and his hair soaked with the dew that had
gathered on the budded branches, and fell pattering round him.
He had been standing a long time in that position, for I saw a
pair of ousels passing and repassing scarcely three feet from him,
busy in building their nest, and regarding his proximity no more
than that of a piece of timber. They flew off at my approach,
and he raised his eyes and spoke —
" She's dead ! " he said ; " I've not waited for you to learn
that. Put your handkerchief away — don't snivel before me.
Damn you all ! she wants none o^ your tears ! "
I was weeping as much for him as her ; we do sometimes pity
creatures that have none of the feeling either for themselves or
others. When I first looked into his face, I perceived that he
had got intelligence of the catastrophe ; and a foolish notion
struck me that his heart was quelled and he prayed, because his
lips moved and his gaze was bent on the ground.
" Yes, she's dead ! " I answered, checking my sobs and drying
my cheeks. " Gone to heaven, I hope; where we may, every
one, join her, if we take due warning and leave our evil ways to
follow good ! "
" Did she take due warning, then? " asked Heathcliff, attempt-
ing a sneer. " Did she die like a saint! Come, give me a
true history of the event. How did "
He endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not
manage it ; and compressing his mouth he held a silent combat
with his inward agony, defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with
an unflinching ferocious stare.''How did she die ? " he resumed
at last — fain, notwithstanding his hardihood, to have a support
behind him ; for, after the struggle, he trembled, in spite of
himself, to his very finger-ends.
" Poor wretch ! " I thought ; " you have a heart and nerves
the same as your brother men ! Why should you be anxious to
conceal them ? Your pride cannot blind God ! You tempt Him
to wring them, till He forces a cry of humiliation. "
" Quietly as a lamb! " I answered aloud. " She drew a
sigh, and stretched herself, like a child reviving, and sinking
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I $7
again to sleep ; and five minutes after I felt one little pulse at
her heart, and nothing more ! "
" And— did she ever mention me? " he asked, hesitating, as
if he dreaded the answer to his question would introduce details
that he could not bear to hear.
" Her senses never returned ; she recognised nobody from the
time you left her, " I said. " She lies with a sweet smile on her
face ; and her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days.
Her life closed in a gentle dream — may she wake as kindly in
the other world ! "
" May she wake in torment ! " he cried, with frightful vehe-
mence, stamping his foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm
of ungovernable passion. " Why, she's a liar to the end!
Where is she? Not there — not in heaven — not perished — ■
where ? Oh ! you said you cared nothing for my sufferings !
And I pray one prayer — I repeat it till my tongue stiffens —
Catherine Earnshaw, may you not rest as long as I am living !
You said I killed you — haunt me, then ! The murdered do
haunt their murderers, I believe. I know that ghosts have
wandered on earth. Be with me always — take any form — drive
me mad ! only do not leave me in this abyss, where I cannot find
you ! Oh, God ! it is unutterable ! I can?iot live without my
life ! I ca?inot live without my soul ! "
He dashed his head against the knotted trunk ; and, lifting
up his eyes, howled, not like a man, but like a savage beast
being goaded to death with knives and spears. I observed
several splashes of blood about the bark of the tree, and his hand
and forehead were both stained ; probably the scene I witnessed
was a repetition of others acted during the night. It hardly
moved my compassion — it appalled me : still, I felt reluctant to
quit him so. But the moment he recollected himself enough to
notice me watching, he thundered a command for me to go, and
I obeyed. He was beyond my skill to quiet or console !
Mrs. Linton's funeral was appointed to take place on the
Friday following her decease ; and till then her coffin remained
uncovered, and strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the
great drawing-room. Linton spent his days and nights there,
a sleepless guardian ; and — a circumstance concealed from all
but me — Heathcliff spent his nights, at least, outside, equally a
stranger to repose. I held no communication with him ; still,
I was conscious of his design to enter, if he could ; and on the
1)8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Tuesday, a little after dark, when my niaster, from sheer fatigue,
had been compelled to retire a couple of hours, I went and
opened one of the windows ; moved by his perseverance, to give
him a chance of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one
final adieu. He did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity,
cautiously and briefly : too cautiously to betray his presence by
the slightest noise. Indeed, I shouldn't have discovered that he
had been there, except for the disarrangement of the drapery
about the corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl of
light hair, fastened with a silver thread ; which, on examination,
I ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round
Catherine's neck. Heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast
out its contents, replacing them by a black lock of his own. I
twisted the two, and enclosed them together.
Mr. Earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of
his sister to the grave ; he sent no excuse, but he never came ; so
that, besides her husband, the mourners were wholly composed of
tenants and servants. Isabella was not asked.
The place of Catherine's interment, to the surprise of the
villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carved monument
of the Lintons, nor yet by the tombs of her own relations, out-
side. It was dug on a green slope in a comer of the kirkyard,
where the wall is so low that heath and bilberry plants have
climbed over it from the moor ; and peat mould almost buries it.
Her husband lies in the same spot now ; and they have each a
simple headstone above, and a plaiR grey block at their feet, to
mark the graves.
CHAPTER XVII.
That Friday made the last of our fine days for a month. In
the evening, the weather broke : the wind shifted from south to
north-east, and brought rain first, and then sleet and snow. On
the morrow one could hardly imagine that there had been three
weeks of summer : the primroses and crocuses were hidden under
wintry drifts ; the larks were silent, the young leaves of the early
trees smitten and blackened. And dreary, and chill, and dismal,
that morrow did creep over ! My master kept his room ; I took
possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a nursery : and
there I was, sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid on my
knee ; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I 59
driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door
opened, and some person entered, out of breath and laughing I
My anger was greater than my astonishment for a minute, I
supposed it one of the maids, and I cried —
" Have done! How dare you show your giddiness here?
\Vhat would Mr. Linton say if he heard you ? "
" Excuse me! " answered a familiar voice; " but I know
Edgar is in bed, and I cannot stop myself. "
With that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and
holding her hand to her side.
" I have run the whole way from Wuthering Heights ! " she
continued, after a pause ; " except where I've flown. I couldn't
count the number of falls I've had. Oh, I'm aching all over !
Don't be alarmed ! There shall be an explanation as soon as I
can give it ; only just have the goodness to step out and order
the carriage to take me on to Gimmerton, and tell a ser\-ant to
seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe. "
The intruder was Mrs. Heathcliff. She certainly seemed in
no laughing predicament : her hair streamed on her shoulders,
dripping with snow and water ; she was dressed in the girhsh
dress she commonly wore, befitting her age more than her
position : a low frock with short sleeves, and nothing on either
head or neck. The frock was of hght silk, and clung to her
with wet, and her feet were protected merely by thin slippers ;
add to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the cold pre-
vented from bleeding profusely, a white face scratched and
bruised, and a frame hardly able to support itself, through
fatigue ; and you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed
when I had had leisure to examine her.
" My dear young lady, " I exclaimed, " I'll stir nowhere, and
hear nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes,
and put en dry things ; and certainly you shall not go to Gim-
merton to-night, so it is needless to order the carriage. "
" Certainly, I shall, " she said ; " walking or riding : j-et I've
no objection to dress myself decently. And — ah, see how it flows
down my neck now ! The fire does make it smart. "
She insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she vrould
let me touch her ; and not till after the coachman had been in-
structed to get ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary
attire, did I obtain her consent for binding the wound and help-
ing to change her garments.
l6o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Now, Ellen, " she said, when my task was finished and she
was seated in an easy chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea
before her,''you sit down opposite me, and put poor Catherine's
baby away : I don't like to see it ! You mustn't think I care
little for Catherine, because I behaved so foolishly on entering :
I've cried, too, bitterly — yes, more than any one else has reason
to cry. We parted unreconciled, you remember, and I shan't
forgive myself. But, for all that, I was not going to sympathise
with him — the brute beast ! Oh, give me the poker ! This is the
last thing of his I have about me : " she slipped the gold ring
from her third finger, and threw it on the floor. " I'll smash it ! "
she continued, striking it with childish spite, " and then I'll burn
it ! " and she took and dropped the misused article among the
coals, " There ! he shall buy another, if he gets me back again.
He'd be capable of coming to seek me, to tease Edgar. I dare
not stay, lest that notion should possess his wicked head ! And
besides, Edgar has not been kind, has he? And I won't come
suing for his assistance ; nor will I bring him into more trouble.
Necessity compelled me to seek shelter here ; though, if I had
not learned he was out of the way, I'd have halted at the kitchen,
washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what I wanted,
and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed
— of that incarnate goblin ! Ah, he was in such a fury ! If he
had caught me ! It's a pity Earnshaw is not his match in
strength : I wouldn't have run till I'd seen him all but demolished,
had Hindley been able to do it ! "
" Well, don't talk so fast, miss ! " I interrupted ; " you'll dis-
order the handkerchief I have tied round your face, and make
the cut bleed again. Drink your tea, and take breath, and give
over laughing : laughter is sadly out of place under this roof,
and in your condition ! "
" An undeniable truth, " she replied. " Listen to that child !
It maintains a constant wail — send it out of my hearing for an
hour ; I shan't stay any longer. "
I rang the bell, and committed it to a servant's care ; and
then I inquired what had urged her to escape from Wuthering
Heights in such an unlikely plight, and where she meant to go,
as she refused remaining with us.
" I ought, and I wish to remain, " answered she, " to cheer
Edgar and take care of the baby, for two things, and because
the Grange is my right home. But I tell you he wouldn't let me !
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l6l
Do you think he could bear to see me grow fat and merry — could
bear to tliink that we were tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning
our comfort ? Now, I have the satisfaction of being sure that
he detests me, to the point of its annoying him seriously to
have me within earshot or eyesight : I notice, when I enter his
presence, the muscles of his countenance are involuntarily dis-
torted into an expression of hatred ; partly arising from his
knowledge of the good causes I have to feel that sentiment for
him, and partly from original aversion. It is strong enough to
make me feel pretty certain that he would not chase me over
England, supposing I contrived a clear escape ; and therefore
I must get quite away. I've recovered from my first desire to
be killed by him : I'd rather he'd kill himself ! He has ex-
tinguished my love effectually, and so I'm at my ease. I can
recollect yet how I loved him ; and can dimly imagine that I
could still be loving him, if — no, no ! Even if he had doted on
me, the devilish nature would have revealed its existence some-
how. Catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him
so dearly, knowing him so well. Monster ! would that he could
be blotted out of creation, and out of my memory ! "
" Hush, hush! He's a human being, " I said. " Be more
charitable : there are worse men than he is yet ! "
" He's not a human being, " she retorted ; " and he has no
claim on my charity. I gave him my heart, and he took and
pinched it to death, and flung it back to me. People feel with
their hearts, Ellen : and since he has destroyed mine, I have not
power to feel for him : and I would not, though he groaned from
this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood for Catherine !
No, indeed, indeed, I wouldn't ! " And here Isabella began to
cry ; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she
recommenced. " You asked, what has driven me to flight at
last? I was compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded
in rousing his rage a pitch above his malignity. Pulling out the
nerves with red-hot pincers requires more coolness than knocking
on the head. He was worked up to forget the fiendish prudence
he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous violence. I expe-
rienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him ; the sense of
pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so I fairly broke
free ; and if ever I come into his hands again he is welcome to a
signal revenge.
" Yesterday, you know, Mr. Earnshaw should have been at
F
l62 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the funeral. He kept himself sober for the purpose — tolerably
sober : not going to bed mad at six o'clock and getting up drunk
at twelve. Consequently he rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit
for the church as for a dance ; and instead, he sat down by the
fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tuniblerfuls.
" Heathcliff — I shudder to name him ! has been a stranger in
the house from last Sunday till to-day. Whether the angels
have fed him, or his kin beneath, I cannot tell ; but he has not
eaten a meal with us for nearly a week. He has just come home
at dawn, and gone upstairs to his chamber ; locking himself in
— as if anybody dreamt of coveting his company ! There he has
continued, praying like a Methodist : only the deity he implored
is senseless dust and ashes ; and God, when addressed, was
curiously confounded with his own black father ! After con-
cluding these precious orisons — and they lasted generally till he
grew hoarse and his voice was strangled in his throat — he would
be off again ; always straight down to the Grange ! I wonder
Edgar did not send for a constable, and give him into custody !
For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it was impossible
to avoid regarding this season of deliverance from degrading
oppression as a holiday.
" I recovered spirits sufficient to hear Joseph's eternal lectures
without u'eeping, and to move up and down the house less with
the foot of a frightened thief than formerly. You wouldn't
think that I should cry at anything Joseph could say ; but he
and Hareton are detestable companions. I'd rather sit with
Hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with't'little maister'
and his staunch supporter, that odious old man ! When Heath-
cliff is in, I'm often obliged to seek the kitchen and their society,
or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers ; when he is
not, as was the case this week, I establish a table and chair at
one corner of the house fire, and never mind how Mr. Earnshaw
may occupy himself ; and he does not interfere with my arrange-
ments. He is quieter now than he used to be, if no one provokes
him : more sullen and depressed, and less furious. Joseph
affirms he's sure he's an altered man : that the Lord has touched
his heart, and he is saved'so as by fire.'I'm puzzled to detect
signs of the favourable change : but it is not my business.
" Yester-evening I sat in my nook reading some old books till
late on towards twelve. It seemed so dismal to go upstairs,
witli the wild snow blowing outside, and my thoughts continually
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 63
reverting to the kirkyard and the new-made grave ! I dared
hardly hft my eyes from the page before me, that melancholy
scene so instantly usurped its place. Hindley sat opposite, his
head leant on his hand ; perhaps meditating on the same subject.
He had ceased drinking at a point below irrationality, and had
neither stirred nor spoken during two or three hours. There
was no sound through the house but the moaning wind, which
shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of
the coals, and the click of my snuffers as I removed at intervals
the long wick of the candle. Hareton and Joseph were probably
fast asleep in bed. It was very, very sad : and while I read I
sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished from the world,
never to be restored.
" The doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the
kitchen latch : Heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier
than usual ; owing, I suppose, to the sudden storm. That en-
trance was fastened, and we heard him coming round to get in
by the other. I rose with an irrepressible expression of what I
felt on my lips, which induced my companion, who had been
staring towards the door, to turn and look at me.
"'I'll keep him out five minutes,'he exclaimed.'You won't
object?'
"'No, you may keep him out the whole night for me,'I
answered.'Do ! put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.'
" Earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front ;
he then came and brought his chair to the other side of my table,
leaning over it, and searching in my eyes for a sympathy with
the burning hate that gleamed from his : as he both looked and
felt like an assassin, he couldn't exactly find that ; but he dis-
covered enough to encourage him to speak.
"'You and I,'he said,'have each a great debt to settle with
the man out yonder ! If we were neither of us cowards, we
might combine to discharge it. Are you as soft as your brother ?
Are you willing to endure to the last, and not once attempt a
repayment ?'
"'I'm weary of enduring now,'I replied ;'and I'd be glad
of a retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself ; but treachery and
violence are spears pointed at both ends : they wound those who
resort to them worse than their enemies.'
"'Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and
violence !'cried Hindley.'Mrs. Hcathchff, I'll ask you to do
l64 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
nothing ; but sit still and be dumb. Tell me now, can you ?
I'm sure you would have as much pleasure as I in witnessing the
conclusion of the fiend's existence ; he'll be your death unless
you overreach him ; and he'll be my ruin. Damn the hellish
villain ! He knocks at the door as if he were master here
already ! Promise to hold your tongue, and before that clock
strikes — it wants three minutes of one — you're a free woman !'
''He took the implements which I described to you in my letter
from his breast, and would have turned down the candle. I
snatched it away, however, and seized his arm.
"'I'll not hold my tongue !'I said ;'you mustn't touch him.
Let the door remain shut, and be quiet !'
"'No ! I've formed my resolution, and by God I'll execute it !'
cried the desperate being.'I'll do you a kindness in spite of your-
self, and Hareton justice ! And you needn't trouble your head
to screen me ; Catherine is gone. Nobody alive would regret
me, or be ashamed, though I cut my throat this minute — and it's
time to make an end !'
" I might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with
a lunatic. The only resource left me was to run to a lattice and
warn his intended victim of the fate which awaited him.
"'You'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night !'I ex-
claimed in rather a triumphant tone.'Mr. Earnshaw has a mind
to shoot you, if you persist in endeavouring to enter.'
"'You'd better open the door, you'he answered, address-
ing me by some elegant term that I don't care to repeat.
"'I shall not meddle in the matter,'I retorted again.'Come
in and get shot, if you please ! I've done my duty.'
" With that I shut the window and returned to my place by
the fire ; having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command
to pretend any anxiety for the danger that menaced him. Earn-
shaw swore passionately at me : affirming that I loved the villain
yet ; and calling me all sorts of names for the base spirit I evinced.
And I, in my secret heart (and conscience never reproached me),
thought what a blessing it would be for hitn should Heathcliflf
put him out of misery ; and what a blessing for me should he send
Heathcliff to his right abode ! As I sat nursing these reflections,
the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow
from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked
blightingly through. The stanchions stood too close to suffer
his shoulders to follow, and I smiled, exulting in my fancied
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l6$
security. His hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and
his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed
through the dark.
"'Isabella, let me in, or I'll make you repent !'he'girned,'
as Joseph calls it.
"'I cannot commit murder,'I replied.'Mr. Hindley stands
sentinel with a knife and loaded pistol.'
"'Let me in by the kitchen door,'he said.
"'Hindley will be there before me,'I answered :'and that's
a poor love of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow ! We
were left at peace in our beds as long as the summer moon shone,
but the moment a blast of winter returns, you must run for shelter !
Heathcliff, if I were you, I'd go stretch myself over her grave and
die like a faithful dog. The world is surely not worth living in
now, is it? You had distinctly impressed on me the idea that
Catherine was the whole joy of your life ; I can't imagine how
you think of surviving her loss.'
"'He's there, is he?'exclaimed my companion, rushing to
the gap.'If I can get my arm out I can hit him !'
" I'm afraid, Ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked ; but
you don't know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't have aided or
abetted an attempt on even his life for anything. Wish that he
Avere dead, I must ; and therefore I was fearfully disappointed,
and unnerved by terror for the consequences of my taunting
speech, when he flung himself on Earnshaw's weapon and
wrenched it from his grasp.
" The charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed
into its owner's wrist. Heathcliff pulled it away by main force,
slitting up the flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into
his pocket. He then took a stone, struck down the division be-
tween two windows, and sprang in. His adversary had fallen
senseless with excessive pain and the fiow of blood, that gushed
from an artery or a large vein. The ruffian kicked and trampled
on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the flags, hold-
ing me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning
Joseph. He exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from
finishing him completely ; but getting out of breath he finally
desisted, and dragged the apparently inanimate bodyx)n to the
settle. There he tore off tlie sleeve of Earnshaw's coat, and
bound up the wound with brutal roughness ; spitting and cursing
during the operation as energetically as he had kicked before.
l66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking the old servant ; who,
having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale, hurried
below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at once.
"'What is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now? "
"'There's this to do,'thundered Heathcliflf,'that your
master's mad ; and should he last another month, I'll have him
to an asylum. And how the devil did you come to fasten me
out, you toothless hound ? Don't stand muttering and mum-
bling there. Come, I'm not going to nurse him. Wash that
stuff away ; and mind the sparks of your candle — it is more than
half brandy !'
"'And so, ye've been murthering on him ?'exclaimed Joseph,
lifting his hands and eyes in horror.'If iver I seed a seeght
loike this ! Jvlay the Lord'
" Heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of
the blood, and flung a towel to him ; but instead of proceeding
to dry it up, he joined his hands and began a prayer, which
excited my laughter from its odd phraseology. I was in the
condition of mind to be shocked at nothing : in fact, I was as
reckless as some malefactors show themselves at the foot of the
gallows.
"'Oh, I forgot you,'said the tyrant.'You shall do that.
Down with you. % And you conspire with him against me, do
you, viper ? There, that is work fit for you !'
" He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside
Joseph, who steadily concluded his supplications and then rose,
vowing he would set oft " for the Grange directly. Mr. Linton
was a magistrate, and though he had fifty wives dead, he should
inquire into this. He was so obstinate in his resolution, that
Heathcliff " deemed it expedient to compel from my lips a re-
capitulation of what had taken place ; standing over me, heaving
with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the account in answer
to his questions. It required a great deal of labour to satisfy the
old man that Heathcliff " was not the aggressor ; especially with
my hardly-wrung replies. However, Mr. Earnshaw soon con-
vinced him that he was alive still ; Joseph hastened to administer
a dose of spirits, and by their succour his master presently re-
gained motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aw^are that his
pppouent was ignorant of the treatment received while insensible,
called him deliriously intoxicated ; and said he should not notice
his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to get to bed.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 167
To my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel, and
Hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone. I departed to my
own room, marvelling that I had escaped so easily.
" This morning, when I came down, about half-an-hour before
noon, Mr. Earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick ; his
evil genius, almost as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the
chimney. Neither appeared inclined to dine, and, having waited
till all was cold on the table, I commenced alone. Nothing
hindered me from eating heartily, and I experienced a certain
sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, I cast a look
towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet
conscience within me. After I had done, I ventured on the
unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round Earnshaw's
seat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.
" Heathchff did not glance my way, and I gazed up, and
contemplated his features almost as confidently as if they had
been turned to stone. His forehead, that I once thought so
manly, and that I now think so diabolical, was shaded with a
heavy cloud ; his basilisk eyes were nearly quenched by sleep-
lessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were wet then ;
his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an
expression of unspeakable sadness. Had it been another, I
would have covered my face in the presence of such grief. In
his case, I was gratified ; and, ignoble as it seems to insult a
fallen enemy, I couldn't miss this chance of sticking in a dart :
his weakness was the only time when I could taste the delight of
paying wrong for wrong. "
" Fie, fie, miss! " I interrupted. " One might suppose you
had never opened a Bible in your life. If God afflict your enemies,
surely that ought to suffice you. It is both mean and presump-
tuous to add your torture to His ! "
" In general I'll allow that it would be, Ellen, " she continued ;
" but what misery laid on Heathcliff could content me, unless I
have a hand in it? I'd rather he suffered less, if I might cause
his sufferings and he might k7ww that I was the cause. Oh, I
owe him so much. On only one condition can I hope to forgive
him. It is, if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth ;
for every wrench of agony return a wrench : reduce him to my
level. As he was the first to injure, make him the first to implore
pardon ; and then — why then, Ellen, I might show you some
generosity. But it is utterly impossible I can ever be revenged,
l68 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and therefore I cannot forgive him. Hindley wanted some
water, and I handed him a glass, and asked him how he
was.
'''Not as ill as I wish,'he replied.'But leaving out my arm,
every inch of me is as sore as if I had been fighting with a legion
of imps !'
" • Yes, no wonder,'was my next remark.'Catherine used to
boast that she stood between you and bodily harm : she meant
that certain persons would not hurt you for fear of offending her.
It's well people don't really rise from their grave, or, last night,
she might have witnessed a repulsive scene ! Are not you
bruised and cut over your chest and shoulders ?'
"'I can't say,'he answered :'but what do you mean? Did
he dare to strike me when I was down ?'
"'He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the
ground,'I whispered.'And his mouth watered to tear you with
his teeth ; because he's only half man : not so much, and the
rest fiend.'
" Mr. Earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our
mutual foe ; who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible
to anything around him : the longer he stood, the plainer his
reflections revealed their blackness through his features.
"'Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle him in
my last agony, I'd go to hell with joy,'groaned the impatient
man, writhing to rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of
his inadequacy for the struggle.
"'Nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you,'I
observed aloud.'At the Grange, every one knows your sister
would have been living now, had it not been for Mr. HeathclifF.
After all, it is preferable to be hated than loved by him. When
I recollect how happy we were — how happy Catherine was before
he came — I'm fit to curse the day.'
" Most likely, Heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was
said, than the spirit of the person who said it. His attention
was roused, I saw, for his eyes rained down tears among the
ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sighs. I stared full
at him, and laughed scornfully. The clouded windows of hell
flashed a moment towards me ; the fiend which usually looked
out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that I did not fear
to hazard another sound of derision.
"'Get up, and begone out of my sight,'said the mourner.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 69
" I guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his voice
was hardly intelligible.
"'I beg your pardon,'I replied.'But I loved Catherine too ;
and her brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, I shall
supply. Now that she's dead, I see her in Hindley : Hindley
has exactly her eyes, if you had not tried to gouge them out, and
made them black and red ; and her'
"'Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death !'he
cried, making a movement that caused me to make one also.
"'But then,'I continued, holding myself ready to flee ;'if
poor Catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous,
contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff, she would soon
have presented a similar picture ! She wouldn't have borne your
abominable behaviour quietly : her detestation and disgust nmst
have found voice.'
" The back of the settle and Earnshaw's person interposed
between me and him : so instead of endeavouring to reach me,
he snatched a dinner knife from the table and flung it at my head.
It struck beneath my ear, and stopped the sentence I was utter-
ing ; but, pulling it out, I sprang to the door and delivered
another ; which I hope went a little deeper than his missile. The
last glimpse I caught of him was a furious rush on his part,
checked by the embrace of his host ; and both fell locked together
on the hearth. In my flight through the kitchen I bid Joseph
speed to his master ; I knocked over Hareton, who was hanging
a litter of puppies from a chair-back in the doorway ; and, blest
as a soul escaped from purgatory, I bounded, leaped, and flew
down the steep road ; then, quitting its windings, shot direct
across the moor, rolling over banks, and wading through
marshes : precipitating myself, in fact, towards the beacon light
of the Grange. And far rather would I be condemned to a per-
petual dwelling in the infernal regions, than, even for one night,
abide beneath the roof of Wuthering Heights again. "
Isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea ; then she
rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl I had
brought, and turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain
another hour, she stepped on to a chair, kissed Edgar's and
Catherine's portraits, bestowed a similar salute on me > and de-
scended to the carriage, accompanied by Fanny, who yelped wild
with joy at recovering her mistress. She was driven away, never
to revisit this neighbourhood : but a regular correspondence was
F 3
I/O WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
established between her and my master when things were more
settled. I believe her new abode was in the south, near London ;
there she had a son born, a few months subsequent to her escape.
He was christened Linton, and, from the first, she reported him
to be an ailing, peevish creature.
Mr. Heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village, inquired
where she lived. I refused to tell. He remarked that it was
not of any moment, only she must beware of coming to her
brother : she should not be with him, if he had to keep her
himself. Though I would give no information, he discovered,
through some of the other servants, both her place of residence
and the existence of the child. Still he didn't molest her : for
which forbearance she might thank his aversion, I suppose. He
< Dften asked about the infant, when he saw me ; and on hearing
its name, smiled grimly, and observed —
" They wish me to hate it too, do they? "
" I don't think they wish you to know anything about it, "
I answered.
" But I'll have it, " he said, " when I want it. They maji
reckon on that ! "
Fortunately, its mother died before the time arrived ; some
thirteen years after the decease of Catherine, when Linton ^vas
twelve, or a little more.
On the day succeeding Isabella's unexpected visit, I had no
opportunity of speaking to my niaster : he shunned conversa-
tion, and was fit for discussing nothing. When I could get him
to listen, I saw it pleased him that his sister had left her hus-
band ; whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildness
of his nature would scarcely seem to allow. So deep and sensi-
tive was his aversion, that he refrained from going anywhere
where he was likely to see or hear of Heathcliff. Grief, and
that together, transformed him into a complete hermit : he
threw up his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church,
avoided the village on all occasions, and spent a life of entire
seclusion within the limits of his park and grounds ; only varied
by solitary rambles on the moors, and visits to the grave of his
wife, mostly at evening, or early morning before other wanderers
were abroad. But he was too good to be thoroughly unhappy
long. He didn't pray for Catherine's soul to haunt him. Time
" brought resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than common joy.
He recalled her memory with nrdcnt, tender love, and hopeful
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I71
aspiring to the better world ; where he doubted not she was
gone.
And he had earthly consolation and affections also. For a
few days, I said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to
the departed : that coldness melted as fast as snow in April,
and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step,
it wielded a despot's sceptre in his heart. It was named
Catherine ; but he never called it the name in full, as he had
never called the first Catherine short ; probably because Heath-
cliff had a habit of doing so. The little one was always Cathy ;
it formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a con-
nection with her ; and his attachment sprang from its relation
to her, far more than from its being his own.
I used to draw a comparison between him and Hindley Earn-
shaw, and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their
conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances. They had
both been fond husbands, and were both attached to their chil-
dren ; and I could not see how they shouldn't both have taken
the same road, for good or evil. But, I thought in my mind,
Hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has shown himself
sadly the worse and the weaker man. When his ship struck,
the captain abandoned his post ; and the crew, instead of trying
to save her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving no hope for
their luckless vessel. Linton, on the contrary, displayed the
true courage of a loyal and faithful soul : he trusted God ; and
God comforted him. One hoped, and the other despaired : they
chose their own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure
them. But you'll not want to hear my moralising. Air. Lock-
wood ; you'll judge as well as I can, all these things : at least,
you'll think you will, and that's the same. The end of Earnshaw
was what might have been expected ; it followed fast on his
sister's : there were scarcely six months between them. We,
at the Grange, never got a very succinct account of his state
preceding it ; all that I did learn, was on occasion of going to
aid in the preparations for the funeral. Mr. Kenneth came to
announce the event to my master.
" W^ell, Nelly, " said he, riding into the yai'd one morning,
too early not to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad
news, " it's yours and my turn to go into mourning at present.
Who's given us the slip now, do you think ? "
" W^ho ? " I asked in a flurry.
172 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Why, guess ! " he returned, dismounting, and slinging his
bridle on a hook by the door. " And nip up the corner of your
apron : I'm certain you'll need it. "
" Not Mr. Heathcliff, surely? " I exclaimed.
" What! would you have tears for him? " said the doctor.
" No, Heathcliff's a tough young fellow: he looks blooming
to-day. I've just seen him. He's rapidly regaining flesh since
he lost his better half. "
" Who is it then, Mr. Kenneth? " I repeated impatiently.
" Hindley Earnshaw ! Your old friend Hindley, " he replied,
" and my wicked gossip : though he's been too wild for me this
long while. There ! I said we should draw water. But cheer
up. He died true to his character : drunk as a lord. Poor lad !
I'm sorry, too. One can't help missing an old companion :
though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man imagined,
and has done me many a rascally turn. He's barely twenty-
seven, it seems ; that's your own age : who would have thought
you were born in one year ? "
I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of Mrs.
Linton's death : ancient associations lingered round my heart ;
I sat down in the porch and wept as for a blood relation, desiring
Mr. Kenneth to get another servant to introduce him to the
master. I could not hinder myself from pondering on the
question — " Had he had fair play? " Whatever I did, that idea
would bother me : it was so tiresomely pertinacious that I re-
solved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights, and
assist in the last duties to the dead. Mr. Linton was extremely
reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless
condition in which he lay ; and I said my old master and foster-
brother had a claim on my services as strong as his own. Be-
sides, I reminded him that tlie child Hareton was his wife's
nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to act as its
guardian ; and he ought to and must inquire how the property
was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law. He
was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid me
speak to his lawyer ; and at length permitted me to go. His
lawyer had been Earnshaw's also : I called at the village, and
asked him to accompany me. He shook his head, and advised
that Heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were
known, Hareton would be found little else than a beggar.
" His father died in debt, " he said ; " the whole property is
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 173
mortgaged, and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow
him an opportunity of creating some interest in the creditor's
heart, that he may be inclined to deal leniently towards him. "
When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had come to
see everything carried on decently ; and Joseph, who appeared
in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence.
!Mr. Heathcliff said he did not perceive that I was wanted ; but I
might stay and order the arrangements for the funeral, if I chose.
" Correctly, " he remarked, " that fool's body should be buried
at the cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I happened
to leave him ten minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that inter-
val he fastened the two doors of the house against me, and he
has spent the night in drinking himself to death deliberately !
We broke in this morning, for we heard him snorting like a
horse ; and there he was, laid over the settle ; flaying and
scalping would not have wakened him. I sent for Kenneth,
and he came ; but not till the beast had changed into carrion :
he was both dead and cold, and stark ; and so you'll allow it
was useless making more stir about him ! "
The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered —
" I'd rayther he'd goan hisseln for t'doctor ! I sud ha'taen
tent o't'maister better nor him — and he warn't deead when I
left, naught o't'soart ! "
I insisted on the funeral being respectable. Mr. Heathcliff
said I might have my own way there too ; only, he desired me
to remember that the money for the whole affair came out of his
pocket. He maintained a hard, careless deportment, indicative
of neither joy nor sorrow ; if anything, it expressed a flinty
gratification at a piece of difficult work successfully executed. I
observed once, indeed, something like exultation in his aspect :
it was just when the people were bearing the coffin from the
house. He had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner : and
previous to following with Hareton, he lifted the unfortunate
child on to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto,''Now,
my bonny lad, you are mine! And we'll see if one tree won't
grow as crooked as another, with the same wind to twist it ! "
The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this speech : he played
with Heathcliff's whiskers, and stroked his cheek ; but I divined
its meaning, and observed tartly, " That boy must go back
with me to Thrushcross Grange, sir. There is nothing in the
world less vours than he is ! "
174 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Does Linton say so? " he demanded.
" Of course — he has ordered me to take him, " I replied.
" Well, " said the scoundrel, " we'll not argue the subject
now : but I have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young
one ; so intimate to your master that I must supply the place of
this with my own, if he attempt to remove it. I don't engage to
let Hareton go undisputed ; but I'll be pretty sure to make the
other come ! Remember to tell him. "
This hint was enough to bind our hands. I repeated its sub-
stance on my return ; and Edgar Linton, little interested at the
commencement, spoke no more of interfering. I'm not aware
that he could have done it to any purpose, had he been ever so
willing.
The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights : he
held firm possession, and proved to the attorney — who, in his
turn, proved it to Mr. Linton— that Earnshaw had mortgaged
every yard of land he owned, for cash to supply his mania for
gaming ; and he, Heathcliff, was the mortgagee. In that
manner Hareton, who should now be the first gentleman in the
neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete dependence
on his father's inveterate enemy ; and lives in his own house as
a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages : quite unable to
right himself, because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance
that he has been wronged.
CHAPTER XVIIL
The twelve years, continued Mrs. Dean, following that dismal
period, were the happiest of my life : my greatest troubles in
their passage rose from our little lady's trifling illnesses, which
she had to experience in common with all children, rich and
poor. For the rest, after the first six months, she grew Hke a
larch, and could walk and talk too, in her own way, before the
heath blossomed a second time over Mrs. Linton's dust. She
was the most winning thing that ever brought sunshine into a
desolate house : a real beauty in face, with the Earnshaws'hand-
some dark eyes, but the Lintons'fair skin and small features,
and yellow curling hair. Her spirit was high, though not rough,
and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its
affections. That capacity for intense attachments reminded me of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I75
her mother : still she did not resemble her ; for she could be soft
and mild as a dove, and she had a gentle voice and pensive
expression : her anger was never furious ; her love never fierce :
it was deep and tender. However, it must be acknowledged,
she had faults to foil her gifts. A propensity to be saucy was
one ; and a perverse will, that indulged children invariably
acquire, whether they be good-tempered or cross. If a servant
chanced to vex her, it was always — " I shall tell papa ! " And if
he reproved her, even by a look, you would have thought it a
heart-breaking business : I don't believe he ever did speak a
harsh word to her. He took her education entirely on himself,
and made it an amusement. Fortunately, curiosity and a quick
intellect made her an apt scholar : she learned rapidly and
eagerly, and did honour to his teaching.
Till she reached the age of thirteen, she had not once been
beyond the range of the park by herself. Mr. Linton would
take her with him a mile or so outside, on rare occasions ; but
he trusted her to no one else. Gimmerton was an unsubstantial
name in her ears ; the chapel, the only building she had ap-
proached or entered, except her own home. Wuthering Heights
and Mr. Heathcliff did not exist for her : she was a perfect
recluse ; and, apparently, perfectly contented. Sometimes,
indeed, while surveying the country from her nursery window,
she would observe —
" Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to the top of
those hills? I wonder what lies on the other side — is it the
sea? "
" No, Miss Cathy, " I would answer; " it is hills again, just
like these. "
" And what are those golden rocks like when you stand under
them ? " she once asked.
The abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly attracted
her notice ; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the
topmost heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay
in shadow. I explained that they were bare masses of stone,
with hardly enough earth in their clefts to nourish a stunted tree.
" And why are they bright so long after it is evening here? "
she pursued.
''Because they are a great deal higher up than we are, " replied
I; " you could not climb them, they are too high and steep. In
winter the frost is always there before it comes to us ; and deep
176 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
into summer I have found snow under that black hollow on the
north-east side ! "
" Oh, you have been on them ! " she cried gleefully. " Then
I can go, too, when I am a woman. Has papa been, Ellen? "
" Papa would tell you, miss, " I answered hastily, " that they
are not worth the trouble of visiting. The moors, where you
ramble with him, are much nicer ; and Thrushcross Park is the
finest place in the world. "
" But I know the park, and I don't know those, " she mur-
mured to herself.''And I should delight to look round me from
the brow of that tallest point : my little pony jSIinny shall take
me some time. "
One of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave, quite turned her
head with a desire to fulfil this project : she teased Mr. Linton
about it ; and he promised she should have the journey when
she got older. But Miss Catherine measured her age by months,
and, " Now, am I old enough to go to Penistone Crags? " was
the constant question in her mouth. The road thither wound
close by Wuthering Heights. Edgar had not the heart to pass
it ; so she received as constantly the answer,''Not yet, love :
not yet. "
I said Mrs. Heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting
her husband. Her family were of a delicate constitution : she
and Edgar both lacked the ruddy health that you will generally
meet in these parts. What her last illness was, I am not certain :
I conjecture, they died of the same thing, a kind of fever, slow
at its commencement, but incurable, and rapidly consuming life
towards the close. She wrote to inform her brother of the pro-
bable conclusion of a four month's indisposition under which she
had suffered, and entreated him to come to her, if possible ; for
she had much to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, and
deliver Linton safely into his hands. Her hope was, that Linton
might be left with him, as he had been with her : his father, she
would fain convince herself, had no desire to assume the burden
of his maintenance or education. My master hesitated not a
moment in complying with her request : reluctant as he was to
leave home at ordinary calls, he flew to answer this ; commending
Catherine to my peculiar vigilance, in his absence, with reiterated
■orders that she must not wander out of the park, even under my
escort : he did not calculate on her going unaccompanied.
He was away three weeks. The first day or two, rny charge
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 77
sat in a corner of the library, too sad for either reading or play-
ing : in that quiet state she caused me Httle trouble ; but it was
succeeded by an interval of impatient fretful weariness ; and being
too busy, and too old then, to run up and down amusing her, I
hit on a method by which she might entertain herself. I used to
send her on her travels round the grounds — now on foot, and
now on a pony ; indulging her with a patient audience of all
her real and imaginary adventures, when she returned.
The summer shone in full prime ; and she took such a taste
for this solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out
from breakfast till tea ; and then the evenings were spent in re-
counting her fanciful tales. I did not fear her breaking bounds ;
because the gates were generally locked, and I thought she would
scarcely venture forth alone, if they had stood wide open. Un-
luckily, my confidence proved misplaced. Catherine came to me,
one morning, at eight o'clock, and said she was that day an
Arabian merchant, going to cross the Desert with his caravan ;
and I must give her plenty of provision for herself and beasts :
a horse, and three camels, personated by a large hound and a
couple of pointers. I got together good store of dainties, and
slung them in a basket on one side of the saddle ; and she
sprang up as gay as a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat
and gauze veil from the July sun, and trotted off with a merry
laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to avoid galloping, and
come back early. The naughty thing never made her appear-
ance at tea. One traveller, the hound, being an old dog and
fond of its ease, returned ; but neither Cathy, nor the pony, nor
the two pointers were visible in any direction : I despatched
emissaries down this path, and that path, and at last went
wandering in search of her myself. There was ^ labourer work-
ing at a fence round a plantation, on the borders of the grounds.
I inquired of him if he had seen our young lady.
" I saw her at morn, " he replied ; " she would have me to cut
her a hazel switch, and then she leapt her Galloway over the
hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and galloped out of sight. "
You may guess how I felt at hearing this news. It struck me
directly she must have started for Penistone Crags. " What
will become of her? " I ejaculated, pushing through a gap
which the man was repairing, and making straight to the high-
road. I walked as if for a wager, mile after mile, till a turn
brought me in view of the Heights ; but no Catherine could I
178 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
detect far or near. The Crags lie about a mile and a half be-
yond Mr. Heathcliff's place, and that is four from the Grange,
so I began to fear night would fall ere I could reach them.
" And what if she should have slipped in clambering among
them, " I reflected, " and been killed, or broken some of her
bones? " My suspense was truly painful ; and, at first, it gave
me delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the farmhouse,
Charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window, with
swelled head and bleeding ear. I opened the wicket and ran to
the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. A woman whom
I knew, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton, answered : she
had been servant there since the death of Mr. Earnshaw.
" Ah, " said she, " you are come a seeking your little mistress I
don't be frightened. She's here safe : but I'm glad it isn't the
master. "
" He is not at home then, is he? " I panted, quite breathless
with quick walking and alarm.
" No, no, " she replied : " both he and Joseph are off, and I
think they won't return this hour or more. Step in and rest you
a bit. "
I entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth,
rocking herself in a little chair that had been her mother's when
a child. Her hat was hung against the wall, and she seemed
perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the best spirits
imaginable, to Hareton — now a great, strong lad of eighteen —
who stared at her with considerable curiosity and astonishment':
comprehending precious little of the fluent succession of remarks
and questions which her tongue never ceased pouring forth.
" Very well, miss I " I exclaimed, concealing my joy under an
angry countenance. " This is your last ride, till papa comes
back. I'll not trust you over the threshold again, you naughty,
naughty girl ! "
" Aha, Ellen! " she cried gaily, jumping up and running to
my side. " I shall have a pretty story to tell to-night : and so
you've found me out. Have you ever been here in your life
before ? "
" Put that hat on, and home at once, " said I. " I'm dread-
fully grieved at you. Miss Cathy : you've done extremely wrong.
It's no use pouting and crying: that won't repay the trouble I've
had, scouring the country after you. To think how Mr. Linton
charged me to keep you in ; and you stealing off so ! it shows
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 79
you are a cunning'little fox, and nobody will put faith in you
any more. "
" What have I done ? " sobbed she, instantly checked. " Papa
charged me nothing : he'll not scold me, Ellen — he's never cross,
like you ! "
" Come, come ! " I repeated. " I'll tie the riband. Now, let
us have no petulance. Oh, for shame ! You thirteen years old,
and such a baby ! "
This exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from her
head, and retreating to the chimney out of my reach.
" Nay, " said the servant, " don't be hard on the bonny lass,
Mrs. Dean. We made her stop : she'd fain have ridden for-
wards, afeard you should be uneasy. Hareton offered to go with
her, and I thought he should : it's a wild road over the hills. "
Hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his
pockets, too awkward to speak ; though he looked as if he did
not relish my intrusion.
" How long am I to wait? " I continued, disregarding the
woman's interference. " It will be dark in ten minutes. Where
is the pony, Miss Cathy ? And where is Phoenix ? I shall leave
you, unless you be quick ; so please yourself. "
" The pony is in the yard, " she replied, " and Phoenix is shut
in there. He's bitten— and so is Charlie. I was going to tell
you all about it ; but you are in a bad temper, and don't deserve
to hear. "
I picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it ; but per-
ceiving that the people of the house took her part, she commenced
capering round the room ; and on my giving chase, ran like a
mouse over and under and behind the furniture, rendering it
ridiculous for me to pursue. Hareton and the woman laughed,
and she joined them, and waxed more impertinent still ; till I
cried, in great irritation —
" Well, Miss Cathy, if you were aware whose house this is,
you'd be glad enough to get out. "
" It's yo?(r father's, isn't it? " said she, turning to Hareton.
" Nay, " he replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.
He could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes, though they
were just his own.
" Whose then — your master's? " she asked.
He coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an oath,
and turned away.
l8o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Who is his master ? " continued the tiresome girl, appeal-
ing to me. " He talked about'our house,'and'our folk.'I
thought he had been the owner's son. And he never said, Miss ;
he should have done, shouldn't he, if he's a servant? "
Hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud, at this childish
speech. I silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded
in equipping her for departure.
" Now, get my horse, " she said, addressing her unknown
kinsman as she would one of the stable-boys at the Grange.
" And you may come with me. I want to see where the goblin-
hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear about the fairishes, as
you call them : but make haste ! What's the matter ? Get my
horse, I say. "
" I'll see thee damned before I be thy servant ! " growled the
lad.
" You'll see me zvhatf " asked Catherine in surprise.
" Damned — thou saucy witch ! " he replied.
" There, Miss Cathy ! you see you have got into pretty com-
pany, " I interposed. " Nice words to be used to a young lady !
Pray don't begin to dispute with him. Come, let us seek for
Minny ourselves, and begone. "
" But, Ellen, " cried she, staring, fixed in astonishment, " how
dare he speak so to me ? Mustn't he be made to do as I ask
him? You wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you said. —
Now, then ! "
Hareton did not appear to feel this threat ; so the tears
sprang into her eyes with indignation. " You bring the pony,'
she exclaimed, turning to the woman, " and let my dog free this
moment ! "
" Softly, miss, " answered she addressed : " you'll lose nothing
by being civil. Though Mr. Hareton, there, be not the master's
son, he's your cousin ; and I was never hired to serve you. "
" He my cousin ! " cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh.
" Yes, indeed, " responded her reprover.
" Oh, Ellen ! don't let them say such things, " she pursued, in
great trouble. " Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from London :
my cousin is a gentleman's son. That my " — she stopped, and
wept outright ; upset at the bare notion of relationship with such
a clown.
" Hush, hush ! " I whispered, " people can have many cousins,
and of all sorts. Miss Cathy, without being any the worse for it ;
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l8l
only they needn't keep their company, if they be disagreeable
and bad. "
" He's not — he's not my cousin, Ellen ! " she went on, gather-
ing fresh grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms
for refuge from the idea.
I was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual
revelations ; having no doubt of Linton's approaching arrival,
communicated by the former, being reported to Mr. Heathcliff r
and feeling as confident that Catherine's first thought on her
father's return, would be to seek an explanation of the latter's
assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred. Hareton, recover-
ing from his disgust at being taken for a servant, seemed moved
by her distress ; and, having fetched the pony round to the door,
he took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-legged terrier-whelp-
from the kennel, and putting it into her hand bid her whist ! for
he meant nought. Pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed
him with a glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
I could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the
poor fellow ; who was a well-made, athletic youth, good-looking
in features, and stout and healthy, but attired in garments be-
fitting his daily occupations of working on the farm, and loung-
ing among the moors after rabbits and game. Still, I thought I
could detect in his physiognomy a mind owning better qualities
than his father ever possessed. Good things lost amid a wilder-
ness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far overtopped their
neglected growth ; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy
soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable
circumstances. Mr. Heathcliff, I believe, had not treated him
physically ill ; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression : he had none of the
timid susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment,
in Heathcliff's judgment. He appeared to have bent his male-
volence on making him a brute : he was never taught to read or
write ; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper ; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a
single precept against vice. And from what I heard, Joseph
contributed much to his deterioration, by a narrow-minded
partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him, as a boy,
because he was the head of the old family. And as he had been
in the habit of accusing Catherine Earnshaw and Heathcliff,
when children, of putting the master past his patience, and
1 82 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their
" offalld ways, " so at present he laid the whole burden of Hare-
ton's faults on the shoulders of the usurper of his property. If
the lad swore, he wouldn't correct him : nor however culpably
he behaved. It gave Joseph satisfaction, apparently, to watch
him go the worst lengths : he allowed that the lad was ruined :
that his soul was abandoned to perdition ; but then, he reflected
that Heathcliff must answer for it. Hareton's blood would be
required at his hands ; and there lay immense consolation in
that thought. Joseph had instilled into him a pride of name, and
of his lineage ; he would, had he dared, have fostered hate
between him and the present owner of the Heights : but his
dread of that owner amounted to superstition ; and he confined
his feelings regarding him to muttered innuendoes and private
comminations. I don't pretend to be intimately acquainted with
the mode of living customary in those days at Wuthering
Heights : I only speak from hearsay ; for I saw little. The
villagers affirmed iMr. Heathcliff was near, and a cruel hard
landlord to his tenants ; but the house, inside, had regained its
ancient aspect of comfort under female management, and the
scenes of riot common in Hindley's time were not now enacted
within its walls. The master was too gloomy to seek com-
panionship with any people, good or bad ; and he is yet.
This, however, is not making progress with my story. Miss
Cathy rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded
lier own dogs, Charlie and Phoenix. They came limping, and
hanging their heads ; and we set out for home, sadly out of sorts,
every one of us. I could not wring from my little lady how she
had spent the day ; except that, as I supposed, the goal of her
I)ilgrimage was Penistone Crags ; and she arrived without adven-
ture to the gate of the farmhouse, when Hareton happened to
issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who attacked her
train. They had a smart battle, before their owners could separate
ihem : that formed an introduction. Catherine told Hareton who
she was, and where she was going ; and asked him to show her
the way : finally, beguiling him to accompany her. He opened
the mysteries of the Fairy Cave, and twenty other queer places.
But, being in disgrace, I was not favoured with a description of
the interesting objects she saw. I could gather, however, that
lier guide had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by
addressing him as a servant ; and Heathcliff's housekeeper hurt
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 83
hers by calling him her cousin. Then the language he had held
to her rankled in her heart ; she who was always " love, " and
" darling, " and " queen, " and " angel, " with everybody at the
Grange, to be insulted so shockingly by a stranger ! She did not
comprehend it ; and hard work I had to obtain a promise that she
would not lay the grievance before her father. I explained how
he objected to the whole household at the Heights, and how
sorry he would be to find she had been there ; but I insisted
most on the fact, that if she revealed my negligence of his orders,
he would perhaps be so angry, that I should have to leave ; and
Cathy couldn't bear that prospect: she pledged her word, and
kept it, for my sake. After all, she was a sweet little girl.
CHAPTER XIX.
A LETTER, edged with black, announced the day of my master's
return. Isabella was dead ; and he wrote to bid me get mourn-
ing for his daughter, and arrange a room, and other accommoda-
tions, for his youthful nephew. Catherine ran wild with joy at
the idea of welcoming her father back ; and indulged most san-
guine anticipations of the innumerable excellences of her " real "
cousin. The evening of their expected arrival came. Since
early morning, she had been busy ordering her own small affairs ;
and now, attired in her new black frock — poor thing ! her aunt's
death impressed her with no definite sorrow — she obliged me, by
constant worrying, to walk with her down through the grounds
to meet them.
" Linton is just six months younger than I am, " she chattered,
as we strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf,
under shadow of the trees. " How deligiUful it will be to have
him for a playfellow ! Aunt Isabella sent papa a beautiful lock
of his hair ; it was lighter than mine — more flaxen, and quite as
fine. I have it carefully preserved in a little glass box : and I've
often thought what pleasure it would be to see its owner. Oh !
I am happy — and papa, dear, dear papa ! Come, Ellen, let us
run ! come, run. "
She ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my
sober footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on
the grassy bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently ; but
that was impossible : she couldn't be still a minute.
184 WUTHERING HEIGHT.^.
''How long they are ! " she exclaimed.''Ah, I see some dust
on the road— they are coming? No ! When will they be here?
May we not go a little way — half a mile, Ellen : only just half a
mile? Do say yes : to that clump of birches at the turn ! "
I refused staunchly. At length her suspense was ended : the
travelling carriage rolled in sight. jMiss Cathy shrieked and
stretched out her arms, as soon as she caught her father's face
looking from the window. He descended, nearly as eager as
herself: and a considerable interval elapsed ere they had a
thought to spare for any but themselves. While they exchanged
caresses, I took a peep in to see after Linton. He was asleep in
a corner, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had been
winter. A pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been
taken for my master's younger brother, so strong was the re-
semblance : but there was a sickly peevishness in his aspect, that
Edgar Linton never had. The latter saw me looking ; and hav-
ing shaken hands, advised me to close the door, and leave him
undisturbed ; for the journey had fatigued him. Cathy would
fain have taken one glance, but her father told her to come, and
they walked together up the park, while I hastened before to
prepare the servants.
" Now, darling, " said Mr, Linton, addressing his daughter,
as they halted at the bottom of the front steps ; " your cousin is
not so strong or so merry as you are, and he has lost his mother,
remember, a very short time since ; therefore, don't expect him
to play and run about with you directly. And don't harass him
much by talking : let him be quiet this evening, at least, will you? "
" Yes, yes, papa, " answered Catherine : " but I do want to see
him ; and he hasn't once looked out. "
The carriage stopped ; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted
to the ground by his uncle.
" This is your cousin Cathy, Linton, " he said, putting their
little hands together. " She's fond of you already; and mind
you don't grieve her by crying to-night. Try to be cheerful
now ; the travelling is at an end, and you have nothing to do
but rest and amuse yourself as you please. "
" Let me go to bed, then, " answered the boy, shrinking from
Catherine's salute ; and he put up his fingers to remove incipient
tears.
" Come, come, there's a good child, " I whispered, leading him
in. " You'll make her weep too — see how sorry she is for you ! "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 85
I do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin
put on as sad a countenance as himself, and returned to her
father. All three entered, and mounted to the library, where tea
was laid ready. I proceeded to remove Linton's cap and mantle,
and placed him on a chair by the table ; but he was no sooner
seated than he began to cry afresh. My master inquired what
was the matter.
" I can't sit on a chair, " sobbed the boy.
" Go to the sofa, then, and Ellen shall bring you some tea, "
answered his uncle patiently.
He had been greatly tried during the journey, I felt convinced,
by his fretful ailing charge. Linton slowly trailed himself off,
and lay down, Cathy carried a footstool and her cup to his side.
At first she sat silent ; but that could not last : she had resolved
to make a pet of her little cousin, as she would have him to be ;
and she commenced stroking his curls, and kissing his cheek, and
offering him tea in her saucer, like a baby. This pleased him,
for he was not much better : he dried his eyes, and lightened
into a faint smile.
" Oh, he'll do very well, " said the master to me, after watching
them a minute. " Very well, if we can keep him, Ellen. The
company of a child of his own age will instil new spirit into him
soon, and by wishing for strength he'll gain it. "
" Ay, if we can keep him 1 " I mused to myself ; and sore mis-
givings came over me that there was slight hope of that. And
then, I thought, however will that weakling live at Wuthering
Heights? Between his father and Hareton, what playmates
and instructors they'll be. Our doubts were presently decided
— even earlier than I expected. I had just taken the children up-
stairs, after lea was finished, and seen Linton asleep — he would
not suffer me to leave him till that was the case— I had come down,
and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom
candle for Mr. Edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen
and informed me that Mr. Heathcliff's servant Joseph was at the
door, and wished to speak with the master.
" I shall ask him what he wants first, " I said, in considerable
trepidation. " A very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and
the instant they have returned from a long journey'^, I don't
think the master can see him. "
Joseph had advanced through the kitchen as I uttered these
words, and now presented himself in the hall. He was donned
1 86 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
in his Sunday garments, with his most sanctimonious and sourest
face, and, holding his hat in one hand and his stick in the other,
he proceeded to clean his shoes on the mat.
" Good evening, Joseph, " I said coldly. " What business
brings you here to-night? "
" It's Maister Linton I mun spake to, " he answered, waving
me disdainfully aside.
" Mr. Linton is going to bed ; unless 3'ou have something par-
ticular to say, I'm sure he won't hear it now, " I continued.''You
had better sit down in there, and entrust your message to me. "
" AYhich is his rahm? " pursued the fellow, surveying the
range of closed doors.
I perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation, so very
reluctantly I went up to the library, and announced the unseason-
able visitor, advising that he should be dismissed till next day.
Mr. Linton had no time to empower me to do so, for Joseph
mounted close at my heels, and, pushing into the apartment,
planted himself at the far side of the table, with his two fists
clapped on the head of his stick, and began in an elevated tone,
as if anticipating opposition —
" Hathecliff has sent me for his lad, and I munn't goa back
'bout him. "
Edgar Linton was silent a minute ; an expression of exceeding
sorrow overcast his features : he would have pitied the child on
his own account ; but, recalling Isabella's hopes and fears, and
anxious wishes for her son, and her commendations of him to his
care, he grieved bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and
searched in his heart how it might be avoided.'No plan offered
itself : the very exhibition of any desire to keep him would have
rendered the claimant more peremptory : there was nothing left
but to resign him. However, he was not going to rouse him
from his sleep.
" Tell Mr. Heathcliff, " he answered calmly, " that his son
.shall come to Wuthering Heights to-morrow. He is in bed,
and too tired to go the distance now. You may also tell him
that the mother of Linton desired him to remain under my
guardianship ; and, at present, his health is very precarious. "
" Noa ! " said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the floor,
and assuming an authoritative air ; " Noa ! that means naught.
Hathecliff maks noa'count o't'mother, nor ye norther ; but
he'll hev his lad ; und I mun tak him — soa now ve knaw ! "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. J 8/
" You shall not to-night! " answered Linton decisively.
" Walk downstairs at once, and repeat to your master what I
have said. Ellen, show him down. Go "
And, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid
the room of him, and closed the door.
''\\irrah weell ! " shouted Joseph, as he slowly drew off.''To-
morn, he's come hisseln, and thrust him out, if ye darr ! "
CHAPTER XX.
To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, Mr. Linton
commissioned me to take the boy home early, on Catherine's
pony ; and, said he — ■
''As we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good
or bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone, to my
daughter: she cannot associate with him hereafter, and it is
better for her to remain in ignorance of his proximity ; lest she
should be restless, and anxious to visit the Heights. Merely tell
her his father sent for him suddenly, and he has been obliged to
leave us. "
Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five
o'clock, and astonished to be informed that he must prepare for
further travelhng ; but I softened off the matter by stating that
he was going to spend some time with his father, Mr. Heathcliff,
who wished to see him so much, he did not like to defer the
pleasure till he should recover from his late journey.
" My father! " he cried, in strange perplexity. " Mamma
never told me I had a father, ^^'here does he live ? I'd rather
stay with uncle. "
" He hves a Httle distance from the Grange, " I replied ; " just
beyond those hills : not so far, but you may walk over here when
you get hearty. And you should be glad to go home, and to
see him. You must try to love him, as you did your mother,
and then he will love you. "
" But why have I not heard of him before? " asked Linton,
" Why didn't mamma and he live together, as other people do ? "
" He had business to keep him in the north, " I -.answered,
" and your mother's health required her to reside in the
south. "
" And why didn't mamma speak to me about him? " perse-
l88 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
vered the child. " She often talked of uncle, and I learnt to love
him long ago. How am I to love papa? I don't know him. "
" Oh, all children love their parents, " I said. " Your mother,
perhaps, thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned
him often to you. Let us make haste. An early ride on such a
beautiful morning is much preferable to an hour's more sleep. "
" Is she to go with us, " he demanded : " the little girl I saw
yesterday? "
" Not now, " replied I.
" Is uncle? " he continued.
" No, I shall be your companion there, " I said.
Linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown study,
" I won't go without uncle, " he cried at length : " I can't tell
where you mean to take me. "
I attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing
reluctance to meet his father ; still he obstinately resisted any
progress towards dressing, and I had to call for my master's
assistance in coa.xing him out of bed. The poor thing was
finally got off, with several delusive assurances that his absence
should be short ; that Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit him,
and other promises, equally ill-founded, which I invented and
reiterated at intervals throughout the way. The pure heather-
scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of Minny,
relieved his despondency after a while. He began to put ques-
tions concerning his new home, and its inhabitants, with greater
interest and liveliness.
" Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross
Grange? " he inquired, turning to take a last glance into the
valley, whence a light mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud
on the skirts of the blue.
" It is not so buried in trees, " I replied, " and it is not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and
the air is healthier for you — fresher and dryer. You will, per-
haps, think the building old and dark at first ; though it is a
respectable house : the next best in the neighbourhood. And
you will have such nice rambles on the moors. Hareton Earn-
shaw — that is Miss Cathy's other cousin, and so yours in a man-
ner — will show you all the sweetest spots ; and you can bring
a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study ;
and, now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk ; he does,
frequently, walk out on the hills. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 89
" And what is my flither like? " he asked. " Is he as young
and handsome as uncle? "
" He's as young, " said I ; " but he has black hair and eyes,
and looks sterner ; and he is taller and bigger altogether. He'll
not seem to you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it
is not his way : still, mind you, be frank and cordial with him ;
and naturally he'll be fonder of you than any uncle, for you are
his own. "
" Black hair and eyes ! " mused Linton. " I can't fancy him.
Then I am not like him, am I? "
" Not much, " I answered: not a morsel, I thought, survey-
ing with regret the w^hite complexion and slim frame of my com-
panion, and his large languid eyes — his mother's eyes, save that,
unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a moment, they had
not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.
" How strange that he should never come to see mamma and
me! " he murmured. " Has he ever seen me? If he has, I
must have been a baby. I remember not a single thing about
him ! "
" Why, Master Linton, " said I, " three hundred miles is a
great distance ; and ten years seem very different in length to a
grown-up person compared with what they do to you. It is
probable Mr. Heathcliff proposed going from summer to sum-
mer, but never found a convenient opportunity ; and now it is
too late. Don't trouble him with questions on the subject : it
will disturb him, for no good. "
The boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the
remainder of the ride, till we halted before the farm-house
garden gate. I watched to catch his impressions in his counte-
nance. He surveyed the carved front and low-browed lattices,
the stragghng gooseberry bushes and crooked firs, with solemn
intentness, and then shook his head : his private feelings entirely
disapproved of the exterior of his new abode. But he had
sense to postpone complaining : there might be compensation
within. Before he dismounted, I went and opened the door.
It was half-past six ; the family had just finished breakfast ; the
servant was clearing and wiping down the table. Joseph stood
by his master's chair telling some tale concerning a lame horse ;
and Hareton was preparing for the hay-field.
" Hallo, Nelly ! " said Mr. Heathcliff, when he saw me. " I
feared I should have to come down and fetch my propert) "
190 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
myself. You've brought it, have you ? Let us see what we can
make of it. "
He got up and strode to the door : Hareton and Joseph
followed in gaping curiosit3^ Poor Linton ran a frightened
eye over the faces of the three.
" Sure-ly, " said Joseph, after a grave inspection, " he's
swopped wi'ye, maister, an'yon's his lass ! "
Heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of confusion,
uttered a scornful laugh.
" God ! what a beauty ! what a lovely, charming thing ! " he
exclaimed. " Haven't they reared it on snails and sour milk,
Nelly? Oh, damn my soul! but that's worse than I expected
— and the devil knows I was not sanguine ! "
I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter.
He did not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father's
speech, or whether it were intended for him : indeed, he was not
yet certain that the grim, sneering stranger was his father. But
he clung to me with growing trepidation ; and on Mr. Heath-
cliff's taking a seat and bidding him " come hither, " he hid his
face on my shoulder and wept.
" Tut, tut! " said Heathcliff, stretching out a hand and
dragging him roughly between his knees, and then holding
up his head by the chin. " None of that nonsense ! We're
not going to hurt thee, Linton — isn't that thy name? Thou
art thy mother's child, entirely ! Where is my share in thee,
puling chicken? "
He took off the boy's cap and pushed back his thick flaxen
curls, felt his slender arms and his small fingers ; during which
examination, Linton ceased crying, and lifted his great blue
eyes to inspect the inspector.
" Do you know me? " asked Heathcliff, having satisfied him-
self that the limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
" No, " said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.
" You've heard of me, I dare say? "
" No, " he replied again.
" No ! W^hat a shame of your mother, never to waken your
filial regard for me ! You are my son, then, I'll tell you ; and
your mother was a wicked slut to leave you in ignorance of the
sort of father you possessed. Now, don't wince, and colour up !
Though it is something to see you have not white blood. Be a
good lad ; and I'll do for you. Nelly, if you be tired you may
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. IQI
sit down ; if not, get home again. I guess you'll report what
you hear and see to the cipher at the Grange ; and this thing
won't be settled while you linger about it. "
" Well, " rephed I, " I hope you'll be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliff, or you'll not keep him long ; and he's all you have
akin in the wide world, that you will ever know — remember. "
" I'll be veiy kind to him, you needn't fear, " he said, laughing.
" Only nobody else must be kind to him : I'm jealous of mono-
polising his affection. And, to begin my kindness, Joseph, bring
the lad some breakfast. Hareton, you infernal calf, begone to
your work. Yes, Nell, " he added, when they had departed,
''my son is prospective owner of your place, and I should not
wish him to die till I was certain of being his successor. Be-
sides, he's 7nine, and I want the triumph of seeing ;/;;'descendant
fairly lord of their estates : my child hiring their children to till
their father's lands for wages. That is the sole consideration
which can make me endure the whelp : I despise him for himself,
and hate him for the memories he revives ! But that considera-
tion is sufficient : he's as safe with me, and shall be tended as
carefully as your master tends his own. I have a room upstairs,
furnished for him in handsome style : I've engaged a tutor,
also, to come three times a week, from twenty miles distance,
to teach him what he pleases to learn. I've ordered Hareton to
obey him ; and in fact I've arranged everything with a view to
preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his
associates. I do regret, however, that he so little deserves the
trouble : if I wished any blessing in the world, it was to find
him a worthy object of pride ; and I'm bitterly disappointed
with the whey-faced whining wretch ! "
While he was speaking, Joseph returned bearing a basin of
milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton ; who stirred round
the homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed he could
not eat it. I saw the old man-servant shared largely in his
master's scorn of the child ; though he was compelled to retain
the sentiment in his heart, because Heathcliff plainly m.eant his
underlings to hold him in honour.
" Cannot ate it? " repeated he, peering in Linton's face, and
subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear of being ^overheard.
" But Maister Hareton nivir ate naught else, when he wer a
little un ; and what wer gooid eneugh for him's gooid cneugh
for ye, I's rayther think ! "
192 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" I shall t eat it! " answered Linton snappishly. " Take it
away. "
Joscpli snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.
" Is there aught ails th'victuals? " he asked, thrusting the
tray under Heathcliff's nose.
" What should ail them? " he said.
" Wah ! " answered Joseph, " yon dainty chap says he cannut
ate'em. But I guess it's raight ! His mother wer just soa — we
wer a'most too mucky to sow t'corn for makking her breead. "
" Don't mention his mother to me, " said the master angrily.
" Get him something that he can eat, that's all. What is his
usual food, Nelly? "
I suggested boiled milk or tea ; and the housekeeper received
instructions to prepare some. Come, I reflected, his father's
selfishness may contribute to his comfort. He perceives his
delicate constitution, and the necessity of treating him tolerably.
I'll console Mr. Edgar by acquainting him with the turn Heath-
cliff's humour has taken. Having no excuse for lingering longer
I slipped out, while Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the
advances of a friendly sheep-dog. But he was too much on the
alert to be cheated : as I closed the door, I heard a cry, and a
frantic repetition of the words —
" Don't leave me ! I'll not stay here ! I'll not stay here ! "
Then the latch was raised and fell : they did not suffer him to
come forth. I mounted Minny, and urged her to a trot ; and
so my brief guardianship ended.
CHAPTER XXI.
We had sad work with little Cathy that day ; she rose in high
glee, eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tears and
lamentations followed the news of his departure, that Edgar him-
self was obliged to soothe her, by affirming he should come back
soon : he added, however, " if I can get him ; " and there were
no hopes of that. This promise poorly pacified her : but time
was more potent ; and though still at intervals she inquired of
her father when Linton would return, before she did see him
again his features had waxed so dim in her memory that she
did not recognise him.
When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 93
Heights, in paying business-visits to Gimmerton, I used to ask
how the young master got on ; for he Hved almost as secluded as
Catherine herself, and was never to be seen. I could gather from
her that he continued in weak health, and was a tiresome inmate.
She said Mr. Heathcliff seemed to dislike him ever longer and
worse, though he took some trouble to conceal it : he had an
antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do at. all with
his sitting in the same room with him many minutes together.
There seldom passed much talk between them : Linton learnt his
lessons and spent his evenings in a small apartment they called
the parlour : or else lay in bed all day : for he was constantly
getting coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort,
" And I never knew such a faint-hearted creature, " added the
woman ; " nor one so careful of hisseln. He will go on, if I leave
the window open a bit late in the evening. Oh ! it's killing ! a
breath of night air ! And he must have a fire in the middle of
summer ; and Joseph's bacca pipe is poison ; and he must always
have sweets and dainties, and always milk, milk for ever — heed-
ing naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter ; and there
lie'U sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the fire, with
some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at ; and if
Hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him — Hareton is not bad-
natured, though he's rough — they're sure to part, one swearing
and the other crying. I believe the master would relish Earn-
shaw's thrashing him to a mummy, if he were not his son ; and
I'm certain he would be fit to turn him out of doors, if he knew
half the nursing he gives hisseln. But then, he won't go into
danger of temptation : he never enters the parlour, and should
Linton show those ways in the house where he is, he sends him
upstairs directly. "
I divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had
rendered young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he were
not so originally ; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed :
though still I was moved with a sense of grief at his lot, and a
wish that he had been left with us. Mr. Edgar encouraged me
to gain information : he thought a great deal about him, I fancy,
and would have run some risk to see him ; and he told me once
to ask the housekeeper whether he ever came into the village ?
She said he had only been twice, on horseback, accohipanying
his father, and both times he pretended to be quite knocked up
for three or four days afterwards. That housekeeper left, if I
194 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
recollect rightly, two years after he came ; and another, whom
I did not know, was her successor : she lives there still.
Time wore on at the Grange in its former pleasant way, till
Miss Cathy reached sixteen. On the anniversary of her birth we
never manifested any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the
anniversary of my late mistress's death. Her father invariably
spent that day alone in the library ; and walked, at dusk, as far
as Gimmerton kirkyard, where he would frequently prolong his
stay beyond midnight. Therefore Catherine was thrown on her
own resources for amusement. This 20th of March was a beauti-
ful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young lady
came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have
a ramble on the edge of the moor with me : Mr. Linton had
given her leave, if we went only a short distance and were back
within the hour.
" So make haste, Ellen ! " she cried. " I know where I wish
to go ; where a colony of moor game are settled : I want to see
whether they have made their nests yet. "
" That must be a good distance up, " I answered; " they
don't breed on the edge of the moor. "
" No, it's not, " she said. " I've gone very near with papa. "
I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of
the matter. She bounded before me, and returned to my side,
and was off again like a young greyhound ; and, at first, I found
plenty of entertainment in listening to the lai'ks singing far and
near, and enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine ; and watching her,
my pet, and my delight, with her golden ringlets flying loose
behind, and her bright cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as a
wild rose, and her eyes radiant witla cloudless pleasure. She
was a happy creature, and an angel, in those days. It's a pity
she could not be content.
" Well, " said I, " where are your moor-game. Miss Cathy?
We should be at them : the Grange park-fence is a great ?/ay
off now. "
" Oh, a little further— only a little further, Ellen, " was her
answer continually. " Climb to that hillock, pass that bank,
and by the time you reach the other side I shall have raised
the birds. "
But there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass,
that, at length, I began to be weary, and told her we must halt,
and retrace our steps. I shouted to her, as she had outstripped
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 95
me a long way ; she either did not iiear or did not regard, for
she still sprang on, and I was compelled to follow. Finally, she
dived into a hollow ; and before I came in sight of her again,
she was two miles nearer Wuthering Heights than her own
home ; and I beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of whom
I felt convinced was IMr. Heathcliff himself.
Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least,
hunting out the nests of the grouse. The Heights were Heath-
cliff's land, and he was reproving the poacher.
" I've neither taken any nor found any, " she said, as I toiled
to them, expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement.
" I didn't mean to take them ; but papa told me there were
quantities up here, and I wished to see the eggs. "
Heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing
his acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his male-
volence towards it, and demanded who " papa " was?
" Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Grange, " she rephed. " I
thought you did not know me, or you wotildn't have spoken
in that way. "
" You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected then? "
he said sarcastically.
" And what are you? " inquired Catherine, gazing curiously
on the speaker.''That man I've seen before. Is he your son ? "
She pointed to Hareton, the other individual, who had gained
nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two
years to his age : he seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
" Miss Cathy, " I interrupted, " it will be three hours instead
of one that we are out, presently. We really must go back. "
" No, that man is not my son, " answered Heathcliff, pushing
me aside. " But I have one, and you have seen him before too ;
and, though your nurse is in a hurry, I think both you and she
would be the better for a little rest. Will you just turn this nab
of heath, and walk into my house? You'll get home earlier for
the ease ; and you shall receive a kind welcome. "
I whispered Catherine that she mustn't, on any account, accede
to the proposal : it was entirely out of the question.
" Why? " she asked, aloud. " I'm tired of running, and the
ground is dewy : I can't sit here. Let us go, Ellerh Besides,
he says I have seen his son. He's mistaken, I think ; but I guess
where he lives : at the farm-house I visited in coming from
Pcnistone Crags. Don't you ? "
196 WUTHERINC; HEIGHTS.
" I do. Come, Nelly, hold your tongue — it will be a treat for
her to look in on us. Hareton, get forwards with the lass. You
shall walk with me, Nelly. "
" No, she's not going to any such place, " I cried, struggling
to release my arm, which he had seized : but she was almost at
the door-stones already, scampering round the brow at full speed.
Her appointed companion did not pretend to escort her : he shied
off by the road-side, and vanished.
" Mr. Heathcliff, it's very wrong, " I continued: " you know
you mean no good. And there she'll see Linton, and all will be
told as soon as ever we return ; and I shall have the blame. "
" I want her to see Linton, " he answered ; " he's looking better
these few days : it's not often he's fit to be seen. And we'll soon
persuade her to keep the visit secret : where is the harm of it? "
" The harm of it is, that her father would hate me if he found I
suffered her to enter your house ; and I am convinced you have
a bad design in encouraging her to do so, " I replied.
" My design is as honest as possible. I'll inform you of its
whole scope, " he said. " That the two cousins may fall in love,
and get married. I'm acting generously to your master: his
young chit has no expectations, and should she second my wishes,
she'll be provided for at once as joint successor with Linton. "
" If Linton died, " I answered, " and his life is quite uncertain,
Catherine would be the heir. "
" No, she would not, " he said. " There is no clause in the will
to secure it so : his property would go to me ; but, to prevent
disputes, I desire their union, and am resolved to bring it about. "
" And I'm resolved she shall never approach your house with
me again, " I returned, as we reached the gate, where Miss Cathy
waited our coming.
Heathcliff bade me be quiet ; and, preceding us up the path,
hastened to open the door. My young lady gave him several
looks, as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to
think of him ; but now he smiled when he met her eye, and
softened his voice in addressing her ; and I was foolish enough
to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from
desiring her injury. Linton stood on the hearth. He had been
out walking in the fields, for his cap was on, and he was calling
to Joseph to bring him dry shoes. He had grown tall of his age,
still wanting some months of sixteen. His features were pretty
yet, and his eye and complexion brighter than I remembered
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 97
them, though with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the
salubrious air and genial sun.
" Now, who is that? " asked Mr. Heathcliff, turning to
Cathy.''Can you tell ? "
" Your son? " she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one
and then the other.
" Yes, yes, " answered he : " but is this the only time you have
beheld him? Think! Ah! you have a short memory. Linton,
don't you recall your cousin, that you used to tease us so with
wishing to see? "
" What, Linton! " cried Cathy, kindling into joyful surprise
at the name. " Is that little Linton? He's taller than I am !
Are you Linton ? "
The youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she
kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change
time had wrought in the appearance of each. Catherine had
reached her full height ; her figure was both plump and slender,
elastic as steel, and her whole aspect sparkling with health and
spirits. Linton's looks and movements were very languid, and
his form extremely slight ; but there was a grace in his manner
that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not unpleasing.
After exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
cousin went to Mr. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door,
dividing his attention between the objects inside and those that
lay without : pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and
really noting the former alone.
" And you are my uncle, then ! " she cried, reaching up to
salute him. " I thought I liked you, though you were cross at
first. Why don't you visit at the Grange with Linton ? To hve
all these years such close neighbours, and never see us, is odd :
what have you done so for? "
" I visited it once or twice too often before you were born, " he
answered.''There — damn it ! If you have any kisses to spare,
give them to Linton: they are thrown away on me. "
" Naughty Ellen ! " exclaimed Catherine, flying to attack me
next with her lavish caresses. " Wicked Ellen ! to try to hinder
me from entering. Rut I'll take this walk every morning in
future: may I, uncle? and sometimes bring papa. ^Won't you
be glad to see us? "
" Of course! " replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed
grimace, resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed
198 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
visitors. " But stay, " he continued, turning towards the young
lady. " Now I tliink of it, I'd better tell you. Mr. Linton has
a prejudice against me : we quarrelled at one time of our lives,
with unchristian ferocity ; and, if you mention coming here to him,
he'll put a veto on your visits altogether. Therefore, you must
not mention it, unless you be careless of seeing your cousin here-
after : you may come, if you will, but you must not mention it. "
" Why did you quarrel ? " asked Catherine, considerably crest-
fallen,
" He thought me too poor to wed his sister, " answered Heath-
cliff, " and was grieved that I got her : his pride was hurt, and
he'll never forgive it. "
" That's wrong ! " said the young lady : " some time, I'll tell
him so. But Linton and I have no share in your quarrel. I'll
not come here, then ; he shall come to the Grange. "
" It will be too far for me, " murmured her cousin : " to wall-:
four miles would kill me. No, come here, Miss Catherine, now
and then : not every morning, but once or twice a week. "
The father launched towards his son a glance of bitter
contempt.
" I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour, " he muttered to
me. " Miss Catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his
value, and send him to the devil. Now, if it had been Hareton !
—Do you know that, twenty times a day, I covet Hareton, with
all his degradation ? I'd have loved the lad had he been some
one else. But I think he's safe from her love. I'll pit him
against that paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly. We
calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen. Oh, confound
the vapid thing ! He's absorbed in drying his feet, and never
looks at her. — Linton ! "
" Yes, father, " answered the boy.
" Have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about?
not even a rabbit or a weasel's nest ? Take her into the garden,
before you change your shoes ; and into the stable to see your
horse. "
" Wouldn't you rather sit here? " asked Linton, addressing
Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctance to move again.
" I don't know, " she replied, casting a longing look to the
door, and evidently eager to be active.
He kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. Heathcliff rose,
and went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1 99
out for Hareton. Hareton responded, and presently the two re-
entered. The young man had been washing himself, as was
visible by the glow on his cheeks and his wetted hair.
" Oh, I'll ask j(77/, uncle, " cried Miss Cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion, " That is not my cousin, is he? "
" Yes, " he replied, " your mother's nephew. Don't you like
him ? "
Catherine looked queer.
" Is he not a handsome lad ? " he continued.
The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a
sentence in Heathclifif's ear. He laughed ; Hareton darkened :
I perceived he was very sensitive to suspected slights, and had
obviously a dim notion of his inferiority. But his master or
guardian chased the frown by exclaiming —
" You'll be the favourite among us, Hareton ! She says you
area — What was it? Well, something very flattering. Here!
you go with her round the farm. And behave like a gentleman,
mind ! Don't use any bad words ; and don't stare when the
young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to hide your face
when she is ; and, when you speak, say your words slowly, and
keep your hands out of your pockets. Be off, and entertain her
as nicely as j'ou can. "
He watched the couple walking past the window. Earnshaw
had his countenance completely averted from his companion.
He seemed studying the familiar landscape with a stranger's and
an artist's interest. Catherine took a sly look at him, expressing
small admiration. She then turned her attention to seeking out
objects of amusement for herself, and tripped merrily on, lilting
a tune to supply the lack of conversation.
" I've tied hiis tongue, " observed Heathcliff. " He'll not
venture a single syllable, all the time ! Nelly, you recollect me
at his age — nay, some years younger. Did I ever look so stupid :
so'gaumless,'as Joseph calls it? "
" Worse, " I replied, " because more sullen with it. "
*'I've a pleasure in him, " he continued, reflecting aloud.''He
has satisfied my expectations. If he were a born fool I should
not enjoy it half so much. But he's no fool ; and I can sympa-
thise with all his feelings, having felt them myself. I know what
he suffers now, for instance, exactly : it is merely a beginning
of what he shall suff'er, though. And he'll never be able to
emerge from his bathos of coarseness and ignorance. I've got
2CO WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
him faster than his scoundrel of a father secured me, and lower ;
for he takes a pride in his brutishness. I've taught him to scorn
everything extra-animal as silly and vi'eak. Don't you think
Hindley would be proud of his son, if he could see him? almost
as proud as I am of mine. But there's this difference ; one is
gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished
to ape a service of silver. Mi7ie has nothing valuable about it ;
yet I shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor
stuff can go. His had first-rate qualities, and they are lost :
rendered worse than unavailing. / have nothing to regret ; he
would have more than any but I are aware of. And the best
of it is, Hareton is damnably fond of me ! You'll own that I've
out-matched Hijidley there. If the dead villain could rise from
his grave to abuse me for his offspring's wrongs, I should have
the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again, indig-
nant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he has in
the world ! "
Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea. I made no
reply, because I saw that he expected none. Meantime, our young
companion, who sat too removed from us to hear what was said,
began to evince symptoms of uneasiness, probably repenting that
he had denied himself the treat of Catherine's society for fear of
a little fatigue. His father remarked the restless glances wander-
ing to the window, and the hand irresolutely extended towards
his- cap.
" Get up, you idle boy ! " he exclaimed, with assumed hearti-
ness. " Away after them ! they are just at the corner, by the
stand of hives. "
Linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. The lattice
was open, and, as he stepped out, I heard Cathy inquiring of her
unsociable attendant, what was that inscription over the door?
Hareton stared up, and scratched his head like a true clown.
" It's some damnable writing, " he answered. " I cannot
read it. "
" Can't read it ? " cried Catherine ; " I can read it : it's English.
But I want to know why it is there. "
Linton giggled : the first appearance of mirth he had exhibited.
" He does not know his letters, " he said to his cousin. " Could
you believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce? "
" Is he all as he should be? " asked Miss Cathy seriously;
" or is be simple : not right? I've questioned him twice now,
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 20I
and each time he looked so stupid I think he does not understand
ine. I can hardly understand /?/w, I'm sure ! "
Linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at Hareton tauntingly ;
who certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that
moment.
" There's nothing the matter but laziness; is there, Earn-
shaw? " he said. My cousin fancies you are an idiot. There
you experience the consequence of scorning'book -laming,'
as you would say. Have you noticed, Catherine, his frightful
Yorkshire pronunciation? "
" Why, where the devil is the use on't? " growled Hareton,
more ready in answering his daily companion. He was about
to enlarge further, but the two youngsters broke into a noisy fit
of merriment ; my giddy miss being delighted to discover that
she might turn his strange talk to matter of amusement.
" Where is the use of the devil in that sentence? " tittered
Linton, " Papa told you not to say any bad words, and you
can't open your mouth without one. Do try to behave like a
gentleman, now do ! "
" If thou weren't more a lass than a lad, I'd fell thee this
minute, I would; pitiful lath of a crater ! " retorted the angry
boor, retreating, while his face burnt with mingled rage and
mortification ; for he was conscious of being insulted, and em-
barrassed how to resent it,
Mr. Heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as
I, smiled when be saw him go ; but immediately afterwards cast
a look of singular aversion on the flippant pair, who remained
chattering in the doorway : the boy finding animation enough
while discussing Hareton's faults and deficiencies, and relating
anecdotes of his goings-on ; and the girl relishing his pert and
spiteful sayings, without considering the ill-nature they evinced,
I began to dislike, more than to compassionate Linton, and to
excuse his father, in some measure, for holding him cheap.
We stayed till afternoon : I could not tear Miss Cathy away
sooner; but happily my master had not quitted his apartment,
and remained ignorant of our prolonged absence. As we walked
home, I would fain have enlightened my charge on the char-
acters of the people we had quitted ; but she got it into her head
that I was prejudiced against them.
" Aha! " she cried, " you take papa's side, Ellen: you are
partial I know ; or else you wouldn't have cheated me so many
G 2
202 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
years into the notion that Linton hved a long way from here.
I'm really extremely angry ; only I'm so pleased I can't show it !
But you must hold your tongue about my uncle : he's my uncle,
remember ; and I'll scold papa for quarrelling with him, "
And so she ran on, till I relinquished the endeavour to con-
vince her of her mistake. She did not mention the visit that
night, because she did not see Mr. Linton. Next day it all
came out, sadly to my chagrin ; and still I was not altogether
sorry : I thought the burden of directing and warning would be
more efficiently borne by him than me. But he was too timid
in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun
connection with the household of the Heights, and Catherine liked
good reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.
" Papa! " she exclaimed, after the morning's salutations,
" guess whom I saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors. Ah,
papa, you started! you've not done right, have you, now? I
saw — But listen, and you shall hear how I found you out ; and
Ellen, who is in league with you, and yet pretended to pity me
so, when I kept hoping, and was always disappointed about
Linton's coming back ! "
She gave a faithful account of her excursion and its conse-
quences ; and my master, though he cast more than one re-
proachful look at me, said nothing till she had concluded. Then
he drew her to him, and asked if she knew why he had con-
cealed Linton's near neighbourhood from her. Could she think
it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly enjoy ?
" It was because you disliked Mr. Heathcliff, " she answered.
" Then you believe I care more for my own feelings than yours,
Cathy? " he said. " No, it was not because I dishked Mr.
Heathcliff, but because Mr. Heathcliff dislikes me ; and is a
most diabolical man, delighting to wrong and ruin those he
hates, if they give him the slightest opportunity. I knew that
you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin, with-
out being brought into contact with him ; and I knew he would
detest you on my account ; so for your own good, and nothing
else, I took precautions that you should not see Linton again.
I meant to explain this some time as you grew older, and I'm
sorry I delayed it. "
" But Mr. Heathcliff was quite cordial, papa, " observed
Catherine, not at all convinced; " and he didn't object to our
seeing each other : he said I might come to his house when I
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 203
pleased ; only I must not tell you, because you had quarrelled
with him, and would not forgive him for marrying aunt Isabella.
And you won't. You are the one to be blamed : he is willing
to let us be friends, at least ; Linton and I ; and you are not. "
My master, perceiving that she would not take his word for
her uncle-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of his con-
duct to Isabella, and the manner in which Wuthering Heights
became his property. He could not bear to discourse long upon
the topic ; for though he spoke little of it, he still felt the same
horror and detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied
his heart ever since Mrs. Linton's death, " She might have
been living yet, if it had not been for him ! " was his constant
bitter reflection ; and, in his eyes, Heathcliff seemed a murderer.
Miss Cathy — conversant with no bad deeds except her own slight
acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion, arising from hot
temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day they
were committed — was amazed at the blackness of spirit that
could brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately
prosecute its plans without a visitation of remorse. She ap-
peared so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view of
human nature — excluded from all her studies and all her ideas
till now — that Mr. Edgar deemed it unnecessary to pursue the
subject. He merely added —
''You will know hereafter, darling, M'hy I wish you to avoid
his house and family ; now return to your old employments and
amusements, and think no more about them. "
Catherine kissed her father and sat down quietly to her lessons
for a couple of hours, according to custom ; then she accom-
panied him into the grounds, and the whole day passed as usual :
but in the evening, when she had retired to her room, and I went
to help her to undress, I found her crying, on her knees by the
bedside.
" Oh, fie, silly child ! " I exclaimed. " If you had any real
griefs, you'd be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety.
You never had one shadow of substantial sorrow, Miss Catherine.
Suppose, for a minute, that master and I were dead, and you
were by yourself in the world : how would you feel then ? Com-
pare the present occasion with such an affliction as that, and- be
thankful for the friends you have, instead of coveting more. "
" I'm not crying for myself, Ellen, " she answered, " it's for
him. He expected to see me again to-morrow, and there he'll
^04 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
be so disappointed : and he'll wait for me, and I shan't
come! "
" Nonsense, " said I, " do you imagine he has thought as
much of you as you have of him ? Hasn't he Hareton for a
companion? Not one in a hundred would weep at losing a
relation they had just seen twice, for two afternoons. Linton
will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself no further about
you. "
" But may I not write a note to tell him why I cannot come? "
she asked, rising to her feet. " And just send those books I
promised to lend him ? His books are not as nice as mine, and
he wanted to have them extremely, when I told him hov^^ inte-
resting they were. May I not, Ellen? "
" No, indeed ! no, indeed ! " rephed I, with decision. " Then
he would write to you, and there'd never be an end of it. No,
Miss Catherine, the acquaintance must be dropped entirely : so
papa expects, and I shall see that it is done, "
" But how can one little note " she recommenced, putting
on an imploring countenance.
" Silence ! " I interrupted. " We'll not begin with your little
notes. Get into bed. "
She threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that I would
not kiss her good-night at first : I covered her up, and shut her
door, in great displeasure ; but, repenting half-way, I returned
softly, and lo ! there was miss standing at the table with a bit
of blank paper before her and a pencil in her hand, which she
guiltily slipped out of sight, on my entrance.
" You'll get nobody to take that, Catherine, " I said, " if you
write it ; and at present I shall put out your candle. "
I set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as I did so a slap
on my hand, and a petulant " Cross thing 1 " I then quitted her
again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish
humours. The letter was finished and forwarded to its destina-
tion by a milk-fetcher who came from the village : but that I
didn't learn till some time afterwards. Weeks passed on, and
Cathy recovered her temper ; though she grew wondrous fond
of stealing off to corners by herself; and often, if I came near
her suddenly while reading, she would start and bend over the
book, evidently desirous to hide it ; and I detected edges of
loose paper sticking out beyond the leaves. She also got a trick
of coming down early in the morning and lingering about the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 20$
kitchen, as if she were expecting the arrival of something : and
slie had a small drawer in a cabinet in the library, which she
would trifle over for hours, and whose key she took special care
to remove when she left it.
One day, as she inspected this drawer, I observed that the
playthings, and trinkets which recently formed its contents, were
transmuted into bits of folded paper. My curiosity and suspi-
cions were aroused ; I determined to take a peep at her mysterious
treasures ; so, at night, as soon as she and my master were safe
upstairs, I searched and readily found among my house-keys
one that would fit the lock. Having opened, I emptied the
whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to exa-
mine at leisure in my own chamber. Though I could not but
suspect, I was still surprised to discover that they were a mass
of correspondence — daily almost, it must have been — from Linton
Heathcliff: answers to documents forwarded by her. The
earlier dated were embarrassed and short ; gradually, however,
they expanded into copious love letters, foolish, as the age of
the writer rendered natural, yet with touches here and there
which I thought were borrowed from a more experienced source.
Some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds of ardour
and flatness ; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in
the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied,
incorporeal sweetheart. Whether they satisfied Cathy, I don't
know ; but they appeared very worthless trash to me. After
turning over as many as I thought proper, I tied them in a hand-
kerchief and set them aside, re-locking the vacant drawer.
Following her habit, my young lady descended early, and
visited the kitchen : I w^atched her go to the door, on the arrival
of a certain little boy ; and, while the dairy-maid filled his can,
she tucked something into his jacket pocket, and plucked some-
thing out. I went round by the garden, and laid wait for the
messenger ; who fought valorously to defend his trust, and we
spilt the milk between us ; but I succeeded in abstracting the
epistle ; and, threatening serious consequences if he did not
look sharp home, I remained under the wall and perused Miss
Cathy's affectionate composition. It was more simple and more
eloquent than her cousin's ; very pretty and very silly, I shook
my head, and went meditating into the house. The day being
wet, she could not divert herself with rambling about the park ;
so, at the conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to
206 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
the solace of the drawer. Her father sat reading at the table ;
and I, on purpose, had sought a bit of work in some unripped
fringes of the window curtain, keeping my eye steadily fixed on
her proceedings. Never did any bird flying back to a plundered
nest which it had left brimful of chirping young ones, express
more complete despair in its anguished cries and flutterings,
than she by her single " Oh ! " and the change that transfigured
her late happy countenance. Mr. Linton looked up.
" What is the matter, love? Have you hurt yourself? " he said.
His tone and look assured her /le had not been the discoverer
of the hoard.
" No, papa! " she gasped. " Ellen! Ellen! come upstairs —
I'm sick ! "
I obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.
" Oh, Ellen! youhavegot them, " she commenced immediately,
dropping on her knees, when we were enclosed alone.''Oh, give
them to me, and I'll never, never do so again ! Don't tell papa.
You have not told papa, Ellen? say you have not? I've been
exceedingly naughty, hnt I won't do it any more ! "
With a grave severity in my manner, I bade her stand up.
" So, " I exclaimed, " Miss Catherine, you are tolerably far on,
it seems : you may well be ashamed of them ! A fine bundle of
trash you study in your leisure hours, to be sure : why, it's good
enough to be printed ! And what do you suppose the master will
think, when I display it before him? I haven't shown it yet, but
you needn't imagine I shall keep your ridiculous secrets. For
shame ! and you must have led the way in writing such absur-
dities : he would not have thought of beginning,. I'm certain. "
" I didn't ! I didn't ! " sobbed Cathy, fit to break her heart.
" I didn't once think of loving him till "
** Loving! " cried I, as scornfully as I could utter the word.
" Loviiig! Did anybody ever hear the like ! I might just as
well talk of loving the miller who comes once a year to buy our
corn. Pretty loving, indeed ! and both times together you have
seen Linton hardly four hours in your life ! Now here is the
babyish trash. I'm going with it to the library ; and we'll see
what your father says to such loving. "
She sprang at her precious epistles, but I held them above my
head ; and then she poured out further frantic entreaties that I
would burn them — do anything rather than show them. And
being really fully as much inclined to laugh as scold — for I
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. lOj
esteemed it all girlish vanity — I at length relented in a measure,
and asked —
" If I consent to burn them, will you promise faithfully, neither
to send nor receive a letter again, nor a book (for I perceive you
havesenthim books), nor locks of hair, nor rings, nor playthings? "
" We don't send playthings ! " cried Catherine, her pride over-
coming her shame.
" Nor anything at all, then, my lady, " I said. " Unless you
will, here I go. "
" I promise, Ellen ! " she cried, catching my dress. " Oh, put
them in the fire, do, do ! "
But when I proceeded to open a place with the poker, the
sacrifice was too painful to be borne. She earnestly supplicated
that I would spare her one or two.
" One or two, Ellen, to keep for Linton's sake ! "
I unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them
in from an angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
" I will have one, you cruel wretch ; " she screamed, darting
her hand into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed
fragments, at the expense of her fingers.
" Very well — and I will have some to exhibit to papa! " I
answered, shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning
anew to the door.
She emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned
me to finish the immolation. It was done ; I stirred up the ashes,
and interred them under a shovelful of coals ; and she mutely,
and with a sense of intense injurv', retired to her private apart-
ment. I descended to tell my master that the young lady's qualm
of sickness was almost gone, but I judged it best for her to he
down a while. She wouldn't dine ; but she reappeared at tea,
pale, and red about the eyes, and marvellously subdued in out-
ward aspect. Next morning, I answered the letter by a slip of
paper, inscribed, " Master Heathcliff is requested to send no
more notes to Miss Linton, as she will not receive them. " And,
thenceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.
CHAPTER XXIL
Summer^ drew to an end, and early autumn : it was past
Michaelmas, but the harvest was late that year, and a few of
20S WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
our fields were still uncleared. Mr. Linton and his daughter
would frequently walk out among the reapers ; at the carrying
of the last sheaves, they stayed till dusk, and the evening happen-
ing to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad cold, that settled
obstinately on his lungs, and confined him indoors throughout
the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.
Poor Cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been
considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and her
father insisted on her reading less, and taking more exercise.
She had his companionship no longer ; I esteemed it a duty to
supply its lack, as much as possible, with mine : an inefficient
substitute ; for I could only spare two or three hours, from my
numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her footsteps, and then
my society was obviously less desirable than his.
On an afternoon in October, or the beginning of November
— a fresh watery afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling
with moist, withered leaves, and the cold, blue sky was half
hidden by clouds — dark grey streamers, rapidly mounting from
the west, and boding abundant rain — I requested my young lady
to forego her ramble, because I was certain of showers. She
refused ; and I unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my umbrella
to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park : a formal
walk which she generally affected if low-spirited — and that she
invariably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse than ordinary,
a thing never known from his confession, but guessed both by
her and me, from his increased silence and the melancholy of
his countenance. She went sadly on : there was no running or
bounding now, though the chill wind might well have tempted
her to race. And often, from the side of my eye, I could detect
her raising a hand, and brushing something off her cheek. I
gazed round for a means of diverting her thoughts. On one side
of the road rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted
oaks, with their roots half-exposed, held uncertain tenure : the
soil was too loose for the latter ; and strong winds had blown
some nearly horizontal. In summer. Miss Catherine delighted
to climb along these trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging
twenty feet above the ground ; and I, pleased with her agility
and her light, childish heart, still considered it proper to scold
every time I caught her at such an elevation, but so that she knew
there was no necessity for descending. From dinner to tea she
would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing except
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 209
singing old songs — my nursery lore — to herself, or watching the
birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to fly : or
Tiestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming, happier
than words can express.
" Look, miss ! " I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the
roots of one twisted tree. " Winter is not here yet. There's a
little flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of blue-
bells that clouded those turf steps in July with a lilac mist. Will
you clamber up, and pluck it to show to papa? "
Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trembling in
its earthy shelter, and replied, at length —
" No, I'll not touch it : but it looks melancholy, does it not,
Eilen? "
" Yes, " I observed, " about as starved and sackless as you:
}Our cheeks are bloodless ; let us take hold of hands and run.
You're so low, I dare say I shall keep up with you. "
" No, " she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing, at
intervals, to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass,
or a fungus spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown
foliage ; and, ever and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted
face.
" Catherine, why are you crying, love ? " I asked, approaching
and putting my arm over her shoulder. " You mustn't cry, be-
cause papa has a cold ; be thankful it is nothing worse. "
She now put no further restraint on her tears ; her breath was
stifled by sobs.
" Oh, it -will be something worse, " she said. " And what
shall I do when papa and you leave me, and I am by myself?
I can't forget your words, Ellen ; they are always in my ear.
How life will be changed, how dreary the world will be, when
papa and you are dead. "
" None can tell, whether you won't die before us, " I replied.
" It's wrong to anticipate evil. We'll hope there are years and
years to come before any of us go : master is young, and I am
strong, and hardly forty-five. My mother lived till eighty, a
canty dame to the last. And suppose Mr. Linton were spared
till he saw sixty, that would be more years than you have counted,
miss. And would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity above
twenty years beforehand? "
" But Aunt Isabella was younger than papa, " she remarked,
gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation.
2IO AVUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Aunt Isabella had not you and me to nurse her, " I replied.
" She wasn't as happy as master : she hadn't as much to live for.
All you need do, is to wait well on your father, and cheer him
by letting him see you cheerful ; and avoid giving him anxiety
on any subject : mind that, Cathy ! I'll not disguise but you
might kill him, if you were wild and reckless, and cherished a
foolish, fanciful affection for the son of a person who would be
glad to have him in his grave ; and allowed him to discover that
you fretted over the separation he has judged it expedient to
make. "
" I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness, " answered
my companion,''I care for nothing in comparison with papa.
And I'll never — never — oh, never, while I have my senses, do an
act or say a word to vex him. I love him better than myself,
Ellen ; and I know it by this : I pray every night that I may live
after him ; because I would rather be miserable than that he
should be : that proves I love him better than myself. "
" Good words, " I replied. " But deeds must prove it also ;
and after he is well, remember you don't forget resolutions
formed in the hour of fear. "
As we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road ; and
my young lady, hghtening into sunshine again, climbed up and
seated herself on the top of the wall, reaching over to gather
some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the
wild rose trees, shadowing the highway side : the lower fruit had
disappeared, but only birds could touch the upper, except from
Cathy's present station. In stretching to pull them, her hat fell
off; and as the door was locked, she proposed scrambling down
to recover it. I bid her be cautious lest she got a fall, and she
nimbly disappeared. But the return v/as no such easy matter :
the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rose-bushes
and blackberry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascend-
ing. I, like a fool, didn't recollect that, till I heard her laughing
and exclaiming —
" Ellen ! you'll have to fetch the key, or else I must run round
to the porter's lodge. I can't scale the ramparts on this side ! "
" Stay where you are, " I answered, " I have my bundle of keys
in my pocket : perhaps I may manage to open it ; if not I'll go. "
Catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the
door, while I tried all the large keys in succession. I had
applied the last, and found that none would do ; so, repeating
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 211
my desire that she would remain there, I was about to hurry-
home as fast as I could, when an approaching sound arrested me.
It was the trot of a horse ; Cathy's dance stopped also.
" Who is that? " I whispered,
" Ellen, I wish you could open the door, " whispered back my
companion anxiously.
" Ho, Miss Linton! " cried a deep voice (the rider's), " I'm
glad to meet you. Don't be in haste to enter, for I have an
explanation to ask and obtain. "
" I shan't speak to you, Mr. Heathcliff, " answered Catherine.
" Papa says you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and
me ; and Ellen says the same. "
" That is nothing to the purpose, " said Heathcliff. (He it
was.) " I don't hate my son, I suppose ; and it is concerning
him that I demand your attention. Yes ; you have cause to
blush. Two or three months since, were you not in the habit of
writing to Linton ? making love in play, eh ? You deserved, both
of you, flogging for that ! You especially, the elder ; and less
sensitive, as it turns out. I've got your letters, and if you give
me any pertness I'll send them to your father. I presume you
grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn't you ? Well,
you dropped Linton with it into a Slough of Despond. He was
in earnest : in love, really. As true as I live, he's dying for you ;
breaking his heart at your fickleness : not figuratively, but actu-
ally. Though Hareton has made him a standing jest for six
weeks, and I have used more serious measures, and attempted
to frighten him out of his idiocy, he gets worse daily ; and he'll
be under the sod before summer, unless you restore him ! "
" How can you lie so glaringly to the poor child? " I called
from the inside. " Pray ride on ! How can you deliberately
get up such paltry falsehoods ? Miss Cathy, I'll knock the lock
off with a stone : you won't believe that vile nonsense. You can
feel in yourself, it is impossible that a person should die for love
of a stranger. "
" I was not aware there were eavesdroppers, " muttered the
detected villain. " Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you, but I don't
like your double-dealing, " he added aloud. " How could yoii
lie so glaringly, as to affirm I hated the'poor child ?'-and invent
bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-stones? Catherine
Linton (the very name warms me), my bonny lass, I shall be
from home all this week ; go and see if I have not spoken truth :
212 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
do, there's a darling ! Just imagine your father in my place, and
Linton in yours ; then think how you would value your careless
lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your father
himself entreated him ; and don't, from pure stupidity, fall into
the same error. I swear, on my salvation, he's going to his grave,
and none but you can save him ! "
The lock gave way and I issued out.
" I swear Linton is dying, " repeated Heathcliff, looking hard
at me.''And grief and disappointment are hastening his death.
Nelly, if you won't let her go, you can walk over yourself. But I
shall not return till this time next week ; and I think your master
himself would scarcely object to her visiting her cousin ! "
" Come in, " said I, taking Cathy by the arm and half forcing
her to re-enter ; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the
features of the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.
He pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed —
" Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have little patience
with Linton ; and Hareton and Joseph have less. I'll own that
he's with a harsh set. He pines for kindness, as well as love ;
and a kind word from you would be his best medicine. Don't mind
Mrs. Dean's cruel cautions ; but be generous, and contrive to see
him. He dreams of you day and night, and cannot be persuaded
that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor call. "
I closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened
lock in holding it ; and spreading my umbrella, I drew my charge
underneath : for the rain began to drive through the moaning
branches of the trees, and warned us to avoid delay. Our hurry
prevented any comment on the encounter with Heathcliff, as we
stretched towards home ; but I divined instinctively that Cathe-
rine's heart was clouded now in double darkness. Her features
were so sad, they did not seem hers : she evidently regarded
what she had heard as every syllable true.
The master had retired to rest before we came in. Cathy stole
to his room to inquire how he was ; he had fallen asleep. She
returned, and asked me to sit with her in the library. We took
our tea together ; and afterwards she lay down on the rug, and
told me not to talk, for she was weary. I got a book, and pre-
tended to read. As soon as she supposed me absorbed in my
occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping : it appeared,
at present, her favourite diversion. I suffered her to enjoy it
a while ; then I expostulated : deriding and ridiculing all Mr.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 21 J
Heathcliff's assertions about his son, as if I were certain she
would coincide. Alas ! I hadn't skill to counteract the effect
his account had produced : it was just what he intended.
" You may be right, Ellen, " she answered ; " but I shall never
feel at ease till I know. And I must tell Linton it is not my fault
that I don't write, and convince him that I shall not change, "
Wiiat use were anger and protestations against her silly
credulity? We parted that night — hostile ; but next day beheld
me on the road to Wuthering Heights, by the side of my wilful
young mistress's pony. I couldn't bear to witness her sorrow :
to see her pale dejected countenance, and heavy eyes ; and I
yielded, in the faint hope that Linton himself might prove, by
his reception of us, how little of the tale was founded on fact.
CHAPTER XXHL
The rainy night had ushered in a misty morning — half- frost,
half-drizzle — and temporary brooks crossed our path — gurgling
from the uplands. My feet were thoroughly wetted ; I was cross
and low ; exactly the humour suited for making the most of these
disagreeable things. We entered the farmhouse by the kitchen
way, to ascertain whether Mr. Heathcliff were really absent :
because I put slight faith in his own affirmation.
Joseph seemed sitting in a sort of clysium alone, beside a
roaring fire ; a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with
large pieces of toasted oat-cake ; and his black, short pipe in
his mouth. Catherine ran to the hearth to warm herself. I
asked if the master was in? My question remained so long
unanswered, that I thought the old man had grown deaf, and
repeated it louder.
" Na — ay ! " he snarled, or rather screamed througli his nose.
" Na — ay ! yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough. "
''Joseph ! " cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from
the inner room. " How often am I to call you? There are only
a few red ashes now. Joseph ! come this moment. "
Vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate declared he
had no ear for this appeal. The housekeeper and Hareton were
invisible ; one gone on an errand, and the other at his work,
probably. We knew Linton's tones, and entered.
" Oh, I hope you'll die in a garret ! starved to death, " said the
214 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
boy, mistaking our approach for that of his neghgent atten-
dant.
He stopped, on observing his error ; his cousin flew to him.
" Is that you, Miss Linton ? " he said, raising his head from the
arm of the great chair, in which he rechned. " No — don't kiss
me : it takes my breath. Dear me ! Papa said you would call,
continued he, after recovering a little from Catherine's embrace ;
while she stood by looking very contrite. " Will you shut the
door, if you please? you left it open ; and those — those detestable
creatures won't bring coals to the fire. It's so cold ! "
I stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself.
The invalid complained of being covered with ashes ; but he
had a tiresome cough, and looked feverish and ill, so I did not
rebuke his temper.
" Well, Linton, " murmured Catherine, when his corrugated
brow relaxed.''Are you glad to see me ? Can I do you any
good? "
''Why didn't you come before ? " he asked.''You should have
come, instead of writing. It tired me dreadfully, writing those
long letters. I'd far rather have talked to you. Now, I can
neither bear to talk, nor anything else. I wonder where Zillah
is ! Will you (looking at me) step into the kitchen and see ? "
I had received no thanks for my other service ; and being un-
willing to run to and fro at his behest, I replied —
" Nobody is out there but Joseph. "
" I want to drink, " he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.
" Zillah is constantly gadding off to Gimmerton since papa went :
it's miserable ! And I'm obliged to come down here — they re-
solved never to hear me upstairs. "
''Is your father attentive to you. Master Heathcliff ? " I asked,
perceiving Catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.
" Attentive? He makes them a little more attentive at least, "
he cried. " The wretches ! Do you know, Miss Linton, that
brute Hareton laughs at me ! I hate him ! indeed, I hate them
all : they are odious beings, "
Cathy began searching for some water ; she lighted on a
pitcher in the dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it. He bid
her add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ; and
having swallowed a small portion, appeared more tranquil, and
said she was very kind.
" And are you glad to see me? " asked she, reiterating her
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 21$
former question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a
smile.
" Yes, I am. It's something new to hear a voice like yours ! "
he replied. " But I have been vexed, because you wouldn't
come. And papa swore it was owing to me : he called me a
pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing ; and said you despised me ;
and if he had been in my place, he would be more the master
of the Grange than your father, by this time. But you don't
despise me, do you, Miss "
" I wish you would say Catherine, or Cathy, " interrupted my
young lady. " Despise you? No! Next to papa and Ellen,
I love you better than anybody living. I don't love Mr. Heath-
cliff, though ; and I dare not come when he returns : will he
stay away many days ? "
" Not many, " answered Linton; " but he goes on to the
moors frequently, since the shooting season commenced ; and
you might spend an hour or two with me in his absence. Do
say you will. I think I should not be peevish with you : you'd
not provoke me, and you'd always be ready to help me,
wouldn't you? "
" Yes, " said Catherine, stroking his long soft hair ; " if I could
only get papa's consent, I'd spend half my time with you.
Pretty Linton ! I wish you were my brother. "
" And then you would like me as well as your father? "
observed he, more cheerfully.''But papa says you would love
me better than him and all the world, if you were my wife ; so
I'd rather you were that. "
" No, I should never love anybody better than papa, " she
returned gravely.''And people hate their wives, sometimes ; but
not their sisters and brothers : and if you were the latter you would
live with us, and papa would be as fond of you as he is of me. "
Linton denied that people ever hated their wives ; but Cathy
affirmed they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father's
aversion to her aunt. I endeavoured to stop her thoughtless
tongue. I couldn't succeed till everything she knew was out.
Master Heathcliff, much irritated, asserted her relation was false.
" Papa told me ; and papa does not tell falsehoods, " she
answered pertly.
" il/j/ papa scorns yours! " cried Linton. " He calls him a
sneaking fool. "
" Yours is a wicked man, " retorted Catherine : " and vou are
2l6 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
very naughty to dare to repeat what he says. He must be wicked
to have made Aimt Isabella leave him as she did. "
" She didn't leave him, " said the boy; " you shan't contra-
dict me. "
" She did, " cried my young lady.
" Well, I'll tell you something ! " said Linton. " Your motlier
hated your father : now then. "
" Oh ! " exclaimed Catherine, too enraged to continue.
" And she loved mine, " added he.
" You little liar ! I hate you now ! " she panted, and her fiice
grew red with passion.
" She did'! she did ! " sang Linton, sinking into the recess of
his chair, and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the
other disputant, who stood behind.
" Hush, Master Heathcliff! " I said; " that's your father's
tale, too, I suppose. "
" It isn't : you hold your tongue ! " he answered. " She did,
she did, Catherine ! she did, she did ! "
Cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and
caused him to fall against one arm. He was immediately seized
by a suffocating cough that soon ended his triumph. It lasted
so long that it frightened even me. As to his cousin, she wept,
with all her might ; aghast at the mischief she had done : though
she said nothing. I held him till the fit exhausted itself. Then
he thrust me away, and leant his head down silently. Catherine
quelled her lamentations also, took a seat opposite, and looked
solemnly into the fire.
" How do you feel now, Master Heathcliff? " I inquired, after
waiting ten minutes.
" I wish ske felt as I do, " he replied : " spiteful, cruel thing !
Harcton never touches me : he never struck me in his life. And
I was better to-day : and there " his voice died in a whimper.
" / didn't strike you! " muttered Cathy, chewing her lip to
prevent another burst of emotion.
He sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and
kept it up for a quarter of an hour ; on purpose to distress his
cousin apparently, for whenever he caught a stifled sob from her
he put renewed pain and pathos into the inflections of his voice.
" I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton, " she said at length, racked
beyond endurance. " But /couldn't have been hurt by that litde
push, and I had no idea that you could, either: you're not,
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 217
much, are you, Linton? Don't let me go home thinking I've
done you harm. Answer ! speak to me. "
" I can't speak to you, " he murmured ; " you've hurt me so,
that I shall lie awake all night choking with this cough. If you
liad it you'd know what it was : hut you /I be comfortably asleep
while I'm in agony, and nobody near me. I wonder how you
would like to pass those fearful nights ! " And he began to wail
aloud, for very pity of himself.
" Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights, " I said,
" it won't be miss who spoils your ease : you'd be the same had
she never come. However, she shall not disturb you again ; and
perhaps you'll get quieter when we leave you. "
" Must I go? " asked Catherine dolefully, bending over him.
" Do you want me to go, Linton? "
" You can't alter what you've done, " he replied pettishly,
shrinking from her, " unless you alter it for the worse by teasing
me into a fever. "
" Well, then, I must go? " she repeated.
" Let me alone, at least, " said he ; " I can't bear your talking. "
She lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a tire-
some while ; but as he neither looked up nor spoke, she finally
made a movement to the door and I followed. We were recalled
by a scream. Linton had slid from his seat on to the hearth-
stone, and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an indulged
plague of a child, determined to be as grievous and harassing as
it can. I thoroughly gauged his disposition from his behaviour,
and saw at once it would be folly to attempt humouring him.
Not so my companion : she ran back in terror, knelt down, and
cried, and soothed, and entreated, till he grew quiet from lack
of breath : by no means from compunction at distressing her.
" I shall lift him on to the settle, " I said, " and he may roll
about as he pleases : we can't stop to watch him. I hope you
are satisfied. Miss Cathy, that you are not the person to benefit
him ; and that his condition of health is not occasioned by attach-
ment to you. Now, then, there he is ! Come away : as soon
as he knows there is nobody by to care for his nonsense, he'll be
glad to lie still. "
She placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some
water ; he rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former,
as if it were a stone or a block of wood. She tried to put it more
comfortably.
21 8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" I can't do with that, " he said ; " it's not high enough. "
Catherine brought another to lay above it.
" That's too high, " murmured the provoking thing.
" How mvist I arrange it, then? " she asked despairingly.
He twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle,
and converted her shoulder into a support.
" No, that won't do, " I said. " You'll be content with the
cushion. Master Heathcliff. Miss has wasted too much time on
you already : we cannot remain five minutes longer. "
" Yes, yes, we can ! " replied Cathy.''He's good and patient
now. He's beginning to thinic I shall have far greater misery
than he will to-night, if I believe he is the worse for my visit ;
and then I dare not come again. Tell the truth about it, Linton ;
for I mustn't come, if I have hurt you. "
" You must come, to cure me, " he answered. " You ought to
come, because you have hurt me : you know you have extremely !
I was not as ill when you entered as I am at present — was I ? "
''But you've made yourself ill by crying and being in a passion. "
" I didn't do it all, " said his cousin. " However, we'll be
friends now. And you want me : you would wish to see me
sometimes, really? "
" I told you I did, " he replied impatiently. " Sit on the settle
and let me lean on your knee. That's as mamma used to do,
whole afternoons together. Sit quite still and don't talk : but
you may sing a song, if you can sing ; or you may say a nice long
interesting ballad — one of those you promised to teach me ; or
a story. I'd rather have a ballad, though : begin. "
Catherine repeated the longest she could, remember. The
employment pleased both mightily. Linton would have another,
and after that another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections ;
and so they went on until the clock struck twelve, and we heard
Hareton in the court, returning for his dinner.
" And to-morrow, Catherine, will you be here to-morrow? "
asked young Heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluc-
tantly.
" No, " I answered, " nor next day neither. " She, however,
gave a different response evidently, for his forehead cleared as
she stooped and whispered in his ear.
" You won't go to-morrow, recollect, miss ! " I commenced,
when we were out of the house. " You are not dreaming of it,
are von? "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 219
She smiled.
" Oh, I'll take good c;Tje, " I continued : " I'll have that lock
mended, and you can escape by no way else. "
" I can get over the wall, " she said, laughing. •'The Grange
is not a prison, Ellen, and you are not my gaoler. And besides,
I'm almost seventeen : I'm a woman. And I'm certain Linton
would recover quickly if he had me to look after him. I'm clder
than he is, you know, and wiser : less childish, am I not? And
he'll soon do as I direct him, with some slight coaxing. He's a
pretty httle darling when he's good. I'd make such a pet of him,
if he were mine. We should never quarrel, should we, after we
were used to each other? Don't you like him, Ellen? "
" Like him ! " I exclaimed. " The worst-tempered bit of a
sickly slip that ever struggled into its teens. Happily, as Mr.
Heathcliff conjectured, he'll not win twenty. 1 doubt whether
he'll see spring, indeed. And small loss to his family whenever
he drops off. And lucky it is for us that his father took him :
the kinder he was treated, the more tedious and selfish he'd be.
I'm glad you have no chance of having him for a husband, Misr,
Catherine. "
My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. To
speak of his death so regardlessly, wounded her feelings.
" He's younger than I, " she answered, after a protracted pause
of meditation,''and he ought to live the longest : he will — he must
hve as long as I do. He's as strong now as when he first came
into the north ; I'm positive of that. It's only a cold that ails him ,
the same as papa has. You say papa will get better, and why
shouldn't he? "
''Well, well, " I cried,''after all, we needn't trouble ourselves ;
for listen, miss, and mind, I'll keep my word, — if you attempt
going to Wuthering Heights again, with or without me, I shall
inform Mr. Linton, and, unless he allow it, the intimacy with
your cousin must not be revived. "
" It has been revived, " muttered Cathy sulkily.
" Must not be continued, then, " I said.
" We'll see, " was her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leaving
me to toil in rhe rear.
We both reached home before our dinner-time ;, my master
supposed we had been wandering through the park, and there-
fore he demanded no explanation of our absence. As soon as I
entered, I hastened to change my soaked shoes and stockings ;
220 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
but sitting such a while at the Heights had done the mischief.
On the succeeding morning I was laid up, and during three
weeks I remained incapacitated for attending to my duties : a
calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, I am
thankful to say, since.
My little mistress behaved hke an angel, in coming to wait on
me, and cheer my solitude : the confinement brought me exceed-
ingly low. It is wearisome, to a stirring active body : but few
have shghter reasons for complaint than I had. The moment
Catherine left Mr. Linton's room, she appeared at my bedside.
Her day was divided between us ; no amusement usurped a
minute : she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play ; and
she was the fondest nurse that ever watched. She must have had
a warm heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to
me. I said her days were divided between us ; but the master
retired early, and I generally needed nothing after six o'clock ;
thus the evening was her own. Poor thing ! I never considered
what she did with herself after tea. And though frequently,
when she looked in to bid me good-night, I remarked a fresh
colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender fingers ;
instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride across the
moors, 1 laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library.
CHAPTER XXIV.
At the close of three weeks, I was able to quit my chamber, and
move about the house. And on the first occasion of my sitting
tip in the evening, I asked Catherine to read to me, because my
eyes were weak. We were in the library, the master having gone
to bed : she consented, rather unwillingly, I fancied ; and ima-
gining my sort of books did not suit her, I bid her please herself
in the choice of what she perused. She selected one of her own
favourites, and got forward steadily about an hour ; then came
frequent questions.
" Ellen, are not you tired ? Hadn't you better lie down now.
You'll be sick, keeping up so long, Ellen. "
" No, no, dear, I'm not tired, " I returned continually.
Perceiving me immovable, she essayed another method of
showing her disrelish for her occupation. It changed to yawn-
ing, and stretching, and —
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 221
" Ellen, I'm tired. "
" Give over then and talk, " I answered.
That was worse : she fretted and sighed, and looked at her
watch till eight, and finally went to her room, completely over-
done with sleep ; judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the
constant rubbing she inflicted on her eyes. The following night
she seemed more impatient still ; and on the third from recover-
ing my company, she complained of a headache, and left me.
I thought her conduct odd ; and having remained alone a long
while, I resolved on going and inquiring whether she were better,
and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs
in the dark. No Catherine could I discover upstairs, and
none below. The servants affirmed they had not seen her. I
listened at Mr. Edgar's door ; all was silence. I returned to her
apartment, extinguished my candle, and seated myself in the
window.
The moon shone bright ; a sprinkling of snow covered the
ground, and I reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it
into her head to walk about the garden, for refreshment. I did
detect a figure creeping along the inner fence of the park ; but it
was not my young mistress : on its merging into the light, I re-
cognised one of the grooms. He stood a considerable period,
viewing the carriage-road through the grounds ; then started off
at a brisk pace, as if he had detected something, and reappeared
presently, leading miss's pony ; and there she was. just dis-
mounted, and walking by its side. The man took his charge
stealthily across the grass towards the stable. Cathy entered by
the casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly
up to where I awaited her. She put the door gently too, slipped
off her snowy shoes, untied her hat, and was proceeding, uncon-
scious of my espionage, to lay aside her mantle, when I suddenly
rose and revealed myself. The surprise petrified her an instant :
she uttered an inarticulate exclamation, and stood fixed.
" My dear Miss Catherine, " I began, too vividly impressed by
her recent kindness to break into a scold, " where have you been
riding out at this hour? And why should you try to deceive me,
by telling a tale? Where have you been? Speak. "
" To the bottom of the park, " she stammered. " I didn't tell
a tale. "
" And nowhere else? " I demanded.
" No, " was the muttered reply.
222 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Oh, Catherine! " I cried sorrowfully. " You know you
have been doing wrong, or you wouldn't be driven to uttering
an untruth to me. That does grieve me. I'd rather be three
months ill, than hear you frame a deliberate lie. "
She sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw her arms
round my neck.
" Well, Ellen, I'm so afraid of you being angiy, " she said.
''Promise not to be angry, and you shall know the very truth :
I hate to hide it. "
We sat down in the window-seat ; I assured her I w-ould not
scold, whatever her secret might be, and I guessed it of course ;
so she commenced —
" I've been to Wuthering Heights, Ellen, and I've never missed
going a day since you fell ill ; except thrice before, and twice
after you left your room. I gave Michael books and pictures to
prepare Minny every evening, and to put her back in the stable :
you mustn't scold him either, mind. I was at the Heights by
half-past six, and generally stayed till half-past eight, and then
galloped home. It was not to amuse myself that I went : I was
often wretched all the time. Now and then I was happy : once
in a week perhaps. At first, I expected there would be sad work
persuading you to let me keep my word to Linton : for I had en-
gaged to call again next day, when we quitted him ; but, as you
stayed upstairs on the morrow, I escaped that trouble. While
Michael was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon,
I got possession of the key, and told him how my cousin wished
me to visit him, because he was sick, and couldn't come to the
Grange ; and how papa would object to my going : and then I
negotiated with him about the pony. He is fond of reading, and
he thinks of leaving soon to get married ; so he offered, if I would
lend him books out of the librar}^ to do what I wished : but I
preferred giving him my own, and that satisfied him better.
" On my second visit, Linton seemed in lively spirits; and
Zillah (that is their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a
good fire, and told us that, as Joseph was out at a prayer-meeting
and Hareton Earnshaw was off with his dogs — robbing our woods
of pheasants, as I heard afterwards — we might do what we liked.
She brought me some warm wine and gingerbread, and appeared
exceedingly good-natured ; and Linton sat in the arm-chair, and
I in the little rocking-chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed
and talked so merrily, and found so much to say : we planned
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 223
where we would go, aiid what we would do in summer. I
needn't repeat that, because you would call it silly,
" One time, however, we were near quarrelling. He said the
pleasantest manner of spending a hot July day was lying from
morning till evening on a bank of heath in the middle of the
moors, with the bees humming dreamily about among the bloom,
and the larks singing high up overhead, and the blue sky and
bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly. That was his most
perfect idea of heaven's happiness : mine was rocking in a rust-
ling green tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
flitting rapidly above ; and not only larks, but throstles, and
blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every
side, and the moors seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky
dells ; but close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves
to the breeze ; and woods and sounding water, and the whole
world awake and wild with joy. He wanted all to lie in an
ecstasy of peace ; I wanted all to sparkle and dance in a
glorious jubilee. I said his heaven would be only half alive ; and
he said mine would be drunk : I said I should fall asleep in his ;
and he said he could not breathe in mine, and began to grow very
snappish. At last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the right
weather came ; and then we kissed each other and were friends.
" After sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room with its
smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to
play in, if we removed the table ; and I asked Linton to call
Zillah in to help us, and we'd have a game at blind-man's buff;
she should try to catch us : you used to, you know, Ellen. He
wouldn't : there was no pleasure in it, he said ; but he consented
to play at ball with me. We found two in a cupboard, among a
heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores, and shuttle-
cocks. One was marked C, and the other H. ; 1 wished to
have the C. , because that stood for Catherine, and the H. might
be for Heathcliff, his name ; but the bran came out of H., and
Linton didn't like it. I beat him constantly : and he got cross
again, and coughed, and returned to his chair. That night,
though, he easily recovered his good humoiu: : he was charmed
with two or three pretty songs—your songs, Ellen ; and when
I was obliged to go, he begged and intreated me to come the
following evening ; and I promised. Minny and I \\'ent flying
home as light as air ; and I dreamt of Wuthering Heights and
my sweet, darling cousinj till morning.
224 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
''On the morrow I was sad ; partly because you were poorly,
and partly that I wished my father knew, and approved of my
excursions : but it was beautiful moonlight after tea ; and, as I
rode on, the gloom cleared. I shall have another happy even-
ing, I thought to myself ; and what delights me more, my pretty
Linton will. I trotted up their garden, and was turning round
to the back, when that fellow Earnshaw met me, took my bridle,
and bid me go in by the front entrance. He patted Minny's
neck, and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he
wanted me to speak to him. I only told him to leave my horse
alone, or else it would kick him. He answered in his vulgar
accent,'It wouldn't do mitch hurt if it did ;'and surveyed its
legs with a smile. I was half inclined to make it try ; however,
he moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch, he
looked up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupid
mixture of awkwardness and elation —
"'Miss Catherine ! I can read yon, now.'
"'Wonderful,'I exclaimed.'Pray let us hear you — you arc
grown clever !'
" He spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name —'Hareton
Earnshaw.'
"'And the figures?'I cried encouragingly, perceiving that
he came to a dead halt.
"'I cannot tell them yet,'he answered.
"'Oh, you dunce !'I said, laughing heartily at his failure.
" The fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a
scowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might
not join in my mirth : whether it were not pleasant familiarity,
or what it really was, contempt. I settled his doubts, by suddenly
retrieving my gravity and desiring him to walk away, for I came
to see Linton, not him. He reddened — I saw that by the moon-
light — dropped his hand from the latch, and skulked off, a picture
of mortified vanity. He imagined himself to be as accomplished
as Linton, I suppose, because he could spell his own name ; and
was marvellously discomfited that I didn't think the same. "
" Stop, Miss Catherine, dear! " I interrupted. " I shall not
scold, but I don't like your conduct there. If you had re-
membered that Hareton was your cousin as much as Master
Heathcliff, you would have felt how improper it was to behave
in that way. At least, it was praiseworthy ambition for him to
desire to be as accomplished as Ivinton ; and probably he did not
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 225
learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed of his
ignorance before, I have no doubt ; and he wished to remedy it
and please you. To sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad
breeding. Hadyoti been brought up in his circumstances, would
you be less rude? He was as quick and as intelligent a child as
ever you were ; and I'm hurt that he should be despised now,
because that base Heathcliff has treated him so unjustly. "
" Well, Ellen, you won't cry about it, will you? " she ex-
claimed, surprised at my earnestness. " But wait, and you shall
hear if he conned his A B C to please me ; and if it were worth
while being civil to the brute. I entered ; Linton was lying on
the settle, and half got up to welcome me.
"'I'm ill to-night, Catherine, love,'he said ;'and you must
have all the talk, and let me listen. Come, and sit by me. I
was sure you wouldn't break your word, and I'll make you promise
again, before you go.'
" I knew now that I mustn't tease him, as he was ill ; and I
spoke softly and put no questions, and avoided irritating him
in any way. I had brought some of my nicest books for him ;
he asked me to read a little of one, and I was about to comply,
when Earnshaw burst the door open : having gathered venom
with reflection. He advanced direct to us, seized Linton by the
arm, and swung him off the seat.
"'Get to thy own room !'he said, in a voice almost inarti-
culate with passion ; and his face looked swelled and furious.
'Take her there if she comes to see thee : thou shalln't keep me
out of this. Begone wi'ye both !'
" He swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer, nearly
throwing him into the kitchen ; and he clenched his fist as I
followed, seemingly longing to knock me down. I was afraid
for a moment, and I let one volume fall ; he kicked it after me,
and shut us out. I heard a malignant, crackly laugh by the
fire, and turning, beheld that odious Joseph standing rubbing
his bony hands, and quivering.
"'I wer sure he'd sarve ye out ! He's a grand lad ! He's
getten t'raight sperrit in him 1 He knaws— Ay, he knaws, as
weel as I do, who sud be t'maister yonder — Ech, ech, ech I He
made ye skift properly ! Ech, ech, ech !'
"'Where must we go?'I asked of my cousin, disregarding
the old wretch's mockery.
" Linton was white and trembling. He was not pretty then,
226 VVUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Ellen : oh no ! be looked frightful ; for his thin face and large
•eyes were wrought into an expression of frantic, powerless fury.
He grasped the handle of the door, and shook it : it was fastened
inside.
"'If you don't let me in I'll kill you ! — If you don't let me in,
I'll kill you !'he rather shrieked than said.'Devil ! devil ! —
I'll kill you— I'll kill you !'
" Josepli uttered his croaking laugh again.
"'Thear, that's t'father !'he cried.'That's father ! We've
alias summut o'either side in us. Niver heed, Hareton, lad —
dunnut be'feard — he cannot get at thee !'
" I took hold of Linton's hands, and tried to pull him away ;
but he shrieked so shockingly that I dared not proceed. At last
his cries were choked by a dreadful fit of coughing ; blood
gushed from his mouth, and he fell on the ground. I ran into
the yard, sick with terror ; and called for Zillah, as loud as I
could. She soon heard me : she was milking the cows in a shed
behind the barn, and hurrying from her work, she inquired what
there was to do? I hadn't breath to explain ; dragging her in,
I looked about for Linton. Earnshaw had come out to examine
the mischief he had caused, and he was then conveying the
poor thing upstairs. Zillah and I ascended after him ; but he
stopped me at the top of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in :
I must go home. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, and
I would enter. Joseph locked the door, and declared I should
do'no sich stuff,'and asked me whether I were'bahn to be as
mad as him.'I stood crying, till the housekeeper reappeared.
She affirmed he would be better in a bit, but he couldn't do with
that shrieking and din ; and she took me, and nearly carried
me into the house.
" Ellen, I was ready to tear my hair off my head ! I sobbed
and wept so that my eyes were almost blind ; and the ruffian
you have such sympathy with stood opposite : presuming every
now and then to bid me'wisht,'and denying that it was his
fault ; and, finally, frightened by my assertions that I would tell
papa, and that he should be put in prison and hanged, he
■commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide his
• cowardly agitation. Still, I was not rid of him : when at length
they compelled me to depart, and I had got some hundred yards
•off the premises, he suddenly issued from the shadow of the
Toadside, and checked Minny and took hold of me.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 22/
"'Miss Catherine, I'm ill grieved,'he began,'but it's rayther
too bad'
" I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps he would
nmrder me. He let go, thundering one of his horrid curses,
and I galloped home more than half out of my senses.
" I didn't bid you good-night that evening, and I didn't go to
Wuthering Heights the next : I wished to go exceedingly ; but
I was strangely excited, and dreaded to hear that Linton was
dead, sometimes ; and sometimes shuddered at the thought of
encountering Hareton. On the third day I took courage : at
least, I couldn't bear longer suspense, and stole off once more.
I went at five o'clock, and walked ; fancying I might manage to
creep into the house, and up to Linton's room, unobserved.
However, the dogs gave notice of my approach. Zillah received
me, and saying'the lad was mending nicely,'showed me into a
small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy,
I beheld Linton laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books.
But he would neither speak to me nor look at me, through a
whole hour, Ellen : he has such an unhappy temper. And what
quite confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was to
utter the falsehood that I had occasioned the uproar, and Hare-
ton was not to blame ! Unable to reply, except passionately, I
got up and walked from the room. He sent after me a faint
* Catherine !'He did not reckon on being answered so : but I
wouldn't turn back ; and the morrow was the second day on
which I stayed at home, nearly determined to visit him no more.
But it was so miserable going to bed and getting up, and never
hearing anything about him, that my resolution melted into air
before it was properly formed. It had appeared wrong to take
the journey once ; now it seemed wrong to refrain. Michael
came to ask if he must saddle IMinny ; I said'Yes,'and con-
sidered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the hills. I was
forced to pass the front windows to get to the court : it was no
use trying to conceal my presence.
"'Young master is in the house,'said Zillah, as she saw me
making for the parlour. I went in ; Earnshaw was there also,
but he quitted the room directly. Linton sat in the great arm-
chair half asleep ; walking up to the fire, I began in a serious
tone, partly meaning it to be true —
"'As you don't like me, Linton, and as you think I come on
purpose to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time, this is
228 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
our last meeting : let us say good-bye ; and tell Mr. Heathcliff
that you have no wish to see me, and that he mustn't invent any
more falsehoods on the subject.'
"'Sit down and take your hat off, Catherine, he answered.
'You are so much happier than I am, you ought to be better.
Papa talks enough of my defects, and shows enough scorn of
me, to make it natural I should doubt myself. I doubt whether
I am not altogether as worthless as he calls me, frequently ; and
then I feel so cross and bitter, I hate everybody ! I am worth-
less, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, almost always ; and,
if you choose, you may say good-bye : you'll get rid of an annoy-
ance. Only, Catherine, do me this justice : believe that if I
might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, I would
be ; as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy.
And believe that your kindness has made me love you deeper
than if I deserved your love : and though I couldn't, and cannot
help showing my nature to you, I regret it and repent it ; and
shall regret and repent it till I die ! "
" I felt he spoke the truth; and I felt I must forgive him:
and, though he should quarrel the next moment, I must forgive
him again. We were reconciled ; but we cried, both of us, the
whole time I stayed : not entirely for sorrow ; yet I was sorry
Linton had that distorted nature. He'll never let his friends be
at ease, and he'll never be at ease himself ! I have always gone
to his little parlour, since that night ; because his father returned
the day after.
" About three times, I think, we have been merry and hopeful,
as we were the first evening ; the rest of my visits were dreary
and troubled : now with his selfishness and spite, and now with
his sufferings : but I've learned to endure the former with nearly
as little resentment as the latter. Mr. Heathcliff purposely
avoids me : I have hardly seen him at all. Last Sunday, indeed,
coming earlier than usual, I heard him abusing poor Linton,
cruelly, for his conduct of the night before. I can't tell how he
knew of it, unless he hstened. Linton had certainly behaved
provokingly : however, it was the business of nobody but me,
and I interrupted Mr. Heathcliff's lecture by entering and tell-
ing him so. He burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he
was glad I took that view of the matter. Since then, I've told
Linton he must whisper his bitter things. Now, Ellen, you
have heard all. I can't be prevented from going to Wuthering
-31
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 22^,
Heights, except by inflicting misery on two people ; whereas, if
you'll only not tell papa, my going need disturb the tranquillity
of none. You'll not tell, will you? It will be very heartless if
you do. "
" I'll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow. Miss
Catherine, " I replied. " It requires some study; and so I'll
leave you to 3'our rest, and go think it over. "
I thought it over aloud, in my master's presence ; walking
straight from her room to his, and relating the whole story :
with the exception of her conversations with her cousin, and any
mention of Hareton. Mr. Linton was alarmed and distressed,
more than he would acknowledge to me. In the morning,
Catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and she learnt
also that her secret visits were to end. In vain she wept and
writhed against the interdict, and implored her father to have
pity on Linton : all she got to comfort her was a promise that
he would write and give him leave to come to the Grange when
he pleased ; but explaining that he must no longer expect to see
Catherine at Wuthering Heights. Perhaps, had he been aware
of his nephew's disposition and state of health, he would have seen
fit to withhold even that slight consolation.
CHAPTER XXV.
" These things happened last winter, sir, " said Mrs. Dean;
" hardly more than a year ago. Last winter, I did not think, at
another twelve months'end, I should be amusing a stranger to
the family with relating them ! Yet, who knows how long you'll
be a stranger ? You're too young to rest always contented, living
by yourself ; and I some way fancy no one could see Catherine
Linton and not love her. You smile ; but why do you look so
lively and interested, when I talk about her ? and why have you
asked me to hang her picture over your fireplace ? and why "
" Stop, my good friend 1 " I cried. " It may be very possible
that / should love her ; but would she love me ? I doubt it too
much to venture my tranquillity by running into temptation :
and then my home is not here. I'm of the busy worFd, and to
its arms I must return. Go on. Was Catherine obedient to
her father's commands ? "
" She was, " continued the housekeeper. " Her affection for
f230 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
him was still the chief sentiment in her heart ; and he spoke with-
out anger : he spoke in the deep tenderness of one about to leave
his treasure amid perils and foes, where his remembered words
would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide her. He
said to me, a few days afterwards — •
"'I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call. Tell me,
sincerely, what you think of him : is he changed for the better,
or is there a prospect of improvement, as he grows a man ?'
"'He's very delicate, sir,'I replied ;'and scarcely likely to
reach manhood ; but this I can say, he does not resemble his
father ; and if Miss Catherine had the misfortune to marry him,
he would not be beyond her control : unless she were extremely
and foolishly indulgent. However, master, you'll have plenty of
time to get acquainted with him, and see whether he would suit
her : it wants four years and more to his being of age.'
Edgar sighed ; and walking to the window, looked out towards
Gimmerton Kirk. It was a misty afternoon, but the February
sun shone dimly, and we could just distinguish the two fir-trees
in the yard, and the sparely scattered grave-stones.
" I've prayed often, " he half soliloquised, " for the approach
of what is coming ; and now I begin to shrink, and fear it. I
thought the memory of the hour I came down that glen a bride-
groom would be less sweet than the anticipation that I was soon,
in a few months, or, possibly, weeks, to be carried up, and laid
in its lonely hollow ! Ellen, I've been very happy with my little
Cathy : through winter nights and summer days she was a living
hope at my side. But I've been as happy musing by myself
among those stones, under that old church : lying, through the
long June evenings, on the green mound of her mother's grave,
and wishing — yearning for the time when I might lie beneath it.
What can I do for Cathy ? How must I quit her? I'd not care
one moment for Linton being Heathcliff's son ; nor for his taking
her from me, if he could console her for my loss. I'd not care
that Heathcliff gained his ends, and triumphed in robbing me of
my last blessing ! But should Linton be unworthy — only a feeble
tool to his father — I cannot abandon her to him ! And, hard
though it be to crush her buoyant spirit, I must persevere in
making her sad while I live, and leaving her solitary when I die.
Darling ! I'd rather resign her to God, and lay her in the earth
before me. "
" Resign her to God as it is, sir, " I answered, " and if we
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 23I
should lose you — which may He forbid — under Hi« providence,
I'll stand her friend and counsellor to the last. Miss Catherine
is a good girl : I don't fear that she will go wilfully wrong ; and
people who do their duty are always finally rewarded. "
Spring advanced ; yet my master gathered no real strength,
though he resumed his w^alks in the grounds with his daughter.
To her inexperienced notions, this itself was a sign of convales-
cence ; and then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes were
bright : she felt sure of his recovering. On her seventeenth
birthday, he did not visit the churchyard : it was raining, and I
observed — •
" You'll surely not go out to-night, sir? "
He answered —
" No, I'll defer it this year a little longer. "
He wrote again to Linton, expressing his great desire to see
iiim ; and, had the invalid been presentable, I've no doubt his
father would have permitted him to come. As it was, being
instructed, he returned an answer, intimating that Mr. Heathcliif
objected to his calling at the Grange ; but his uncle's kind re-
membrance delighted him, and he hoped to meet him, some^
times, in his rambles, and personally to petition that his cousin
and he might not remain long so utterly divided.
That part of his letter was simple, and probably his own.
Heathcliff knew he could plead eloquently for Catherine's com^
pany, then.
" I do not ask, " he said, " that she may visit here ; but, am I
never to see her, because my father forbids me to go to her home,,
and you forbid her to come to mine? Do, now and then, ride
with her towards the Heights ; and let us exchange a few words,
in your presence ! We have done nothing to deserve this separa^-
tion ; and you are not angry with me : you have no reason to dis-
like me, you allow, yourself. Dear uncle ! send me a kind note
to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please, except
at Thrushcross Grange. I believe an interview would convince
you that my father's character is not mine : he affirms I am more
your nephew than his son ; and though I have faults which
render me unworthy of Catherine, she has excused them, and for
her sake, you should also. You inquire after my health — it is
better ; but while I remain cut off from all hope, and doomed to
solitude, or the society of those who never did and never will like
me, how can I be cheerful and well? "
2p WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to grant
his request ; because he could not accompany Catherine. He
said, in summer, perhaps, they might meet: meantime, he wished
him to continue writing at intervals, and engaged to give him
what advice and comfort he was able by letter ; being well aware
of his hard position in his family. Linton compUed ; and had he
been unrestrained, would probably have spoiled all by filling his
epistles with complaints and lamentations : but his father kept a
sharp watch over him ; and, of course, insisted on every line
that my master sent being shown ; so, instead of penning his
peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly
uppermost in his thoughts, he harped on the cruel obligation of
being held asunder from his friend and love ; and gently intimated
that Mr. Linton must allow an interview soon, or he should fear
he was purposely deceiving him with empty promises.
Cathy was a powerful ally at home ; and, between them, they
at length persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having a ride
or a walk together about once a week, under my guardianship,
and on the moors nearest the Grange : for June found him still
declining. Though he had set aside yearly a portion of his
income for my young lady's fortune, he had a natural desire that
she might retain — or at least return in a short time to — the house
of her ancestors ; and he considered her only prospect of doing
that was by a union with his heir ; he had no idea that the latter
was failing almost as fast as himself ; nor had any one, I believe :
no doctor visited the Heights, and no one saw Master Heath-
cliff to make report of his condition among us. I, for my part,
began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that he must be
actually rallying, when he mentioned riding and walking on the
moors, and seemed so earnest in pursuing his object. I could
not picture a father treating a dying child as tyrannically and
wickedly as I afterwards learned Heathcliff had treated him, to
compel this apparent eagerness : his efforts redoubling the more
imminently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened
with defeat by death.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Summer was already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly
yielded his assent to their entreaties, and Catherine and I set out
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 235
on our first ride to join her cousin. It was a close, sultry day :
devoid of sunshine, but with a sky too dappled and hazy to
threaten rain ; and our place of meeting had been fixed at the
guide-stone, by the cross-roads. On arriving there, however, a
little herd-boy, despatched as a messenger, told us that —
" Maister Lintcn wer just o'this side th'Heights : and he'd
be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further. " __
" Then Master Linton has forgot the first injunction of his
uncle, " I observed : " he bid us keep on the Grange land, and
here we are off at once. "
''Well, we'll turn our horses'heads round, when we reach him, "
answered my companion, " our excursion shall lie towards home. "
But when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of
a mile from his own door, we found he had no horse ; and we
were forced to dismount, and leave ours to graze. He lay on
the heath, awaiting our approach, and did not rise till we came
within a few yards. Then he walked so feebly, and looked so
pale, that I immediately exclaimed — •
''Why, Master Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble,
this morning. How ill you do look ! "
Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment : she
changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips, to one of alarm ; and
the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting, to an
anxious inquiry, whether he were worse than usual?
" No — better — better ! " he panted, trembling, and retaining
her hand as if he needed its support, while his large blue eyes
wandered timidly over her ; the hoUowness round them trans-
forming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once
possessed.
" But you have been worse, " persisted his cousin: " worse than
when I saw you last ; you are thinner, and "
" I'm tired, " he interrupted hurriedly. " It is too hot for
walking, let us rest here. And, in the morning, I often feel sick
— papa says I grow so fast. "
Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her,
" This is something like your paradise, " said she, making an
effort at cheerfulness. " You recollect the two days we agreed to
spend in the place and way each thought pleasantest? This is
nearly yours, only there are clouds ; but then they are so soft and
mellow : it is nicer than sunshine. Next week, if you can, we'll
ride down to the Grange Park, and try mine. "
H 2
234- WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
Linton did not appear to remembei- what slie talked of ; and
he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of con-
versation. His lack of interest in the subjects she started, and
his equal incapacity to contribute to her entertainment, were so
obvious that she could not conceal her disappointment. An in-
definite alteration had come over his whole person and manner.
The pettishness that might be caressed into fondness, had yielded
to a listless apathy ; there was less of the peevish temper of a
child which frets and teases on purpose to be soothed, and more
of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling
consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured mirth of
others as an insult. Catherine perceived, as well as I did, that
he held it rather a punishment, than a gratification, to endure our
company ; and she made no scruple of proposing, presently, to
depart. That proposal, unexpectedly, roused Linton from his
lethargy, and threw him into a strange state of agitation. He
glanced fearfully towards the Heights, begging she would remain
another half-hour at least.
" But I think, " said Cathy, " you'd be more comfortable at
home than sitting here ; and I cannot amuse you to-day, I see,
by my tales, and songs, and chatter : you have grown wiser than
I, in these six months ; you have little taste for my diversions
now : or else, if I could amuse you, I'd willingly stay. "
" Stay to rest yourself, " he replied. " And Catherine, don't
think, or say that I'm very unwell : it is the heavy weather and
heat that make me dull ; and 1 walked about, before you came,
a great deal for me. Tell uncle I'm in tolerable health, will
you ? "
" I'll tell him that you say so, Linton. I couldn't affirm that
you are, " observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious
assertion of what was evidently an untruth.
" And be here again next Thursday, " continued he, shunning
her puzzled gaze. " And give him my thanks for permitting
you to come — my best thanks, Catherine. And — and, if you did
meet my father, and he asked you about me, don't lead him to
suppose that I've been extremely silent and stupid : don't look
sad and downcast, as you are doing — he'll be angry. "
" I care nothing for his anger, " exclaimed Cathy, imagining
she would be its object.
" But I do, " said her cousin, shuddering.''Dont provoke
him against me, Catherine, for he is very hard. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS, 235
" Is he severe to you, Master Heathcliff? " I inquired. " Has
he grown weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active
hatred ? "
Linton looked at me, but did not answer ; and, after keeping
her seat by liis side another ten minutes, during which his head
fell drowsily on his breast, and he uttered nothing except sup-
pressed moans of exhaustion or pain, Cathy began to seek solace
in looking for bilberries, and sharing the produce of her researches
with me : she did not offer them to him, for she saw further
notice would only weary and annoy.
" Is it half-an-hour now, Ellen ? " she whispered in my ear, at
last. " I can't tell why we should stay. He's asleep, and papa
will be wanting us back. "
" Well, we must not leave him asleep, " I answered ; " wait till
he wakes, and be patient. You were mighty eager to set off,
but your longing to see poor Linton has soon evaporated ! "
" Why did he wish to see me? " returned Catherine. " In his
crossest humours, formerly, I liked him better than I do in his
present curious mood. It's just as if it were a task he was com-
pelled to perform — this interview — for fear his father should scold
him. But I'm hardly going to come to give Mr. Heathcliff
pleasure ; whatever reason he may have for ordering Linton to
undergo this penance. And, though I'm glad he's better in
health, I'm sorry he's so much less pleasant, and so much less
affectionate to me. "
" You think he is better in health then? " I said.
''Yes, " she answered ;''because he always made such a great
deal of his sufferings, you know. He is not tolerably well, as he
told me to tell papa ; but he's better, very likely. "
" There you differ with me, Miss Cathy, " I remarked; " I
should conjecture him to be far worse. "
Linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror,
and asked if any one had called his name.
''No, " said Catherine ;''unless in dreams. I cannot conceive
how you manage to doze out of doors, in the morning. "
" I thought I heard my father, " he gasped, glancing up to the
frowning nab above us. *'You are sure nobody spoke ? "
''Quite sure, " replied his cousin.''Only Ellen and -I were dis-
puting concerning your health. Are you truly stronger, Linton,
than when we separated in winter? If you be I'm certain one
thing is not stronger— your regard for me : speak,— are you? "
236 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
The tears gushed from Linton's eyes as he answered, " Yes,
yes, I am ! " And, still under the spell of the imaginary voice,
his gaze wandered up and down to detect its owner. Cathy
rose. " For to-day we must part, " she said. " And I won't
coneeal that I have been sadly disappointed with our meeting ;
though I'll mention it to nobody but you : not that I stand in
awe of Mr. Heathcliff. "
" Hush, " murmured Linton: " for God's sake, hush ! He's
coming. " And he clung to Catherine's arm, striving to detain
her ; but at that announcement she hastily disengaged herself,
and whistled to Minny, who obeyed her like a dog.
" I'll be here next Thursday, " she cried, springing to the
saddle. " Good-bye, Quick, Ellen ! "
And so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so
absorbed was he in anticipating his father's approach.
Before we reached home, Catherine's displeasure softened into
a perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with
vague, uneasy doubts about Linton's actual circumstances,
physical and social ; in which I partook, though I counselled her
not to say much ; for a second journey would make us better
judges. My master requested an account of our ongoings.
His nephew's offering of thanks was duly delivered. Miss Cathy
gently touching on the rest : I also threw little light on his
inquiries, for I hardly knew what to hide, and what to reveal.
CHAPTER XXVII.
Seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the
henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton's state. The havoc
that months had previously wrought was now emulated by the
inroads of hours. Catherine, we would fain have deluded yet :
but her own quick spirit refused to delude her : it divined in
secret, and brooded on the dreadful probability, gradually
ripening into certainty. She had not the heart to mention her
ride, when Thursday came round ; I mentioned it for her, and
obtained permission to order her out of doors : for the library,
where her father stopped a short time daily — the brief period he
could bear to sit up — and his chamber, had become her whole
■world. She grudged each moment that did not find her bending
over his pillow, or seated by his side. Her countenance grew
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 237
wan with watching and sorrow, and my master gladly dismissed
her to what he flattered himself would be a happy change of
scene and society ; drawing comfort from the hope that she
would not now be left entirely alone after his death.
He had a fixed idea, I guessed by several observations he let
fiiU, that, as his nephew resembled him in person, he would
resemble him in mind ; for Linton's letters bore few or no
indications of his defective character. And I, through pardon-
able weakness, refrained from correcting the error ; asking
myself what good there would be in disturbing his last moments
with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to
turn to account.
We deferred our excursion till the afternoon ; a golden after-
noon of August : every breath from the hills so full of life, that
it seemed whoever respired it, though dying, might revive. Cathe-
rine's face was just like the landscape — shadows and sunshine
flitting over it in rapid succession ; but the shadows rested longer,
and the sunshine was more transient ; and her poor little heart
reproached itself for even that passing forgetfulness of its
cares.
We discerned Linton watching at the same spot he had selected
before. My young mistress alighted, and told me that, as sl > e
was resolved to stay a very little while, I had better hold the pony
and remain on horseback ; but I dissented : I wouldn't risk los-
ing sight of the charge committed to me a minute ; so we climbed
the slope of heath together. Master Heathcliff received us with
greater animation on this occasion : not the animation of high
spirits though, nor yet of joy ; it looked more like fear.
" It is late ! " he said, speaking short and with difficulty. " Is
not your father very ill? I thought you wouldn't come. "
" IV/ij won't you be candid? " cried Catherine, swallowing
her greeting. " Why cannot you say at once you don't want
me? It is strange, Linton, that for the second time you have
brought me here on purpose, apparently, tc distress us both, and
for no reason besides ! "
Linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half
ashamed ; but his cousin's patience was not sufficient to endure
this enigmatical behaviour.
" My father /j very ill, " she said ; " and why am I called from
his bedside ? Why didn't you send to absolve me from my pro-
mise, when you wished I wouldn't keep it ? Come ! 1 desire au
238 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
explanation : playing and trifling are completely banished out of
my mind ; and I can't dance attendance on your affectations
now
" My affectations! " he murmured; " what are they? For
Heaven's sake, Catherine, don't look so angry ! Despise me as
much as you please ; I am a worthless, cowardly wretch : I can't
be scorned enough ; but I'm too mean for your anger. Hate my
father, and spare me for contempt. "
" Nonsens,e ! " cried Catherine, in a passion. " Foolish, silly
boy ! And there ! he trembles, as if I were really going to touch
him 1 You needn't bespeak contempt, Linton : anybody will
have it spontaneously at your service. Get off ! I shall return
home : it is folly dragging you from the hearthstone, and pre-
tending — what do we pretend ? Let go my frock ! If I pitied
you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should spurn
such pity, Ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is. Rise,
and don't degrade yourself into an abject reptile — do7i'i! "
With streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton had
thrown his nerveless frame along the ground : he seemed con-
vulsed with exquisite terror.
" Oh ! " he sobbed, " I cannot bear it ! Catherine, Catherine,
I'm a traitor, too, and I dare not tell you ! But leave me, and I
shall be killed ! Dear Catherine, my life is in your hands : and
you have said you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn't harm
you. You'll not go, then? kind, sweet, good Catherine ! And
perhaps you rvill consent — and he'll let me die with you 1 "
My young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to
raise him. The old feehng of indulgent tenderness overcame her
vexation, and she grew thoroughly moved and alarmed,
" Consent to what? " she asked. " To stay! Tell me the
meaning of this strange talk, and I will. You contradict your
own words, and distract me ! Be calm and frank, and confess
at once all that weighs on your heart. You wouldn't injure me,
Linton, would you? You wouldn't let any enemy hurt me, if
you could prevent it? I'll believe you are a coward for yourself,
but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend. "
" But my father threatened me, " gasped the boy, clasping his
attenuated fingers, " and I dread him — I di-ead him! I dare
not tell ! "
" Oh, well ! " said Catherine, with scornful compassion, " keep
your secret : /'w no coward. Save yourself: I'm not afraid I "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 239-
Her magnanimity provoked his tears : he wept wildly, kissing
her supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak
out. I was cogitating what the mystery might be, and deter-
mined Catherine should never suffer, to benefit him or any one
else, by my good will ; when hearing a rustle among the ling, I
looked up and saw Mr. Heathcliff almost close upon us, descend-
ing the Heights. He didn't cast a glance towards my com-
panions, though they were sufficiently near for Linton's sobs to
be audible ; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone he assumed
to none besides, and the sincerity of which I couldn't avoid
doubting, he said—
" It is something to see you so near to my house, Nelly. How
are you at the Grange? Let us hear. The rumour goes, " he
added in a lower tone,''that Edgar Linton is on his deathbed :
perhaps they exaggerate his illness ! "
" No; my master is dying, " I replied: " it is true enough.
A sad thing it will be for us all, but a blessing for him 1 "
" How long will he last, do you think? " he asked.
" I don't know, " I said.
" Because, " he continued, looking at the two young people,
who were fixed under his eye — Linton appeared as if he could
not venture to stir or raise his head, and Catherine could not
move, on his account — " because that lad yonder seems deter-
mined to beat me ; and I'd thank his uncle to be quick, and go
before him. Hallo ! has the whelp been playing that game
long? I did give him some lessons about snivelling. Is he
pretty lively with Miss Linton generally? "
''Lively ? no — he has shown the greatest distress, " I answered.
" To see him, I should say, that instead of rambling with his
sweetheart on the hills, he ought to be in bed, under the hands
of a doctor. "
" He shall be in a day or two, " muttered Heathcliff. " But
first — get up, Linton! Get up ! " he shouted. " Don't grovel
on the ground there : up, this moment ! "
Linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of help-
less fear, caused by his father's glance towards him, I suppose :
there was nothing else to produce such humiliation. He made
several efforts to obey, but his little strength was ani^ihilated for
the time, and he fell back again with a moan. Mr. Heathcliff
advanced, and lifted him to lean against a ridge of turf.
" Now, " said he, with curbed ferocity, " I'm getting angry;
240 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and if you don't command that paltry spirit of yours — Damn
you ! get up directly ! "
" I will, father, " he panted. " Only, let me alone, or I shall
faint. I've done as you wished, I'm sure. Catherine will tell you
that I— that I — have been cheerful. Ah ! keep by me, Catherine :
give me your hand. "
" Take mine, " said his father ; " stand on your feet. There
now — she'll lend you her arm : that's right, look at her. You
would imagine I was the devil himself, Miss Linton, to excite
such horror. Be so kind as to walk home with him, will you ?
He shudders if I touch him. "
" Linton, dear ! " whispered Catherine, " I can't go to Wuther-
jng Heights ; papa has forbidden me. He'll not harm you :
why are you so afraid? "
" I can never re-enter that house, " he answered. " I'm 7iot to
re-enter it without you ! "
" Stop! " cried his father. " We'll respect Catherine's filial
scruples. Nelly, take him in, and I'll follow your advice con-
cerning the doctor, without delay. "
" You'll do well, " replied I. " But I must remain with my
mistress : to mind your son is not my business. "
" You are very stiff, " said Heathcliff, " I know that : but you'll
force me to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves
your charity. Come, then, my hero. Are you willing to return,
escorted by me? "
He approached once more, and made as if he would seize the
fragile being ; but, shrinking back, Linton clung to his cousin,
and implored her to accompany him, with a frantic importunity
that admitted no deniak However I disapproved, I couldn't
hinder her : indeed, how could she have refused him herself?
What was filling him with dread we had no means of discerning :
but there he was, powerless under its gripe, and any addition
seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy. We reached the
threshold : Catherine walked in, and I stood waiting till she had
conducted the invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately ;
when Mr. Heathcliff, pushing me forward, exclaimed —
''My house is not stricken with the plague, Nelly ; and I have
a mind to be hospitable to-day : sit down, and allow me to shut
the door. "
He shut and locked it also. I started.
" You shall have tea before you go home, " he added. " I am
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 241
by myself. Hareton is gone with some cattle to the Lees, and
Zillah and Joseph are off on a journey of pleasure ; and, though
I'm used to being alone, I'd rather have some interesting com-
pany, if I can get it. Miss Linton, take your seat by him. I
give you what I have : the present is hardly worth accepting ;
but I have nothing else to offer. It is Linton, I mean. How
she does stare ! It's odd what a savage feehng I have to any-
thing that seems afraid of me ! Had I been born where laws
are less strict and tastes less dainty, I should treat myself to a
slow vivisection of those two, as an evening's amusement. "
He drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself,
" By hell! I hate them. "
" I'm not afraid of you ! " exclaimed Catherine, who could not
hear the latter part of his speech. She stepped close up ; her
black eyes flashing with passion and resolution. " Give me that
key : I will have it ! " she said. " I wouldn't eat or drink here,
if I were starving. "
Heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table.
He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at her boldness ; or,
possibly, reminded by her voice and glance, of the person from
whom she inherited it. She snatched at the instrument, and
half-succeeded in getting it out of his loosened fingers : but her
action recalled him to the present ; he recovered it speedily.
" Now, Catherine Linton, " he said, " stand off, or I shall knock
you down ; and that will make Mrs. Dean mad. "
Regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and
its contents again. " We will go ! " she repeated, exerting her
utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax ; and finding
that her nails made no impression, she applied her teeth pretty
sharply. Heathcliff glanced at me a glance that kept me from
interfering a moment. Catherine was too intent on his fingers
to notice his face. He opened them suddenly, and resigned the
object of dispute ; but, ere she had well secured it, he seized her
with the liberated hand, and, pulling her on his knee, adminis-
tered with the other a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of
the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been
able to fall.
At this diabolical violence I rushed on him furiously. " You
villain ! " I began to cry, " you villain ! " A touch on the chest
silenced me : I am stout, and soon put out of breath ; and, what
with that and the rage, I staggered dizzily back, and felt ready
242 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
to suffocate, or to burst a blood-vessel. The scene was over in
two minutes ; Catherine, released, put her two hands to her
temples, and looked just as if she were not sure whether her ears
were off or on. She trembled like a reed, poor thing, and leant
against the table perfectly bewildered.
" I know how to chastise children, you see, " said the scoundrel
grimly, as he stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had
dropped to the floor. " Go to Linton now, as I told you ; and
cry at your ease ! I shall be your father, to-morrow — all the
father you'll have in a few days — and you shall have plenty of
that. You can bear plenty ; you're no weakling : you shall have
a daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a temper in your eyes
again! "
Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down and put her
burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. Her cousin had shrunk
into a corner of the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulating
himself, I dare say, that the correction had lighted on another
than him. Mr. Heathcliff, perceiving us all confounded, rose,
and expeditiously made the tea himself. The cups and saucers
were laid ready. He poured it out, and handed me a cup.
" Wash away your spleen, " he said. " And help your own
naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned, though I prepared
it. I'm going out to seek your horses. "
Our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit some-
M'here. We tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened out-
side : we looked at the windows — they were too narrow for even
Cathy's little figure.
" Master Linton, " I cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned :
''you know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall
tell us, or I'll box your ears, as he has done your cousin's. "
" Yes, Linton, you must tell, " said Catherine. " It was for your
sake I came ; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse. "
" Give me some tea, I'm thirsty, and then I'll tell you, " he
answered. " Mrs. Dean, go away. I don't hke you standing
over me. Now, Catherine, you are letting your tears fall into
my cup. I won't drink that. Give me another. "
Catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. I felt
disgusted at the Httle wretch's composure, since he was no longer
in terror for himself. The anguish he had exhibited on the moor
subsided as soon as ever he entered Wuthering Heights ; so I
guessed he had been menaced with an awful visitation of wrath
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 243.
if he failed in decoying us there ; and, that accompHshed, he had
no further immediate fears.
" Papa wants us to be married, " he continued, after sipping
some of the hquid. " And he knows your papa wouldn't let us
marry now ; and he's afraid of my dying, if we wait ; so we are
to be married in the morning, and you are to stay here all night ;
and if you do as he wishes, you shall return home next day, and
take me with you. "
" Take you with her, pitiful changeling? " I exclaimed.
" Voti marry? Why, the man is mad; or he thinks us fools,
every one. And do you imagine that beautiful young lady, that
healthy, hearty girl, will tie herself to a little perishing monkey
like you ! Are you cherishing the notion that anybody, let alone
!Miss Catherine Linton, would have you for a husband? You
want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with your dastardly-
puling tricks ; and — don't look so silly, now ! I've a very good
mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery,
and your imbecile conceit. "
I did give him a slight shaking ; but it brought on the cough,
and he took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping,
and Catherine rebuked me.
" Stay all night? No, " she said, looking slowly round.
" Ellen, I'll burn that door down, but I'll get out. "
And she would have commenced the execution of her threat
directly, but Linton was up in alarm for his dear self again.
He clasped her in his two feeble arms, sobbing —
" Won't you have me, and save me? not let me come to the
Grange ? Oh ! darling Catherine ! you mustn't go and leave,
after all. You must obey my father — you must / "
" I must obey my owTi, " she replied, " and relieve him from
this cruel suspense. The whole night ! What would he think ?
he'll be distressed already. I'll either break or burn a way out
of the house. Be quiet ! You're in no danger ; but if you
hinder me — Linton, I love papa better than you ! "
The mortal terror he felt of Mr. HeathclifFs anger, restored
to the boy his coward's eloquence. Catherine was near dis-
traught : still, she persisted that she must go home, and tried
entreaty in her turn, persuading him to subdue his selfish agony.
While they were thus occupied, our gaoler re-entered.
" Your beasts have trotted off, " he said, " and — now, Linton !
snivelling again? What has she been doing to you? Come,
244 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
come — have done, and get to bed. In a month or two, my lad,
you'll be able to pay her back her present tyrannies with a
vigorous hand. You're pining for pure love, are you not?
nothing else in the world : and she shall have you ! There, to
bed ! Zillah won't be here to-night ; you must undress yourself.
Hush ! hold your noise ! Once in your own room, I'll not come
near you : you needn't fear. By chance you've managed tole-
rably. I'll look to the rest. "
He spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to
pass ; and the latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might,
which suspected the person who attended on it of designing
a spiteful squeeze. The lock was re-secured. Heathcliff ap-
proached the fire, where my mistress and I stood silent. Cathe-
rine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to her cheek :
his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation. Anybody else
would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with
sternness, but he scowled on her, and muttered —
" Oh ! you are not afraid of me ? Your courage is well dis-
guised : you seem damnably afraid ! "
" I am afraid now, " she replied, " because, if I stay, papa will
be miserable ; and how can I endure making him miserable ;
— when he — when he — Mr. Heathcliff, let me go home ! I pro-
mise to marry Linton : papa would like me to : and I love him.
Why should you wish to force me to do what I'll willingly do
of myself? "
" Let him dare to force you ! " I cried. " There's law in the
land, thank God there is ; though we be in an out-of-the-way
place. I'd inform if he were my own son : and it's felony with-
out benefit of clergy ! "
" Silence ! " said the ruffian. " To the devil with your clam-
our ! I don't want you to speak. Miss Linton, I shall enjoy
myself remarkably in thinking your father will be miserable : I
shall not sleep for satisfaction. You could have hit on no surer
way of fixing your residence under my roof for the next twenty-
four hours, than informing me that such an event would follow.
As to your promise to marry Linton, I'll take care you shall keep
it ; for you shall not quit this place till it is fulfilled. "
" Send Ellen, then, to let papa know I'm safe! " exclaimed
Catherine, weeping bitterly.''Or marry me now. Poor papa !
Ellen, he'll think we're lost. What shall we do? "
" Not he ! He'll think you are tired of waiting on him, and
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 24$
run off for a little amusement, " answered Heathcliff. " You
cannot deny that you entered my house of your own accord, in
contempt of his injunctions to the contrary. And it is quite
natural that you should desire amusement at your age ; and that
you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that man only your
father. Catherine, his happiest days were over when your days
began. He cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the world
(I did, at least) ; and it would just do if he cursed you as he
went out of it. I'd join him. I don't love you ! How should I ?
Weep away. As far as I can see, it will be your chief diversion
hereafter ; unless Linton make amends for other losses : and your
provident parent appears to fancy he may. His letters of advice
and consolation entertained me vastly. In his last he recom-
mended my jewel to be careful of his ; and kind to her when he
got her. Careful and kind — that's paternal. But Linton requires
his whole stock of care and kindness for himself. Linton can
play the little tyrant well. He'll undertake to torture any num-
ber of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. You'll
be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his khidfiess, when you get
home again, I assure you. "
" You're right there ! " I said ; " explain your son's character.
Show his resemblance to yourself ; and then, I hope, Miss Cathy
will think twice before she takes the cockatrice ! "
" I don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now, "
he answered ;''because she must either accept him or remain a
prisoner, and you along with her, till your master dies. I can de-
tain you both, quite concealed, here. If you doubt, encourage her
to retract her word, and you'll have an opportunity of judging ! "
" I'll not retract my word, " said Catherine, " I'll marry him
within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange afterwards.
Mr. Heathcliff, you're a cruel man, but you're not a fiend ; and
you won't, from fnere malice, destroy irrevocably all my happi-
ness. If papa thought I had left him on purpose, and if he died
before I returned, could I bear to live? I've given over crying :
but I'm going to kneel here, at your knee ; and I'll not get up,
and I'll not take my eyes from your face till you look back at me !
No, don't turn away ! do look ! You'll see nothing to provoke
you. I don't hate you. I'm not angry that you struck me.
Have you never loved anybody in all your life, uiicle ? never f
Ah ! you must look once. I'm so wretched, you can't help being
sorry and pitying me. "
246 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Keep your eft's fingers off; and move, or I'll kick you ! "
cried Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.''I'd rather be hugged
by a snake. How the devil can you dream of fawning on me ?
I detest you ! "
He shrugged his shoulders : shook himself, indeed, as if his
flesh crept with aversion ; and thrust back his chair ; while I got
up, and opened my mouth, to commence a downright torrent of
abuse. But I was rendered dumb in the middle of the first
sentence, by a threat that I should be shown into a room by my-
self the very next syllable I uttered. It v/as growing dark — we
heard a sound of voices at the garden gate. Our host hurried
out instantly : he had his wits about him ; %ve had not. There
was a talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.
" I thought it had been your cousin Hareton, " I observed to
Catherine.''I wish he would arrive ! Who knows but he might
take our part? "
" It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange, " said
Heathcliff, overhearing me. " You should have opened a lattice
and called out : but I could swear that chit is glad you didn't.
She's glad to be obliged to stay, I'm certain. "
At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to
our grief without control ; and he allowed us to wail on till nine
o'clock. Then he bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to
Zillah's chamber ; and I whispered my companion to obey :
perhaps we might contrive to get through the window there, or
into a garret, and out by its skylight. The window, however,
was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap was safe from
our attempts ; for we were fastened in as before. We neither
of us lay down : Catherine took her station by the lattice, and
watched anxiously for morning ; a deep sigh being the only
answer I could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would
try to rest. I seated myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro,
passing harsh judgment on my many derelictions of duty ; from
which, it struck me then, all the misfortunes of my employers
sprang. It was not the case, in reality, I am aware ; but it was,
in my imagination, that dismal night ; and I thought Heathcliff
himself less guilty than I.
At seven o'clock he came, and inquired if Miss Linton had
risen. She ran to the door immediately, and answered, " Yes. "
''Here, then, " he said, opening it, and puUing her out. I rose to
follow, but he turned the lock again. I demanded my release.
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 247
" Be patient, " he replied ; " I'll send up your breakfast in a
■while. "
I thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily ; and
Catherine asked why I was still shut up? He answered, I must try
to endure it another hour, and they went away. I endured it two
or three hours ; at length, I heard a footstep : not Heathcliff's.
" I've brought you something to eat, " said a voice ; " oppen
t'door ! "
Complying eagerly, I beheld Hareton, laden with food enough
to last me all day.
" Tak it, " he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
" Stay one minute, " I began.
" Nay, " cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers I
could pour forth to detain him.
And there I remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole
of the next night ; and another, and another. Five nights and
four days I remained, altogether, seeing nobody but Hareton,
once every morning ; and he was a model of a gaoler : surly,
and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving his sense of
justice or compassion.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approached — lighter and shorter ; and, this time, the person
entered the room. It was Zillah ; donned in her scarlet shawl,
with a black silk bonnet on her head, and a willow basket
swung to her arm.
" Eh, dear ! Mrs. Dean ! " she exclaimed. " Well ! there is a
talk about you at Gimmerton. I never thought but you were
sunk in the Blackhorse marsh, and missy with you, till master
told me you'd been found, and he'd lodged you here ! What !
and you must have got on an island, sure ? And how long were
you in the hole? Did master save you, Mrs. Dean? But you're
not so thin — you've not been so poorly, have you ? "
" Your master is a true scoundrel ! " I replied. " But he shall
answer for it. He needn't have raised that tale : it shall all be
laid bare ! "
" What do you mean? " asked Zillah, " It's not his'tale :
they tell that in the village— about your being lost in the marsh :
248 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and I calls to Earnshaw, when I come in—'Eli, they's queer
things, Mr. Hareton, happened since I went off. It's a sad pity
of that likely young lass, and cant Nelly Dean. " He stared.
I thought he had not heard aught, so I told him the rumour.
The master listened, and he just smiled to himself, and said,'If
they have been in the marsh, they are out now, Zillah. Nelly
Dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room. You can tell her
to flit, when you go up ; here is the key. The bog-water got
into her head, and she would have run home quite flighty ; but
I fixed her till she came round to her senses. You can bid her
go to the Grange at once, if she be able, and carry a message
from me, that her young lady will follow in time to attend the
squire's funeral.'"
" Mr. Edgar is not dead? " I gasped. " Oh! Zillah, Zillah! "
" No, no; sityou down, my good mistress, " she replied, " you're
right sickly yet. He's not dead ; Doctor Kenneth thinks he
may last another day. I met him on the road and asked. "
Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things, and
hastened below, for the way was free. On entering the house,
I looked about for some one to give information of Catherine.
The place was filled with sunshine, and the door stood wide
open ; but nobody seemed at hand. As I hesitated whether to
go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a slight cough
drew my attention to the hearth. Linton lay on the settle, sole
tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my move-
ments with apathetic eyes. " Where is Miss Catherine? " I
demanded sternly, supposing I could frighten him into giving
intelligence, by catching him thus, alone. He sucked on hke
an innocent.
" Is she gone? " I said.
''No, " he replied ;''she's upstairs : she's not to go ; we won't
let her. "
" You won't let her, little idiot ! " I exclaimed. " Direct me
to her room immediately, or I'll make you sing out sharply. "
" Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there, "
he answered. " He says I'm not to be soft with Catherine : she's
my wife, and it's shameful that she should wish to leave me.
He says, she hates me and wants me to die, that she may have
my money ; but she shan't have it : and she shan't go home !
She never shall ! — she may cry, and be sick as much as she
pleases! "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 249
He resumed his former occupation, closing his hds, as if he
meant to drop asleep.
" Master Heathcliff, " I resumed, " have you forgotten all
Catherine's kindness to you last winter, when you afifirmed you
loved her, and when she brought you books and sung you songs,
and came many a time through wind and snow to see you? She
wept to miss one evening, because you would be disappointed ;
and you felt then that she was a hundred times too good to you :
and now you believe the lies your father tells, though you know
he detests you both. And you join him against her. That's
fine gratitude, is it not? "
The corner of Linton's mouth fell, and he took the sugar-
candy from his lips.
''Did she come to Wuthering Heights, because she hated you ? "
I continued, " Think for yourself ! As to your money, she does
not even know that you will have any. And you say she's sick ;
and yet, you leave her alone, up there in a strange house ! You
who have felt what it is to be so neglected ! You could pity your
own sufferings ; and she pitied them too ; but you won't pity hers !
I shed tears, Master Heathcliff, you see — an elderly woman, and
a servant merely — and you, after pretending such affection, and
having reason to worship her almost, store every tear you have
for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. Ah ! you're a heartless,
selfish boy ! "
" I can't stay with her, " he answered crossly. " I'll not stay
by myself. She cries so I can't bear it. And she won't give over,
though I say I'll call my father. I did call him once, and he
threatened to strangle her, if she was not quiet ; but she began
again the instant he left the room, moaning and grieving all night
long, though I screamed for vexation that I couldn't sleep. "
" Is Mr. Heathcliff out? " I inquired, perceiving that the
wretched creature had no power to sympathise with his cousin's
mental tortures.
" He's in the court, " he replied, " talking to Doctor Kenneth ;
who says uncle is dying, truly, at last. I'm glad, for I shall be
master of the Grange after him. Catherine always spoke of it as
her house. It isn't hers ! It's mine : papa says everything she
has is mine. All her nice books are mine ; she offered to give me
them, and her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I would get
the key of our room, and let her out; but I told her she had
nothing to give, they were all, all mine. And then she cried, and
250 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
took a little picture from her neck, and said I should have that ;
two pictures in a gold case, on one side her mother, and on the
other, uncle, when they were young. That was yesterday — I said
they were mine, too ; and tried to get them from her. Tiie spiteful
thing wouldn't let me : she pushed me off, and hurt me. I
shrieked out — that frightens her — she heard papa coming, and
she broke the hinges and divided the case, and gave me her
mother's portrait ; the other she attempted to hide : but papa
asked what was the matter, and I explained it. He took the one
I had away, and ordered her to resign hers to me ; she refused,
and he— he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain, and
crushed it with his foot. "
" And were you pleased to see her struck? " I asked : having
my designs in encouraging his talk.
" I winked, " he answered : " I wink to see my father strike a
dog or a horse, he does it so hard. Yet I was glad at first — she
deserved punishing for pushing me : but when papa was gone,
she made me come to the window and showed me her cheek cut
on the inside, against her teeth, and her mouth filling with blood ;
and then she gathered up the bits of the picture, and went and sat
down with her face to the wall, and she has never spoken to me
since : and I sometimes think she can't speak for pain. I don't
like to think so ; but she's a naughty thing for crying continually ;
and she looks so pale and wild, I'm afraid of her. "
" And you can get the key if you choose ? " I said.
" Yes, when I am upstairs, " he answered ; " but I can't walk
upstairs now. "
''In what apartment is it ? " I asked.
" Oh, " he cried, " I shan't tell you where it is! It is our
secret. Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, is to know.
There ! you've tired me — go away, go away ! " And he turned
his face on to his arm, and shut his eyes again.
I considered it best to depart without seeing Mr. Heathcliff, and
bring a rescue for my young lady from the Grange. On reaching
it, the astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy
also, was intense ; and when they heard that their little mistress
was safe, two or three were about to huriy up and shout the news
at Mr. Edgar's door : but I bespoke the announcement of it, m)^-
self. How changed I found him, even in those few days ! He
lay an image of sadness and resignation waiting his death. Very
young he looked ; though his actual age was thirty-nine, one
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2$ I
would have called him ten years younger, at least. He thought
of Catherine ; for he murmured her name. I touched his hand,
and spoke.
" Catherine is coming, dear master! " I whispered ; " she is
alive and well ; and will be here, I hope, to-night. "
I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence : he half rose
i:p, looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in
a swoon. As soon as he recovered, I related our compulsory-
visit, and detention at the Heights. I said Heathcliff forced
me to go in : which was not quite true. I tittered as little as
possible against Linton ; nor did I describe all his father's brutal
conduct — ray intentions being to add no bitterness, if I could
help it, to his already overflowing cup.
He divined that one of his enemy's purposes was to secure the
personal property, as well as the estate, to his son : or rather
himself ; yet why he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to
my master, because ignorant how nearly he and his nephew
would quit the world together. However, he felt that his will
had better be altered : instead of leaving Catherine's fortune at
her own disposal, he determined to put it in the hands of
trustees for her use during life, and for her children, if she had
any, after her. By that means, it could not fall to Mr. Heath-
cliff should Linton die.
Having received his orders, I despatched a man to fetch the
attorney, and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to
demand my young lady of her gaoler. Both parties were delayed
very late. The single servant returned first. He said Mr. Green,
the lawyer, was out when he arrived at his house, and he had to
wait two hours for his re-entrance ; and then Mr. Green told him
he had a little business in the village that must be done ; but he
would be at Thrushcross Grange before morning. The four men
came back unaccompanied also. They brought word that Cathe-
rine was ill : too ill to quit her room ; and Heathcliff would not
suffer them to see her. I scolded the stupid fellows well for
listening to that tale, which I would not carry to my master ; re-
solving to take a whole bevy up to the Heights, at daylight, and
storm it literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to
us. Her father shall see her, I vowed, and vowed again, if that
devil be killed on his own doorstones in trying to prevent it !
Happily, I was spared the journey and the trouble. I had
gone downstairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water ; and
252 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
was passing through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp
knock at the front door made me jump. " Oh ! it is Green, " I
said, recollecting myself — " only Green, " and I went on, intend-
ing to send somebody else to open it ; but the knock was re-
peated : not loud, and still importunately. I put the jug on the
banister and hastened to admit him myself. The harvest moon
shone clear outside. It was not the attorney. My own sweet
little mistress sprang on my neck, sobbing —
" Ellen ! Ellen ! is papa alive? "
" Yes, " I cried: " yes, my angel, he is. God be thanked,
you are safe with us again ! "
She wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs to Mr.
Linton's room ; but I compelled her to sit down on a chair, and
made her drink, and washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint
colour with my apron. Then I said I must go first, and tell of
her arrival ; imploring her to say, she should be happy with young
Heathcliff. She stared, but soon comprehending why I coun-
selled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me she would not
complain.
I couldn't abide to be present at their meeting. I stood out-
side the chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured
near the bed, then. All was composed, however : Catherine's
despair was as silent as her father's joy. She supported him
calmly, in appearance ; and he fixed on her features his raised
eyes, that seemed dilating with ecstasy.
He died blissfully, Mr. Lockwood : he died so. Kissing her
cheek, he murmtired —
" I am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to
lis ! " and never stirred or spoke again ; but continued that
rapt, radiant gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his
soul departed. None could have noticed the exact minute of
his death, it was so entirely without a struggle.
Whether Catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief
were too weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the
sun rose : she sat till noon, and would still have remained brood-
ing over that deathbed, but I insisted on her coming away and
taking some repose. It was well I succeeded in removing her ;
for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having called at Wuther-
ing Heights to get his instructions how to behave. He had sold
himself to Mr. Heathcliff: that was the cause of his delay in
obeying my master's summons. Fortunately, no thought of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2)^
worldly affairs crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him, after
his daughter's arrival.
Mr. Green took upon himself to order everything and every-
body about the place. He gave all the servants, but me, notice
to quit. He would have carried his delegated authority to the
point of insisting that Edgar Linton should not be buried beside
his wife, but in the chapel, with his family. There was the will,
however, to hinder that, and my loud protestations against any
infringement of its directions. The funeral was hurried over ;
Catherine, Mrs. Linton Heathcliff now, was suffered to stay at
the Grange till her father's corpse had quitted it.
She told me that her anguish had at last spurred Linton to incur
the risk of liberating her. She heard the men I sent disputing
at the door, and she gathered the sense of Heathcliff's answer.
It drove her desperate. Linton, who had been conveyed up to
the little parlour soon after I left, was terrified into fetching the
key before his father re-ascended. He had the cunning to un-
lock and re-lock the door, without shutting it ; and when he
should have gone to bed, he begged to sleep with Hareton, and
his petition was granted for once. Catherine stole out before
break of day. She dare not try the doors, lest the dogs should
raise an alarm ; she visited the empty chambers and examined
their windows ; and, luckily, lighting on her mother's, she got
easily out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the
fir-tree close by. Her accomplice suffered for his share in
the escape, notwithstanding his timid contrivances.
CHAPTER XXIX.
The evening after the funeral, my young lady and I were seated
in the library ; now musing mournfully — one of us despairingly —
on our loss, now venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.
We had just agreed the best destiny which could await
Catherine, would be a permission to continue resident at the
Grange ; at least, during Linton's life : he being allowed to join
her there, and I to remain as housekeeper. That seemed rather
too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for ; and yet I did
hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my
home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young
mistress ; when a servant — one of the discarded ones, not yet
254 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
departed — rushed hastily in, and said''that devil Heathcliff " was
coming through the court : should he fasten the door in his face ?
If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had
not time. He made no ceremony of knocking or announcing
his name : he was master, and availed himself of the master's
privilege to walk straight in, without saying a word. The sound
of our informant's voice directed him to the hbrary : he entered,
and motioning him out, shut the door.
It was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a
guest, eighteen years before : the same moon shone through the
window ; and the same autumn landscape lay outside. We had
not yet lighted a candle, but all the apartment was visible, even
to the portraits on the wall : the splendid head of Mrs. Linton,
and the graceful one of her husband. Heathcliff advanced to the
hearth. Time had little altered his person either. There was the
same man : his dark face rather sallower and more composed,
his frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other differ-
ence. Catherine had risen, with an impulse to dash out, when
she saw him.
" Stop! " he said, arresting her by the arm. " No more
runnings away ! Where would you go ? I'm come to fetch you
home ; and I hope you'll be a dutiful daughter, and not encour-
age my son to further disobedience. I was embarrassed how to
punish him when I discovered his part in the business : he's such
a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him ; but you'll see by his
look that he has received his due ! I brought him down one
evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in a chair,
and never touched him afterwards. I sent Hareton out, and we
had the room to ourselves. In two hours, I called Joseph to
carry him up again ; and since then my presence is as potent on
his nerves as a ghost ; and I fancy he sees me often, though I am
not near. Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night by the
hour together, and calls you to protect him from me ; and,
whether you like your precious mate or not, you must come : he's
your concern now ; I yield all my interest in him to you. "
" Why not let Catherine continue here? " I pleaded, " and send
Master Linton to her. As you hate them both, you'd not miss
them : they can only be a daily plague to your unnatural heart. "
" I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange, " he answered ; " and
I want my children about me, to be sure. Besides, that lass
owes me her services for her bread, I'm not going to nurture
WUTHERIXG HEIGHTS. 255
her in luxury and idleness after Linton has gone. Make haste
and get ready, now ; and don't oblige me to compel you. "
" I shall, " said Catherine. " Linton is all I have to love in
the world, and though you have done what you could to make
him hateful to me, and me to him, you camiot make us hate
each other. And I defy you to hurt him when I am by, and
I defy you to frighten me ! "
" You are a boastful champion, " replied Heathchff; " but I
don't like you well enough to hurt him : you shall get the full
benefit of the torment, as long as it lasts. It is not I who will
make him hateful to you — it is his own sweet spirit. He's as
bitter as gall at your desertion and its consequences : don't
expect thanks for this noble devotion. I heard him draw a
pleasant picture to Zillah of what he would do if he were as
strong as I : the inclination is there, and his very weakness will
sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength. "
" I know he has a bad nature, " said Catherine: " he's your
son. But I'm glad I've a better, to forgive it ; and I know he
loves me, and for that reason I love him. Mr. Heathchff, you
have nobody to love you ; and, however miserable you make us,
we shall still have the revenge of thinking that your cruelty arises
from your greater misery. You are miserable, are you not?
Lonely, like the devil, and envious like him ? Nobody loves you
— nobody will cry for you when you die ! I wouldn't be you ! "
Catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph : she seemed
to have made up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future
family, and draw pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
" You shall be sorry to be yourself presently, " said her father-
in-law, " if you stand there another minute. Begone, witch, and
get your things ! "
She scornfully withdrew. In her absence, I began to beg for
Zillah's place at the Heights, offering to resign mine to her ; but
he would suffer it on no account. He bid me be silent ; and then,
for the first time, allowed himself a glance round the room and a
look at the pictures. Having studied Mrs. Linton's, he said — ■
''I shall have that home. Not because I need it, but " • He
turned abruptly to the fire, and continued, with what, for lack of
a better word, I must call a smile — " I'll tell you what I did
yesterday ! I got the sexton, who was digging Linton's grave,
to remove the earth off her coffin-lid, and I opened it. I thought,
once, I would have stayed there : when I saw her face again— it
256 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
is hers yet ! — he had hard work to stir me ; but he said it would
change if the air blew on it, and so I struck one side of the cofifin
loose, and covered it up : not Linton's side, damn him ! I wish
he'd been soldered in lead. And I bribed the sexton to pull it
away when I'm laid there, and slide mine out too ; I'll have it
made so : and then, by the time Linton gets to us he'll not know
which is which ! "
" You were very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff! " I exclaimed,
" were you not ashamed to disturb the dead? "
" I disturbed nobody, Nelly, " he replied ; " and I gave some
ease to myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable now ;
and you'll have a better chance of keeping me underground,
when I get there. Disturbed her? No ! she has disturbed me,
night and day, through eighteen years — incessantly — remorse-
lessly — till yesternight ; and yesternight I was tranquil. I dreamt
I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with my heart stopped
and my cheek frozen against hers. "
" And if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what
would you have dreamt of then? " I said.
" Of dissolving with her, and being more happy still ! " he
answered. " Do you suppose I dread any change of that sort?
I expected such a transformation on raising the lid : but I'm
better pleased that it should not commence till I share it.
Besides, unless I had received a distinct impression of her
passionless features, that strange feeling would hardly have been
removed. It began oddly. You know I was wild after she died ;
and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to me
l:ier spirit ! I have a strong faith in ghosts : I have a conviction
that they can, and do, exist among us ! The day she was buried
there came a fall of snow. In the evening I went to the church-
yard. It blew bleak as winter — all round was solitary. I didn't
fear that her fool of a husband would wander up the den so late ;
and no one else had business to bring them there. Being alone,
and conscious two yards of loose earth was the sole barrier
between us, I said to myself—'I'll have her in my arms again !
If she be cold, I'll think it is this north wind that chills me ; and
if she be motionless, it is sleep.'I got a spade from the tool-
house, and began to delve with all my might — it scraped the
coffin ; I fell to work with my hands ; the wood commenced
cracking about the screws ; I was on the point of attaining my
object, when it seemed that I heard a sigh from some one above,
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 237
close at the edge of the grave, and bending down.'If I can
only get this off,'I muttered,'I wish they may shovel in the
earth over us both !'and I wrenched at it more desperately still.
There was another sigh, close at my ear. I appeared to feel the
warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. I knew no
living thing in flesh and blood was by ; but, as certainly as you
perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark,
iliough it cannot be discerned, so certainly I felt that Cathy was
there : not under me, but on the earth. A sudden sense of relief
flowed from my heart through every limb. I relinquished my
labour of agony, and turned consoled at once : unspeakably
consoled. Her presence was with me : it remained while I re-
filled the grave, and led me home. You may laugh, if you will ;
but I was sure I should see her there. I was sure she was with
me, and I could not help talking to her. Having reached the
Heights, I rushed eagerly to the door. It was fastened ; and,
I remember, that accursed Earnshaw and my wife opposed my
entrance. I remember stopping to kick the breath out of him,
and then hurrying upstairs, to my room and hers. I looked
round impatiently— I felt her by me — I could almost see her, and
yet I could not ! I ought to have sweat blood then, from the
anguish of my yearning— from the fervour of my supplications
to have but one glimpse ! I had not one. She showed herself,
as she often was in life, a devil to me ! And, since then, some-
times more and sometimes less, I've been the sport of that in-
tolerable torture ! Infernal ! keeping my nerves at such a stretch,
that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago
have relaxed to the feebleness of Linton's. When I sat in the
house with Hareton, it seemed that on going out, I should meet
her ; when I walked on the moors I should meet her coming in.
When I went from home, I hastened to return : she must be
.somewhere at the Heights, I was certain ! And when I slept in
her chamber — I was beaten out of that. I couldn't lie there ; for
the moment I closed my eyes, she was either outside the window,
or sUding back the panels, or entering the room, or even resting
her darling head on the same piflow as she did when a child ;
and I must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed
them a hundred times a night — to be always disappointed ! It
racked me ! I've often groaned aloud, till that old rascal Joseph
no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the fiend
inside of me. Now, since I've seen her, I'm pacified— a little.
258 WUTHERING HEIGHtS.
It was a strange way of killing ! not by inches, but by fractions
of hairbreadths, to beguile me with the spectre of a hope,
through eighteen years ! "
Mr. Heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead ; his hair clung
to it, wet with perspiration ; his eyes were fixed on the red embers
of the fire, the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples ;
diminishing the grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting
a peculiar look of trouble, and a painful appearance of mental
tension towards one absorbing subject. He only half addressed
me, and I maintained silence. I didn't like to hear him talk !
After a short period he resumed his meditation on the picture,
took it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at
better advantage ; and while so occupied Catherine entered,
announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be
saddled.
" Send that over to-morrow, " said Heathcliff to me; then
turning to her, he added — " You may do without your pony:
it is a fine evening, and you'll need no ponies at Wuthering
Heights ; for what journeys you take, your own feet will serve
you. Come along. "
" Good-bye, Ellen! " whispered my dear little mistress. As
she kissed me, her lips felt like ice. " Come and see me,
Ellen ; don't forget. "
" Take care you do no such thing, Mrs. Dean ! " said her new
father. " When I wish to speak to you I'll come here. I want
none of your prying at my house ! "
He signed her to precede him ; and casting back a look that cut
my heart, she obeyed. I watched them from the window, walk
down the garden. Heathcliff fixed Catherine's arm under his :
though she disputed the act at first evidently ; and with rapid ^
strides he hurried her into the alley, whose trees concealed them.
CHAPTER XXX.
I HAVE paid a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen her since
she left : Joseph held the door in his hand when I called to ask
after her, and wouldn't let me pass. He said Mrs. Linton was
" thrang, " and the master was not in. Zillah has told me some-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 259
thing of the way they go on, otherwise I should hardly know who
was dead and who living. She thinks Catherine haughty, and
does not like her, I can guess by her talk. My young lady asked
some aid of her when she first came ; but Mr. Heathcliff told her
to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look after
herself; and Zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded
selfish woman. Catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this
neglect ; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant
among her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some
great wrong. I had a long talk with Zillah about six weeks, ago,
a little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the
moor ; and this is what she told me.
" The first thing Mrs. Linton did, " she said, " on her arrival
at the Heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good
evening to me and Joseph ; she shut herself into Linton's room,
and remained till morning. Then, while the master and Earn-
shaw were at breakfast, she entered the house, and asked all in
a quiver if the doctor might be sent for? her cousin was very ill.
"'We know that !'answered Heathcliff;'but his life is not
worth a farthing, and I won't spend a farthing on him.'
"'But I cannot tell how to do,'she said ;'and if nobody will
help me, he'll die !'
"'Walk out of the room,'cried the master,'and let me never
hear a word more about him ! None here care what becomes
of him ; if you do, act the nurse ; if you do not, lock him up
and leave him.'
" Then she began to bother me, and I said I'd had enough
plague with the tiresome thing ; we each had our tasks, and hers
was to wait on Linton, Mr. Heathcliff bid me leave that labour
to her.
''How they managed together, I can't tell. I fancy he fretted
a great deal, and moaned hisseln night and day ; and she had
precious little rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy
eyes. She sometimes came into the kitchen all wildered like,
and looked as if she would fain beg assistance ; but I was not
going to disobey the master : I never dare disobey him, I\Irs.
Dean ; and, though I thought it wrong that Kenneth should not
be sent for, it was no concern of mine either to advise or-complain,
and I always refused to meddle. Once or twice, after we had
gone to bed, I've happened to open my door again and seen her
sitting crying on the stairs'top ; and then I've shut myself in
26o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
quick, for fear of being moved to interfere. I did pity her then,
I'm sure : still I didn't wish to lose my place, you know.
" At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and
frightened me out of my wits, by saying —
"'Tell Mr. Heathcliff that his son is dying — I'm sure he is,
this time. Get up, instantly, and tell him.'
" Having uttered this speech, she vanished again. I lay a
quarter of an hour listening and trembling. Nothing stirred —
the house was quiet.
" She's mistaken, I said to myself. He's got over it. I needn't
disturb them ; and I began to doze. But my sleep was marred
a second time by a sharp ringing of the bell — the only bell we
have, put up on purpose for Linton ; and the master called to
me to see what was the matter, and inform them that he wouldn't
have that noise repeated.
" I delivered Catherine's message. He cursed to himself, and
in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded
to their room. I followed. Mrs. Heathcliff was seated by the
bedside, with her hands folded on her knees. Her father-in-law
went up, held the light to Linton's face, looked at him, and
touched him ; afterwards he turned to her.
"'Now — Catherine,'he said,'how do you feel?'
" She was dumb.
"'How do you feel, Catherine?'he repeated.
"'He's safe, and I'm free,'she answered :'I should feel well
— ^but,'she continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal,
'you have left me so long to struggle against death alone, that
I feel and see only death ! I feel like death !'.
''And she looked like it, too ! I gave her a little wine. Hare-
ton and Joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the
sound of feet, and heard our talk from outside, now entered.
Joseph was fain, I believe, of the lad's removal ; Hareton seemed
a thought bothered : though he was more taken up with staring
at Catherine than thinking of Linton. But the master bid him
get off to bed again : we didn't want his help. He afterwards
made Joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and Mrs. Heathcliff remained by herself.
" In the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down
to breakfast : she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep,
and said she was ill ; at which I hardly wondered. I informed
Mr. Heathcliff, and he replied — •
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 261
" * Well, let her be till after the funeral ; and go up now and
then to get her what is needful ; and, as soon as she seems
better, tell me.'"
Cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to Zillah ; who
visited her twice a day, and would have been rather more friendly,
but her attempts at increasing kindness were proudly and
promptly repelled.
Heathcliff went up once, to show her Linton's will. He had
bequeathed the whole of his, and what had been her, movable
property to his father : the poor creature was threatened, or
coaxed, into that act during her week's absence, when his uncle
died. The lands, being a minor, he could not meddle with.
However, Mr. Heathcliff has claimed and kept them in his wife's
right and his also : I suppose legally : at any rate, Catherine,
destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his posses-
sion.
" Nobody, " said Zillah, " ever approached her door, except
that once, but I ; and nobody asked anything about her. The
first occasion of her coming down into the house was on a Sunday
afternoon. She had cried out, when I carried up her dinner,
that she couldn't bear any longer being in the cold : and I told
her the master was going to Thrushcross Grange, and Earnshaw
and I needn't hinder her from descending ; so, as soon as she
heard Heathcliff's horse trot off, she made her appearance
donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her
ears as.plain as a Quaker : she couldn't comb them out.
" Joseph and I generally go to chapel on Sundays : " the kirk,
you know, has no minister now, explained Mrs. Dean ; and they
call the Methodists'or Baptists'place (I can't say which it is), at
Gimmerton, a chapel. " Joseph had gone, " she continued, " but
I thought proper to bide at home. Young folks are always the
better for an elder's over-looking ; and Hareton, with all his
bashfulness, isn't a model of nice behaviour. I let him know
that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she had been
always used to see the Sabbath respected ; so he had as good
leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed.
He coloured up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands
and clothes. The train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of
sight in a minute. I saw he meant to give her his company ;
and I guessed, by his way, he wanted to be presentable ; so,
laughing, as I durst not laugh when the master is by, I offered
262 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
to help liim, if he would, and joked at his confusion. He grew
sullen, and began to swear.
" Now, Mrs. Dean, " Zillah went on, seeing me not pleased
by her manner, " you happen think your young lady too fine for
Mr. Hareton ; and happen you're right : but I own I should
love well to bring her pride a peg lower. And what will all her
learning and her daintiness do for her, now? She's as poor as
you or I : poorer I'll be bound : you're saving, and I'm doing
my little all that road. "
Hareton allowed Zillah to give him her aid ; and she flattered
him into a good humour : so, when Catherine came, half forget-
ting her former insults, he tried to make himself agreeable, by
the housekeeper's account.
" Missis walked in, " she said, " as chill as an icicle, and as
high as a princess. I got up and offered her my seat in the
arm-chair. No, she turned up her nose at my civility. Earn-
shaw rose, too, and bid her come to the settle, and sit close b}-
the fire : he was sure she was starved.
"'I've been starved a month and more,'she answered,
resting on the word as scornful as she could.
" And she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance
from both of us. Having sat till she was warm, she began to
look round, and discovered a number of books in the dresser ;
she was instantly upon her feet again, stretching to reacli
them: but they were too high up. Her cousin, after watching
her endeavours a while, at last summoned courage to help her ;
she held her frock, and he filled it with the first that came to
hand.
" That was a great advance for the lad. She didn't thank
him ; still, he felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance,
and ventured to stand behind as she examined them, and even
to stoop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pic-
tures which they contained ; nor was he daunted by the sauc}-
style in which she jerked the page from his finger : he contented
himself with going a bit farther back, and looking at her instead
of the book. She continued reading, or seeking for something
to read. His attention became, by degrees, quite centred in
the study of her thick, silky curls : her face he couldn't see, and
she couldn't see him. And, perhaps, not quite awake to what
he did, but attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded
from staring to touching ; he put out his hand and stroked one
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 26^
curl, as gently as if it were a bird. He might have stuck a knife
into her neck, she started round in such a taking.
'''Get away, this moment ! How dare you touch me ? Why
are you stopping there ?'she cried, in a tone of disgust.'I can't
endure you ! I'll go upstairs again, if you come near me.'
" Mr. Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do : he
sat down in the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over
her volumes another half-hour ; finally, Earnshaw crossed over,
and whispered to me — •
'''Will you ask her to read to us, Zillah ? I'm stalled of
doing naught ; and I do like — I could like to hear her ! Dunnot
say I wanted it, but ask of yourseln.'
"';Mr. Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am,'I said
immediately.'He'd take it very kind — he'd be much obliged.'
" She frowned ; and looking up, answered —
"'Mr. Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough
to understand that I reject any pretence at kindness you have
the hypocrisy to offer ! I despise you, and will have nothing to
say to any of you ! When I would have given my life for one
kind word, even to see one of your faces, you all kept off. But
I won't complain to you ! I'm driven down here by the cold ;
not either to amuse you or enjoy your society.'
'''What could I ha'done ?'began Earnshaw.'How v.as I
to blame ?'
"'Oh ! you are an exception, " answered Mrs. Heathcliff.'I
never missed such a concern as you.'
"'But I offered more than once, and asked,'he said, kindling
up at her pertness, " I asked Mr. Heathcliff to let me wake for
you'
"'Be silent! I'll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than
have your disagreeable voice in my ear !'said my lady.
" Hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him ! and unsUng-
ing his gun, restrained himself from his Sunday occupations no
longer. He talked now, freely enough ; and she presently saw
fit to retreat to her sohtude : but the frost had set in, and, in
spite of her pride, she was forced to condescend to our company,
more and more. However, I took care there should be no
further scorning at my good-nature : ever since, I've been as
stiff as herself ; and she has no lover or liker among us : and she
does not deserve one ; for, let them say the least word to her, and
she'll curl back without respect of any one ! She'll snap at the
264 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
master himself, and as good as dares him to thrash her ; and
the more hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows. "
At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined to
leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to come
and hve with me : but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon permit that
as he would set up Hareton in an independent house ; and I can
see no remedy, at present, unless she could marry again : and
that scheme it does not come within my province to arrange.
Thus ended Mrs Dean's story. Notwithstanding the doctor's
prophecy, I am rapidly recovering strength ; and though it be only
the second week in January, I propose getting out on horseback
in a day or two, and riding over to Wuthering Heights, to
inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six months in
London ; and, if he likes, he may look out for another tenant to
take the place after October. I would not pass another winter
here for much.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty. I went to the Heights
as I proposed ; my housekeeper entreated me to bear a little note
from her to her young lady, and I did not refuse, for the worthy
woman was not conscious of anything odd in her request. The
front door stood open, but the jealous gate was fastened, as at
my last visit ; I knocked, and invoked Earnshaw from among
the garden beds ; he unchained it, and I entered. The fellow is
as handsome a rustic as need be seen. I took particular notice
of him this time ; but then he does his best, apparently, to make
the least of his advantages.
I asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home? He answered, No ;
but he would be in at dinner-time. It was eleven o'clock, and
I announced my intention of going in and waiting for him, at
which he immediately flung down his tools and accompanied me,
in the office of watchdog, not as a substitute for the host.
We entered together ; Catherine was there, making herself
useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal ;
she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I had seen
her first. She hardly raised her eyes to notice me, and continued
her employment with the same disregard to common forms of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2l,
politeness as before ; never returning my bow and good-morning
by the slightest acknowledgment.
" She does not seem so amiable, " I thought, " as Mrs. Dean
would persuade me to believe. She's a beauty, it is true ; but
not an angel. "
Earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen.
" Remove them yourself, " she said, pushing them from her as
soon as she had done ; and retiring to a stool by the window,
where she began to carve figures of birds and beasts out of the
turnip parings in her lap. I approached her, pretending to
desire a view of the garden ; and, as I fancied, adroitly dropped
Mrs. Dean's note on to her knee, unnoticed by Hareton — but
she asked aloud, " What is that ? " and chucked it off.
''A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the
Grange, " I answered ; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed,
and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my own. She
would gladly have gathered it up at this information, but Hare-
ton beat her ; he seized and put it in his waistcoat, saying Mr.
Heathcliff should look at it first. Thereat, Catherine silently
turned her face from us, and, very stealthily, drew out her pocket-
handkerchief and applied it to her eyes ; and her cousin, after
struggling a while to keep down his softer feelings, pulled out
the letter and flung it on the floor beside her, as ungraciously as
he could. Catherine caught and perused it eagerly ; then she
put a few questions to me concerning the inmates, rational and
irrational, of her former home ; and gazing towards the hills,
murmured in soliloquy —
" I should like to be riding Minny down there ! I should like
to be climbing up there ! Oh ! I'm tired — I'm stalled, Hareton ! "
And she leant her pretty head back against the sill, with half a
yawn and half a sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted
sadness : neither caring nor knowing whether we remarked her.
" Mrs. Heathcliff, " I said, after sitting some time mute, " you
are not aware that I am an acquaintance of yours ? so intimate
that I think it strange you won't come and speak to me. My
housekeeper never wearies of talking about and praising you ;
and she'll be greatly disappointed if I return with no news of or
from you, except that you received her letter and said nothing! "
She appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked—
" Does Ellen like you? "
" Yes, very well, " I replied hesitatingly.
1 2
2v56 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" You must tell her, " she continued, " that I would answer
her letter, but I have no materials for writing : not even a book
from v.hich I might tear a leaf. "
" No books! " I exclaimed. " How do you contrive to live
here without them ? if I may take the liberty to inquire. Though
provided with a large library, I'm frequently very dull at the
Grange ; take my books away, and I should be desperate ! "
" I was always reading, when I had them, " said Catherine;
" and Mr. Heathcliff never reads ; so he took it into his head to
destroy my books. I have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.
Only once, I searched through Joseph's store of theology, to his
great irritation ; and once, Hareton, I came upon a secret stock
in your room — some Latin and Greek, and some tales and poetry :
all old friends. I brought the last here — and you gathered them,
as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love of stealing !
They are of no use to you ; or else you concealed them in the bad
spirit that as you cannot enjoy them nobody else shall. Perhaps
your envy counselled Mr. Heathcliff to rob me of my treasures ?
But I've most of them written on my brain and printed in my
heart, and you cannot deprive me of those ! "
Earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revela-
tion of his private literary accumulations, and stammered an
indignant denial of her accusations.
" Mr. Hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of know-
ledge, " I said, coming to his rescue. " He is not envious but
etmilous of your attainments. He'll be a clever scholar in a few
years. "
" And he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime, " answered
Catherine.''Yes, I hear him trying to spell and read to himself,
and pretty blunders he makes ! I wish you would repeat Chevy
Chase as you did yesterday ; it was extremely funny. I heard
you ; and I heard you turning over the dictionary to seek out
the hard words, and then cursing because you couldn't read
their explanations ! "
The young man evidently thought it too bad that he should be
laughed at for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to
remove it. I had a similar notion ; and, remembering Mrs.
Dean's anecdote of his first attempt at enlightening the darkness
in which he had been reared, I observed — •
" But, Mrs. Heathcliff, we have each had a commencement, and
each stumbled and tottered on the threshold ; had our teachers
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 267
scorned instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter
yet. "
" Oh ! " she replied, " I don't wish to limit his acquirements :
still, he has no right to appropriate %vhat is mine, and make it
ridiculous to me with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations !
Those books, both prose and verse, are consecrated to me by other
associations ; and I hate to have them debased and profaned
in his mouth ! Besides, of all, he has selected my favourite
pieces that I love the most to repeat, as if out of deliberate
malice. "
Hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute : he laboured under
a severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy
task to suppress. I rose, and, from a gentlemanly idea of reheving
his embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying
the external prospect as I stood. He followed my example, and
left the room ; but presently reappeared, bearing half-a-dozen
volumes in his hands, which he threw into Catherine's lap, ex-
claiming —
''Take them ! I never want to hear, or read, or think of them
again ! "
" I won't have them now, " she answered. " I shall connect
them with you, and hate them. "
She opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and
read a portion in the drawling tone of a beginner ; then laughed,
and threw it from her. " And listen, " she continued pro vokingly,
commencing a verse of an old ballad in the same fashion. _
But his self-love would endure no further torment : I heard,
and not altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to her
saucy tongue. The little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her
cousin's sensitive though uncultivated feelings, and a physical
'argument was the only mode he had of balancing the account,
and repaying its effects on the inflictor. He afterwards gathered
Jthe books and hurled them on the fire. I read in his countenance
what anguish it was to offer that sacrifice to spleen. I fancied
that as tliey consumed, he recalled the pleasure they had already
imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing pleasure he had
anticipated from them ; and I fancied I guessed the incitement
to his secret studies also. He had been content with daily labour
and rough animal enjoyments, till Catherine crossed his path.
Shame at her scorn, and hope of her approval, were his first
prompters to higher pursuits ; and, instead of guarding him from
268 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
one and winning him to the other, his endeavours to raise him-
self had produced just the contrary result.
" Yes ; that's all the good that such a brute as you can get from
them ! " cried Catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching
the conflagration with indignant eyes.
" You'd defter hold your tongue, now, " he answered fiercely.
And his agitation precluded further speech ; he advanced
hastily to the entrance, where I made way for him to pass. But
ere he had crossed the door-stones, Mr. Heathcliff, coming up
the causeway, encountered him, and laying hold of his shoulder
asked —
" What's to do now, my lad ? "
" Naught, naught, " he said, and broke away to enjoy his grief
and anger in solitude.
Heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.
" It will be odd if I thwart myself, " he muttered, unconscious
that I was behind him. " But when I look for his father in his
face, I find her every day more ! How the devil is he so like ?
I can hardly bear to see him. "
He bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in. There
was a restless, anxious expression in his countenance I had never
remarked there before ; and he looked sparer in person. His
daughter-in-law, on perceiving him through the window, im-
mediately escaped to the kitchen, so that I remained alone.
" I'm glad to see you out of doors again, Mr. Lockwood, " he
said, in reply to my greeting ; " from selfish motives partly: I
don't think I could readily supply your loss in this desolation.
I've wondered more than once what brought you here. "
" An idle whim, I fear, sir, " was my answer ; " or else an idle
whim is going to spirit me away. I shall set out for London,
next week ; and I must give you warning that I feel no disposi-
tion to retain Thrushcross Grange beyond the twelve months 1
agreed to rent it. I believe I shall not live there any more. "
" Oh, indeed ; you're tired of being banished from the world,
are you? " he said. " But if you be coming to plead off paying
for a place you won't occupy, your journey is useless : I never
relent in exacting my due from any one, "
" I'm coming to plead off nothing about it, " 1 exclaimed,
considerably irritated. " Should you wish it, I'll settle with you
now, " and I drew my note-book from my pocket.
" No, no, " he replied coolly; " you'll leave sufficient behind
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 269
to cover your debts, if you fail to return : I'm not in such a
hurry. Sit down and take your dinner with us ; a guest that is
safe from repeating his visit can generally be made welcome.
Catherine, bring the things in : where are you? "
Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.
" You may get your dinner with Joseph, " muttered Heathcliff
aside, " and remain in the kitchen till he is gone, "
She obeyed his directions very punctually : perhaps she had
no temptation to transgress.'Living among clowns and mis-
anthropists, she probably cannot appreciate a better class of
people when she meets them.
With Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand,
and Hareton, absolutely dumb, on the other, I made a some-
what cheerless meal, and bade adieu early, I would have de-
parted by the back way, to get a last glimpse of Catherine and
annoy old Joseph ; but Hareton received orders to lead up my
horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so I could
not fulfil my wish. .
" How dreary life gets over in that house ! " I reflected, whilA
riding down the road. " What a realisation of something morel
romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for Mrs. Linton I
Heathcliff, had she and I struck up an attachment, as her good 1
nurse desirqd, and migrated together into the stirring atmos- \
phere of the town ! "
CHAPTER XXXIL
1802. — This September I was invited to devastate the moors of
a friend in the north, and on my journey to his abode, I unex-
pectedly came within fifteen miles of Gimmerton. The ostler
at a roadside public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh
my horses, when a cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed
by, and he remarked —
" Yon's frough Gimmerton, nah ! They're alias three wick
after other folk wi'ther harvest. "
" Gimmerton? " I repeated — my residence in that locality had
already grown dim and dreamy.''Ah ! I know. How far is
it from this? "
" Happen fourteen mile o'er th'hills ; and a rough read, " he
answered.
270 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange. It
was scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as well pass
the night under my own roof as in an inn. Besides, I could
spare a day easily to arrange matters with my landlord, and
thus save myself the trouble of invading the neighbourhood
again. Having rested a while, I directed my servant to inquire
the way to the village ; and, with great fatigue to our beasts,
we managed the distance in some three hours.
I left him there, and proceede'd down the valley alone. The
grey church looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier.
I distinguished a moor sheep cropping the short turf on the
graves. It was sweet, warm weather — too warm for travelling ;
but the heat did not hinder me from enjoying the delightful
scenery above and below : had I seen it nearer August, I'm sure
it would have tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes.
In winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more divine,
than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells of
heath.
I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for admit-
tance ; but the family had retreated into the back premises, I
judged, by one thin, blue wreath curling from the kitchen
chimney, and they did not hear. I rode into the court. Under
the porch, a girl of nine or ten sat knitting, and an old woman
reclined on the house-steps, smoking a meditative pipe.
" Is Mrs. Dean within? " I demanded of the dame.
" Mistress Dean? Nay ! " she answered, " shoo doesn't bide
here : shoo's up at th'Heights. "
" Are you the housekeeper, then ? " I continued.
" Eea, aw keep th'hause, " she replied.
" Well, I'm Mr. Lockwood, the master. Are there any rooms
to lodge me in, I wonder? I wish to stay all night. "
" T'maister ! " she cried in astonishment. " Whet, whoiver
knew yah wur coming ? Yah sud ha'send word. They's nowt
norther dry nor mensful abaht t'place : nowt there isn't ! "
She threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed,
and I entered too ; soon perceiving that her report was true,
and, moreover, that I had almost upset her wits by my unwel-
come apparition, I bade her be composed, I would go out for
a walk ; and, meantime, she must try to prepare a corner of
a sitting-room for me to sup in, and a bedroom to sleep i
No sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 27 1
necessary. She seemed willing to do her best ; though she
thrust the hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker,
and mal-appropriated several other articles of her craft : but I
retired, confiding in her energy for a resting-place against my
return. Wuthering Heights was the goal of my proposed
excursion. An after-thought brought me back, when I had
quitted the court.
" All well at the Heights? " I inquired of the woman.
" Eea, fr owt ee knaw ! " she answered, skurrying away with
a pan of hot cinders.
I would have asked why Mrs. Dean had deserted the Grange,
but it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis, so I turned
away and made my exit, rambling leisurely along with the glow
of a sinking sun behind, and the mild glory of a rising moon
in front — one fading, and the other brightening — as I quitted
the park, and climbed the stony by-road branching off to Mr.
Heathcliff's dwelling. Before I arrived in sight of it, all that
remained of day was a beamless amber light along the west :
but I could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of
grass, by that splendid moon. I had neither to climb the gate
nor to knock — it yielded to my hand. That is an improvement,
I thought. And I noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils ;
a fragrance of stocks and wallflowers wafted on the air from
amongst the homely fruit-trees.
Both doors and lattices were open ; and yet, as is usually the
case in a coal district, a fine, red fire illumined the chimney : the
comfort which the eye derives from it renders the extra heat
endurable. But the house of Wuthering Heights is so large,
that the inmates have plenty of space for withdrawing out of
its influence ; and accordingly, what inmates there were had
stationed themselves not far from one of the windows. I could
both see them and hear them talk before I entered, and looked
and listened in consequence ; being moved thereto by a mingled
sense of curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.
" Con-frary / " said a voice as sweet as a silver bell — " That
for the third time, you dunce ! I'm not going to tell you again.
Recollect, or I'll pull your hair ! "
" Contrary, then, " answered another, in deep but softened
tones. " And now, kiss me, for minding so well. "
" No, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake. "
The male speaker began to read : he was a young man, re-
272 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
spectably dressed and seated at a table, having a book before
him. His handsome features glowed with pleasure, and his
eyes kept impatiently wandering from the page to a small white
hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a smart slap on
the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of inattention.
Its owner stood behind ; her light, shining ringlets blending, at
intervals, with his brown locks, as she bent to superintend his
studies ; and her face — it was lucky he could not see her face, or
he would never have been so steady. I could ; and I bit my lij)
in spite, at having thrown away the chance I might have had of
■doing something besides staring at its smiting beauty.
The task was done, not free from further blunders ; but the
pupil claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses : which,
however, he generously returned. Then they came to the door,
and from their conversation I judged they were about to issue
out and have a walk on the moors. I supposed I should be
condemned in Hareton Earnshaw's heart, if not by his mouth,
to the lowest pit in the infernal regions, if I showed my un-
fortunate person in his neighbourhood then ; and feeling very
mean and malignant, I skulked round to seek refuge in the
kitchen. There was unobstructed admittance on that side also,
and at the door sat my old friend Nelly Dean, sewing and singing
a song ; which was often interrupted from within by harsh words
of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
" I'd rayther, by th'haulf, hev'em swearing i'my lugs fro'h
morn to neeght, nor hearken ye, hahsiver ! " said the tenant of
the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's. " It's a
blazing shame, that I cannot oppen t'blessed Book, but yah set
up them glories to Sattan, and all t'flaysome wickednesses that
iver were torn into th'warld ! Oh ! ye'er a raight nowt ; and
shoo's another ; and that poor lad'll be lost atween ye. Poor
lad ! " he added, with a groan ; " he's witched : I'm sartin on't !
O Lord, judge'em, for there's norther law nor justice among
war rullers ! "
" No ! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, I suppose, "
retorted the singer. " But wisht, old man, and read your Bible
like a Christian, and never mind me. This is'Fairy Annie's
Wedding'— a bonny tune — it goes to a dance. "
Mrs. Dean was about to reconmience, when I advanced ; and
recognising me directly, she jumped to her feet, crying —
" Why, bless you, Mr. Lockwood ! How could you think of
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 273
returning in this way? All's shut up at Thrushcross Grange.
You should have given us notice ! "
" I've arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as I
shall stay, " I answered. " I depart again to-morrow. And how
are you transplanted here, Mrs. Dean? tell me that. "
" Zillah left, and Mr. Heathcliff wished me to come, soon after
you went to London, and stay till you returned. But, step in,
pray ! Have you walked from Gimmerton this evening? "
" From the Grange, " I replied; " and while they make me
lodging room there, I want to finish my business with your
master ; because I don't think of having another opportunity in
a hurry. "
" What business, sir? " said Nelly, conducting me into the
house. " He's gone out at present, and won't return soon. "
" About the rent, " I answered.
" Oh! then it is with Mrs. Heathcliff you must settle, " she
observed ; " or rather with me. She has not learnt to manage
her affairs yet, and I act for her : there's nobody else. "
I looked surprised.
" Ah! you have not heard of HeathclifTs death, I see, " she
continued.
" Heatljcliff dead ! " I exclaimed, astonished. " How long
ago? "
" Three months since : but sit down and let me take your hat,
and I'll tell you all about it. Stop, you have had nothing to eat,
have you? "
" I want nothing : I have ordered supper at home. You sit
down too. I never dreamt of his dying ! Let me hear how it
came to pass. You say you don't expect them back for some
time— the young people ? "
''No — I have to scold them every evening for their late rambles :
but they don't care for me. At least have a drink of our old
ale ; it will do you good : you seem weary. "
She hastened to fetch it before I could refuse, and I heard
Joseph asking whether " it warn't a crying scandal that she should
have followers at her time of life? And then, to get them jocks
out o't'maister's cellar ! He fair shaamed to'bide still and
see it. "
She did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute,
bearing a reaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with be-
coming earnestness. And afterwards she furnished me with the
274
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
sequel of Heathcliff's history. He had a " queer " end, as she
expressed it.
I was summoned to Wuthering Heights, within a fortnight of
your leaving us, she said ; and I obeyed joyfully, for Calherine's
sake. My first interview with her grieved and shocked me : she
had altered so much since our separation. Mr. Heathcliff did
not explain his reasons for taking a new mind about my coming
here ; he only told me he wanted me, and he was tired of seeing
Catherine : I must make the little parlour my sitting-room, and
keep her with me. It was enough if he were obliged to see her
once or twice a day. She seemed pleased at this arrangement ;
and, by degrees, I smuggled over a great number of books, and
ether articles, that had formed her amusement at the Grange ;
and flattered myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. The
delusion did not last long. Catherine, contented at first, in a
brief space grew irritable and restless. For one thing, she was
forbidden to move out of the garden, and it fretted her sadly to
be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ; for another,
in following the house, I was forced to quit her frequently, and
she complained of loneliness : she preferred quarrelling with
Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude, I did
not mind their skirmishes : but Hareton was often obliged to seek
the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the house to
himself; and though in the beginning she either left it at his
approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned re-
marking or addressing him — and though he was always as sullen
and silent as possible — after a while she changed her behaviour,
and became incapable of letting him alone :. talking at him ;
commenting on his stupidity and idleness ; expressing her
wonder how he could endure the life he lived— how he could sit
a whole evening staring into the fire and dozing.
" He's just like a dog, is he not, Ellen? " she once observed,
" or a cart-horse? He does his work, eats his food, and sleeps
eternally ! What a blank, dreary mind he must have ! Do you
ever dream, Hareton? And, if you do, what is it about? But
you can't speak to me ! "
Then she looked at him ; but he would neither open his mouth
nor look again.
" He's, perhaps, dreaming now, " she continued. " He twitched
his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him, Ellen. "
" Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 1']%
don't behave ! " I said. He had not only twitched his shoulder
but clenched his fist, as if tempted to use it.
" I know why Hareton never speaks, when I am in the kitchen, "
she exclaimed, on another occasion. " He is afraid I shall laugh
at him. Ellen, what do you think. He began to teach himself
to read once ; and because I laughed, he burned his books, and
dropped it : was he not a fool? "
" Were not you naughty? " I said ; " answer me that. "
" Perhaps I was, " she went on ; " but I did not expect him to
be so silly. Hareton, if I gave you a book, would you take it
now? I'll try ! "
She placed one she had been perusing on his hand ; he flung
it off, and muttered, if she did not give over, he would break her
neck.
" Well, I shall put it here, " she said, " in the table drawer;
and I'm going to bed. "
Then she whispered me to watch whether he touched it, and
departed. But he would not come near it ; and so I informed
her in the morning, to her great disappointment. I saw she was
sorry for his persevering sulkiness and indolence : her conscience
reproved her for frightening him off improving himself: she had
done it effectually. But her ingenuity was at work to remedy the
injury : while I ironed, or pursued other such stationary employ-
ments as I could not well do in the parlour, she would bring some
pleasant volume and read it aloud to me. When Hareton was
there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the
book lying about : that she did repeatedly; but he was as obstinate
as a mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather
he took to smoking with Joseph ; and they sat like automatons,
one on each side of the fire, the elder happily too deaf to under-
stand her wicked nonsense, as he would have called it, the younger
doing his best to seem to disregard it. On fine evenings the
latter followed his shooting expeditions, and Catherine yawned
and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the
court or garden, the moment I began ; and, as a last resource,
cried, and said she was tired of living : her life was useless.
Mr. Heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society,
had almost banished Earnshaw from his apartment. Owing to
an accident at the commencement of March, he became for some
days a fixture in the kitchen. His gun burst while out on the
hills by himself ; a splinter cut his arm, and he lost a good deal
276 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
of blood before he could reach home. The consequence was that,
perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and tranquillity, till
he made it up again. It suited Catherine to have him there : at
an)''rate, it made her hate her room upstairs more than ever :
and she would compel me to find out business below, that she
might accompany me.
On Easter Monday, Joseph went to Gimmerton fair with some
cattle : and, in the afternoon, I was busy getting up linen in the
kitchen. Earnshaw sat, morose as usual, at the chimney-corner,
and my little mistress was beguiling an idle hour with drawing
pictures on the window panes ; varying her amusement by
smothered bursts of songs, and whispered ejaculations, and quick
glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of her
cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the grate. At
a notice that I could do with her no longer intercepting my light,
'she removed to the hearthstone. I bestowed little attention on
her proceedings, but, presently, I heard her begin —
" I've found out, Hareton, that I want — that I'm glad — that
I should like you to be my cousin now, if you had not grown so 1
cross to me, and so rough. "
Hareton returned no answer.
" Hareton, Hareton, Hareton ! do you hear? " she continued.
" Get off wi'ye ! " he growled, with uncompromising gruffness.
" Let me take that pipe, " she said, cautiously advancing her
hand and abstracting it from his mouth.
Before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and
behind the fire. He swore at her and seized another.
" Stop, " she cried, " you must listen to me first ; and I can't
speak while those clouds are floating in my face. "
" Will you go to the devil ! " he exclaimed ferociously, " and
let me be ! "
" No, " she persisted, " I won't : I can't tell what to do to
make you talk to me ; and you are determined not to under-
stand. When I call you stupid, I don't mean anything : I don't
mean that I despise you. Come, you shall take notice of me,
Hareton ! you are my cousin, and you shall own me. "
''I shall have naught to do wi'you and your mucky pride, and
your damned mocking tricks ! " he answered. " I'll go to hell,
body and soul, before I look sideways after you again. Side out
o't'gate, now ; this minute ! "
Catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2/7
her lip, and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to
conceal a growing tendency to sob.
" You should be friends with your cousin, Mr. Hareton, " I
interrupted, " since she repents of her sauciness. It would do
you a great deal of good : it would make you another man to
have her for a companion. "
" A companion ! " he cried ; " when she hates me, and does
not think me fit to wipe her shoon ! Nay ! if it made me a king,
I'd not be scorned for seeking her good-will any more. "
" It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me ! " wept
Cathy, no longer disguising her trouble. " You hate me as
much as Mr. Heathcliff does, and more. "
" You're a damned har, " began Earnshaw : " why have I made
him angry, by taking your part, then, a hundred times ? and
that when you sneered at and despised me, and — Go on plaguing
me, and I'll step in yonder, and say you worried me out of the
kitchen ! "
" I didn't know you took my part, " she answered, drying her
eyes ; " and I was miserable and bitter at everybody ; but now 1
thank you, and beg you to forgive me : what can I do besides? "
She returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.
He blackened and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept his
fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground.
Catherine, by instinct, must have divined it was obdurate per-
versity, and not dislike, that prompted this dogged conduct ; for,
after remaining an instant undecided, she stooped and impressed
on his cheek a gentle kiss. The little rogue thought I had not
seen her, and, drawing back, she took her former station by the
window, quite demurely. I shook my head reprovingly, and
then she blushed and whispered —
''Well ! what should I have done, Ellen ? He wouldn't shake
hands, and he wouldn't look : I must show him some way that
I like him — that I want to be friends. "
Whether the kiss convinced Hareton, I cannot tell : he was
very careful, for some minutes, that his face should not be seen,
and when he did raise it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his
eyes.
Catherine employed herself in wrapping a han^dsome book
neatly in white paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and
addressed it to " Mr. Hareton Earnshaw, " she desired me to be her
ambassadress, and convey the present to its destined recipient.
278 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" And tell him, if he'll take it I'll come and teach him to read
it right, " she said; " and, if he refuse it, I'll go upstairs, and
never tease him again. "
I carried it, and repeated the message ; anxiously watched by
my employer. Hareton would not open his fingers, so I laid it
on his knee. He did not strike it off, either, I returned to my
work. Catherine leaned her head and arms on the table, till she
heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed ; then she
stole away, and quietly seated herself beside her cousin. He
trembled, and his face glowed : all his rudeness and all his surly
harshness had deserted him : he could not summon courage, at
first, to utter a syllable in reply to her questioning look, and her
murmured petition.
" Say you forgive me, Hareton, do? You can make me so
happy by speaking that httle word. "
He muttered something inaudible.
" And you'll be my friend? " added Catherine interrogatively.
" Nay, you'll be ashamed of me every day of your life, " he
answered ; " and the more ashamed, the more you know me ;
.and I cannot bide it. "
" So you won't be my friend? " she said, smiling as sweet as
honey, and creeping close up.
I overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking
round again, I perceived two such radiant countenances bent
over the page of the accepted book, that I did not doubt the
treaty had been ratified on both sides ; and the enemies were,
thenceforth, sworn allies.
The work they studied was full of costly pictures ; and those
and their position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till
Joseph came home. He, poor man, was perfectly aghast at the
spectacle of Catherine seated on the same bench with Hareton
Earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder ; and confounded
at his favourite's endurance of her proximity : it affected him too
deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night. His
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he
solemnly spread his large Bible on the table, and overlaid it with
dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's
transactions. At length, he summoned Hareton from his seat.
" Tak'these in to t'maister, lad, " he said, " and bide there.
I's gang up to my own rahm. This hoile's neither mensful nor
seemly for us : we mun side out and seearch another. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 279
" C'-me, Catherine, " I said, " we must'side out'too; I've
done my ironing, are you ready to go? "
" It is not eight o'clock! " she answered, rising unwillingly.
" Hareton, I'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and I'll
bring some more to-morrow. "
" Ony books that yah leave, I shall tak'into th'hahse, " said
Joseph, " and it'll be mitch if yah find em agean ; soa, yah may
plase yerseln 1 "
Cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers ; and,
smiling as she passed Hareton, went singing upstairs : lighter of
heart, I venture to say, than ever she had been under that roof
before ; except, perhaps, during her earliest visits to Linton.
The intimacy thus commenced, grew rapidly ; though it en-
countered temporary interruptions. Earnshaw was not to be
civilised with a wish, and my young lady was no philosopher,
and no paragon of patience ; but both their minds tending to the
same point — one loving and desiring to esteem, and the other
loving and desiring to be esteemed — they contrived in the end
to reach it.
You see, Mr. Lockwood, it was easy enough to win Mrs.
Heathcliff's Iieart. But now, I'm glad you did not try. The
crown of all my wishes will be the union of those two. I shall
envy no one on their wedding-day : there won't be a happier
woman than myself in England !
CHAPTER XXXIII.
On the morrow of that Monday, Earnshaw being still unable to
follow his ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about
the house, I speedily found it would be impracticable to retain
my charge beside me, as heretofore. She got downstairs before
me, and out into the garden, where she had seen her cousin
, performing some easy work ; and when I went to bid them come
to breakfast, I saw she had persuaded him to clear a large space
of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and they were
busy planning together an importation of plants from the Grange.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished
in a brief half-hour ; the black currant trees were the apple of
Joseph's eye, and she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed
in the midst of them.
28o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" There ! That will be all shown to the master, " I exclaimed,
" the minute it is discovered. And what excuse have you to offer
for taking such liberties with the garden ? We shall have a fine
explosion on the head of it: see if we don't! Mr. Hareton, I
wonder you should have no more wit, than to go and make that
mess at her bidding ! "
" I'd forgotten they were Joseph's, " answered Earnshaw, rather
puzzled ; " but I'll tell him I did it. "
We always ate our meals with Mr. Heathcliff. I held the
mistress s post in making tea and carving ; so I was indispensable
at table. Catherine usually sat by me, but to-day she stole
nearer to Hareton ; and I presently saw she would have no more
discretion in her friendship than she had in her hostility.
" Now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too
much, " were my whispered instructions as we entered the room.
" It will certainly annoy Mr. Heathcliff, and he'll be riiad at
you both. "
" I'm not going to, " she answered.
The minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking
primroses in his plate of porridge.
He dared not speak to her there : he dared hardly look ; and
yet she went on teasing, till he was twice on the point of being
provoked to laugh, I frowned, and then she glanced toward
the master : whose mind was occupied on other subjects than his
company, as his countenance evinced ; and she grew serious for
an instant, scrutinising him with deep gravity. Afterwards she
turned, and recommenced her nonsense ; at last, Hareton uttered
a smothered laugh. Mr. Heathcliff started;, his eye rapidly
surveyed our faces, Catherine met it with her accustomed look
of nervousness and yet defiance, which he abhorred,
" It is well you are out of my reach, " he exclaimed. " What
fiend possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those
infernal eyes? Down with them ! and don't remind me of your
existence again. I thought I had cured you of laughing. "
" It was me, " muttered Hareton.
" What do you say? " demanded the master.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession.
Mr. Heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently resumed
his breakfast and his interrupted musing. We had nearly
finished, and the two young people prudently shifted wider
asunder, so I anticipated no further disturbance during that
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 28 1
sitting : when Joseph appeared at the door, revealing by his
quivering hp and furious eyes, that the outrage committed on
his precious shrubs was detected. He must have seen Cathy
and her cousin about the spot before he examined it, for while
his jaws worked like those of a cow chewing its cud, and
rendered his speech difficult to understand, he began —
" I mun hev my wage, and I mun goa ! I hed aimed to dee,
wheare I'd sarved fur sixty year ; and I thowt I'd lug my books
up into t'garret, and all my bits o'stuff, and they sud hev t'
kitchen to theirseln ; for t'sake o'quietness. It wur hard to
gie up my awn hearthstun, but I thowt I could do that ! But,
nah, shoo's taan my garden fro'me, and by th'heart, maister,
I cannot stand it ! Yah may bend to th'yoak, and ye will — I
noan used to't, and an old man doesn't sooin get used to new
barthens. I'd rayther arn my bite an'my sup wi'a hammer in
th'road ! "
" Now, now, idiot! " interrupted Heathcliff, " cut it short!
What's your grievance? I'll interfere in no quarrels between
you and Nelly. She may thrust you into the coal-hole for any-
thing I care. "
" It's noan Nelly! " answered Joseph, " I sudn't shift for
Nelly — nasty ill nowt as shoo is. Thank God ! shoo cannot stale
t'sowl o'nob'dy ! Shoo wer niver soa handsome, but what a
body mud look at her'bout winking. It's yon flaysome, grace-
less quean, that's witched our lad, wi'her bold een and her
forrard ways — till — Nay ! it fair brusts my heart ! He's for-
gotten all I've done for him, and made on him, and goan and
riven up a whole row o't'grandest currant trees, i't'garden ! "
And here he lamented outright ; unmanned by a sense of his bitter
injuries, and Earnshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.
" Is the fool drunk? " asked Mr. Heathcliff. " Hareton, is
it you he's finding fault with ? "
" I've pulled v:p two or three bushes, " replied the young
man ; " but I'm going to set'em again. "
" And why have you pulled them up? " said the master.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
" We wanted to plant some flowers there, " she cried. " I'm
the only person to blame, for I wished him to do it. " --
" And who the devil gavej6 > « leave to touch a stick about the
place? " demanded her father-in-law, much surprised. " And
who ordered ^ < ?« < to obey her? " he added, turning to Hareton.
282 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
The latter was speechless ; his cousin replied —
'''You shouldn't grudge a few yards of earth for me to
ornament, when you have taken all my land ! "
" Your land, insolent slut ! You never had any, " said Heath-
cliff.
" And my money, " she continued ; returning his angry glare,
and meantime biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.
" Silence ! " he exclaimed. " Get done, and begone ! "
" And Hareton's land, and his money, " pursued the reckless
thing. " Hareton and I are friends now; and I shall tell him
all about you ! "
The master seemed confounded a moment : he grew pale, and
rose up, eyeing her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.
" If you strike me, Hareton will strike you, " she said ; " so
you may as well sit down. "
" If Hareton does not turn you out of the room, I'll strike him
to hell, " thundered Heathcliff. " Damnable witch! dare you
pretend to rouse him against me ? Off with her ! Do you hear ?
Fling her into the kitchen ! I'll kill her, Ellen Dean, if you let
her come into my sight again ! "
Hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.
" Drag her away ! " he cried savagely. " Are you staying to
talk? " And he approached to execute his own command.
" He'll not obey you, wicked man, any more, " said Catherine ;
" and he'll soon detest you as much as I do. "
" Wisht ! wisht ! " muttered the young man reproachfully. " I
will not hear you speak so to him. Have done. "
" But you won't let him strike me? " she cried.
" Come, then, " he whispered earnestly.
It was too late : Heathcliff had caught hold of her.
" Now, you go ! " he said to Earnshaw. " Accursed witch !
this time she has provoked me when I could not bear it ; and
I'll make her repent it for ever ! "
Pie had his hand in her hair ; Hareton attempted to release her
locks, entreating him not to hurt her that once. Heathcliff's
black eyes flashed ; he seemed ready to tear Catherine in pieces,
and I was just worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of
a sudden his fingers relaxed ; he shifted his grasp from her head
to her arm, and gazed intently in her face. Then he drew his
hand over her eyes, stood a moment to collect himself apparently,
and turning anew to Catherine, said with assumed calmness — •
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 283
" You must learn to avoid putting me in a passion, or I shall
really murder you some time ! Go with Mrs. Dean, and keep
with her; and confine your insolence to her ears. As to
Hareton Earnshaw, if I see him listen to you, I'll send him
seeking his bread where he can get it ! Your love will make
him an outcast and a beggar. Nelly, take her ; and leave me,
all of you ! Leave me ! "
I led my young lady out : she was too glad of her escape to
resist ; the other followed, and Mr. Heathcliff had the room to
himself till dinner. I had counselled Catherine to dine upstairs ;
but, as soon as he perceived her vacant seat, he sent me to call
her. He spoke to none of us, ate very little, and went out directly
afterwards, intimating that he should not return before evening.
The two new friends established themselves in the house during
his absence ; when I heard Hareton sternly check his cousin, on
her offering a revelation of her father-in-law's conduct to his
father. He said he wouldn't suffer a word to be uttered in his
disparagement : if he were the devil, it didn't signify ; he would
stand by him ; and he'd rather she would abuse himself, as she
used to, than begin on Mr. Heathcliff. Catherine was waxing
cross at this ; but he found means to make her hold her tongue,
by asking how she would like him to speak ill of her father?
Then she comprehended that Earnshaw took the master's reputa-
tion home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger than
reason could break — chains, forged by habit, which it would be
cruel to attempt to loosen. She showed a good heart, thenceforth,
in avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy con-
cerning Heathcliff; and confessed to me her sorrow that she had
endeavoured to raise a bad spirit between him and Hareton :
indeed, I don't believe she has ever breathed a syllable, in the
latter's hearing, against her oppressor since.
When this slight disagreement was over, they were friends
again, and as busy as possible in their several occupations of
pupil and teacher. I came in to sit with them, after I had done
my work ; and I felt so soothed and comforted to watch them,
that I did not notice how time got on. You know, they both
appeared in a measure my children : I had long been proud of
one ; and now, I was sure, the other would be a source of equal
satisfaction. His honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off
rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had
been bred ; and Catherine's sincere commendations acted as a
284 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
spur to his industry.. His brightening mind brightened his
features, and added spirit and nobihty to their aspect : I could
hardly fancy it the same individual I had beheld on the day I
discovered my little lady at Wuthering Heights, after her ex-
];)edition to the Crags. While I admired and they laboured, dusk
drew on, and with it returned the master. He came upon us
quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a full
view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance
at him. Well, I reflected, there was never a pleasanter, or more
harmless sight ; and it will be a burning shame to scold them.
The red firelight glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed
their faces animated with the eager interest of children ; for,
though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so much
of novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor evinced
the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Mr. Heathcliff :
perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely
similar, and they are those of Catherine Earnshaw. The present
Catherine has no other likeness to her, except a breadth of fore-
head, and a certain arch of the nostril that makes her appear
rather haughty, whether she will or not. With Hareton the
resemblance is carried farther : it is singular at all times, then it
was particularly striking ; because his senses were alert, and his
mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity. I suppose this
resemblance disarmed Mr, Heathcliff : he walked to the hearth
in evident agitation ; but it quickly subsided as he looked at the
young man : or, I should say, altered its character ; for it was
there y^t. He took the book from his hand, and glanced at the
open page, then returned it without any observation ; merely
signing Catherine away : her companion lingered very little
behind her, and I was about to depart also, but he bid me sit
still.
e[t i*^ a poor conclusion, is it not? " he observed, having
ded a while on the scene he had just witnessed : " an absurd
iterriiination to my violent exertions? I get levers and mattocks
[ to demolish the two houses, and train myself to be capable of
1 working like Hercules, and when everything is ready and in my
Ipower, I find the will to lift a slate off either roof has vanished !
IMy old enemies have not beaten me ; now would be the precise
lime to revenge myself on their representatives : I could do it ;
jand none could hinder me. But where is the use ? I don't care
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 285
for striking : I can't take the trouble to raise my hand ! That \
sounds as if I had been labouring the whole time only to exhibit I
a fine trait of magnanimity. It is far from being the case : I'
have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and I am too
idle to destroy for nothing. - —
" Nelly, there is a strange change approaching: I'm in its
shadow at present. I take so little interest in my daily life, that
I hardly remember to eat and drink. Those two who have left
the room are the only objects which retain a distinct material
appearance to me ; and that appearance causes me pain,
amounting to agony. About her I won't speak ; and I don't
desire to think ; but I earnestly wish she were invisible : her
presence invokes only maddening sensations. He moves me
differently : and yet if I could do it without seeming insane, I'd
never see him again. You'll perhaps think me rather inclined
to become so, " he added, making an effort to smile, " if I try to
describe the thousand forms of past associations and ideas he
awakens or embodies. But you'll not talk of what I tell you ;
and my mind is so eternally secluded in itself, it is tempting at
last to turn it out to another.
" Five minutes ago, Hareton seemed a personification of my
youth, not a human being : I felt to him in such a variety of
ways, that it would have been impossible to have accosted him
rationally. In the first place, his startling likeness to Catherine
connected him fearfully with her. That, however, which you
may suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination, is actually
the least : for what is not connected with her to me ? and what
does not recall her? I cannot look down to this floor, but her
features are shaped in the flags ! In every cloud, in every tree
— filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object
by day — I am surrounded with her image ! The most ordinary
faces of men and women — my own features — mock me with a
resemblance. The entire world is a dreadful collection of
memoranda that she did exist, and that I have lost her ! Well,
Hareton's aspect was the ghost of my immortal love ; of my
wild endeavours to hold my right ; my degradation, my pride,
my happiness, and my anguish —
" But it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you : oniy it will
let you know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, his
society is no benefit ; rather an aggravation of the constant
torment I suffer : and it partly contributes to render me regard-
286 Vv'UTHERlNG HEIGHTS.
less how he and his cousin go on together. I can give them no
attention, any more. "
" But what do you mean by a change, Mr. Heathcliff ? " I said,
alarmed at his manner : though he was neither in danger of losing
his senses, nor dying, according to my judgment : he was quite
strong and healthy ; and, as to his reason, from childhood he
had a delight in dwelling on dark things, and entertaining odd
fancies. He might have had a monomania on the subject of his
departed idol ; but on every other point his wits were as sound
as mine.
" I shall not know that till it comes, " he said, " I'm only half
conscious of it now. "
" You have no feeling of illness, have you? " I asked.
" No, Nelly, I have not, " he answered.
" Then you are not afraid of death ? " I pursued.
" Afraid? No ! " he replied. " I have neither a fear nor a
presentiment, nor a hope of death. Why should I ? With my
hard constitution and temperate mode of living, and unperilous
occupations, I ought to, and probably shall, remain above
ground till there is scarcely a black hair on my head. And yet
I cannot continue in this condition ! I have to remind myself to
breathe — almost to remind my heart to beat ! And it is like
bending back a stiff spring : it is by compulsion that I do the
slightest act not prompted by one thought ; and by compulsion
that I notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated witli
one universal idea. I have a single wish, and my whole being
and faculties are yearning to attain it. They have yearned to-
wards it so long, and so unwaveringly, that I'm convinced it
zvill be reached — and soon — because it has devoured my exist-
ence : I am swallowed up in the anticipation of its fulfilment.
My confessions have not relieved me ; but they may account for
some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which I show.
God ! It is a long fight, I wish it were over ! "
He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to him-
self, till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph did, that
conscience had turned his heart to an earthly hell. I wondered
greatly how it would end. Though he seldom before had re-
vealed this state of mind, even by looks, it was his habitual mood,
1 had no doubt : he asserted it himself; but not a soul, from his
general bearing, would have conjectured the fact. You did not
when you saw him, Mr. Lockwood : and at the period of which
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 287
I speak he was just the same as then ; only fonder of continued
solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in company.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
For some days after that evening, Ivlr. Heathcliff shunned
meeting us at meals ; yet he would not consent formally to ex-
clude Hareton and Cathy. He had an aversion to yielding so
completely to his feelings, choosing rather to absent himself ;
and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed sufficient susten-
ance for him.
One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him go down-
stairs, and out at the front door. I did not hear him re-enter,
and in the morning I found he was still away. We were in April
then: the weather was sweety and warm, the grass as green as
showers and sun could make it, and the two dwarf apple-trees
near the southern wall in full bloom. After breakfast, Catherine
insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my work under
the fir-trees at the end of the house ; and she beguiled Hareton,
who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and arrange
her Uttle garden, which was shifted to that corner by the influence
of Joseph's complaints. I was comfortably revelHng in the spring
fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some
primrose roots for a border, returned only half laden, and in-
formed us that Mr. HeathcHff was coming in. " And he spoke
to me, " she added, with a perplexed countenance.
" What did he say? " asked Hareton.
" He told me to begone as fast as I could, " she answered.
" But he looked so different from his usual look that I stopped
a moment to stare at him. "
" How? " he inquired.
" Why, almost bright and cheerful. No, almost nothing —
very natch excited, and wild and glad ! " she replied.
" Night-walking amuses him, then, " I remarked, affecting a
careless manner : in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious
to ascertain the truth of her statement ; for to see the master
looking glad would not be an every-day spectacle. I framed an
excuse to go in. Heathcliff stood at the open door ; he was pale,
288 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
and he trembled : yet, certainly, he had a strange joyful glitter
in his eyes, that altered the aspect of his whole face.
" Will you have some breakfast? " I said. " You must be
hungry, rambling about all night ! " I wanted to discover where
he had been, but I did not like to ask directly.
" No, I'm not hungry, " he answered, averting his head, and
speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed I was trying
to divine the occasion of his good-humour.
I felt perplexed : I didn't know whether it were not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
" I don't think it right to wander out of doors, " I observed,
''instead of being in bed : it is not wise, at any rate, this moist
season. I dare say you'll catch a bad cold, or a fever : you
have something the matter with you now ! "
" Nothing but what I can bear, " he replied ; " and with the
greatest pleasure, provided you'll leave me alone : get in, and
don't annoy me. "
I obeyed : and, in passing, I noticed he breathed as fast as a
cat.
" Yes ! " I reflected to myself, " we shall have a fit of illness.
I cannot conceive what he has been doing. "
That noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received a
heaped-up plate from my hands, as if he intended to make
amends for previous fasting.
" I've neither cold nor fever, Nelly, " he remarked, in allusion
to my morning's speech ; " and I'm ready to do justice to the
food you give me. "
He took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating,
when the inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. He
laid them on the table, looked eagerly towards the window, then
rose and went out. We saw him walking to and fro in the
garden while we concluded our meal, and Earnshaw said he'd go
and ask why he would not dine : he thought we had grieved
him some way.
" Well, is he coming? " cried Catherine, when her cousin
returned.
" Nay, " he answered ; " but he's not angry : he seemed rarely
pleased indeed ; only I made him impatient by speaking to him
twice ; and then he bid me be off to you : he wondered how I
could want the company of anybody else. "
I set his plate to keep warm on the fender ; and after an hour
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 289
or two he re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree
cahner : the same unnatural — it was unnatural — appearance of
joy under his black brows ; the same bloodless hue, and his teeth
visible, now and then, in a kind of smile ; his frame shivering, not
as one shivers with chill or weakness, but as a tight-stretched cord
vibrates — a strong thrilling, rather than trembling.
I will ask what is the matter, I thought ; or who should? And
I exclaimed —
" Have you heard any good news, Mr. Heathcliff ? You look
uncommonly animated. "
" Where should good news come from to me? " he said. " I'm
animated with hunger ; and, seemingly, I must not eat. "
" Your dinner is here, " I returned ; " why won't you get it? "
" I don't want it now, " he muttered hastily; " I'll wait till
supper. And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn
Hareton and the other away from me. I wish to be troubled by
nobody : I wish to have this place to myself. "
" Is there some new reason for this banishment ? " I inquired.
" Tell me why you are so queer, Mr. HeathcHff? Where were
you last night? I'm not putting the question through idle
curiosity, but "
" You are putting the question through very idle curiosity, "
he interrupted, with a laugh. " Yet I'll answer it. Last night
I was on the threshold of hell. To-day, I am within sight of my
heaven. I have my eyes on it : hardly three feet to sever me !
And now you'd better go ! You'll neither see nor hear anything
to frighten you, if you refrain from prying. "
Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I departed ;
more perplexed than ever.
He did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one
intruded on his solitude ; till, at eight o'clock, I deemed it
proper, though unsummoned, to carry a candle and his supper
to him. He was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice,
but not looking out : his face was turned to the interior gloom.
The fire had smouldered to ashes ; the room was filled with the
damp, mild air of the cloudy evening ; and so still, that not only
the murmur of the beck down Gimmerton was distinguishable,
but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or through the
large stones which it could not cover. I uttered an ejaculation
of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shut-
ting the casements, one after another, till I came to his.
K
290 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" Must I close this? " I asked, in order to rouse him ; for he
would not stir.
The light flashed on his features as I spoke. Oh, Mr. Lock-
S wood, I cannot express what a terrible start I got by the momen-
'S tary view ! Those deep black eyes 1 That smile, and ghastly
/ paleness ! It appeared to me, not Mr. Heathcliff, but a goblin ;
/ and, in my terror, I let the candle bend towards the wall, and it
\ left me in darkness.
" Yes, close it, " he replied, in his famiUar voice. " There,
that is pure awkwardness ! Why did you hojd the candle
horizontally? Be quick, and bring another. "
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Joseph-
" The master wishes you to take him a light and re-kindle the
fire. " P^or I dare not go in myself again just then,
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went : but he
brought it back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other
hand, explaining that Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed, and he
wanted nothing to eat till morning. We heard him mount the
stairs directly ; he did not proceed to his ordinary chamber, but
turned into that with the panelled bed : its window, as I men-
tioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get through ; and
it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion, of which
he had rather we had no suspicion.
" Is he a ghoul or a vampire ? " I mused. I had read of such
hideous incarnate demons. And then I set myself to reflect how
I had tended him in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and
followed him almost through his whole course ; and what absurd
nonsense it was to yield to that sense of horror.''But where did
he come from, the little dark thing, harboured by a good man tohis
bane? " muttered Superstition, as I dozed into unconsciousness.
And I began, half dreaming, to weary myself with imagining some
fit parentage for him ; and, repeating my waking meditations, I
tracked his existence over again, with grim variations ; at last,
picturing his death and funeral : of which, all I can remember is,
being exceedingly vexed at having the task of dictating an in-
scription for his monument, and consulting the sexton about it
and, as he had no surname, and we could not tell his age, we
were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, " Heath-
cliff. " That came true : we were. If you enter the kirkyard, you'll
read on his headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
Dawn restored me to common sense. I rose, and went into the
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29 1
garden, as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any foot-
marks under his window. There were none. " He has stayed at
home, " I thought, " and he'll be all right to-day. " I prepared
breakfast for the household, as was my usual custom, but told
Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the master came down,
for he lay late. They preferred taking it out of doors, under the
trees, and I set a little table to accommodate them.
On my re-entrance, I found Mr. Heathcliff below. He and
Joseph were conversing about some farming business ; he gave
clear, minute directions concerning the matter discussed, but he
spoke rapidly, and turned his head continually aside, and had the
same excited expression, even more exaggerated. When Joseph
quitted the room he took his seat in the place he generally chose,
and I put a basin of coffee before him. He drew it nearer, and
then rested his arms on the table, and looked at the opposite wall ,
as I supposed, surveying one particular portion, up and down,
with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest tha/
he stopped breathing during half a minute together.
" Come now, " I exclaimed, pushing some bread against his
hand, " eat and drink that, while it is hot : it has been waiting
near an hour. "
He didn't notice me, and yet he smiled. I'd rather have seen
him gnash his teeth than smile so.
" Mr. Heathcliff! master! " I cried, " don't, for God's sake,
stare as if you saw an unearthly vision. "
" Don't, for God's sake, shout so loud, " he replied. " Turn
round, and tell me, are we by ourselves? "
" Of course, " was my answer ; " of course we are. "
Still, I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I was not quite sure.
Witli a sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front
among the breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at
his ease.
Now, I perceived he was not looking at the wall ; for when I
regarded him alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed at something
within two yards'distance. And whatever it was, it communi-
cated, apparently, both pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes :
at least the anguished, yet raptured, expression of his countenance
suggested that idea. The fancied object was not fixe^ : either
his eyes pursued it with unwearied diligence, and, even in speak-
ing to me, were never weaned away. I vainly reminded him of his
protracted abstinence from food : if he stirred to touch anything
292 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
in compliance with my entreaties, if he stretched his hand out to
get a piece of bread, his fingers clenched before they reached it,
and remained on the table, forgetful of their aim,
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed atten-
tion from its engrossing speculation ; till he grew irritable, and
got up, asking why I would not allow him to have his own time
in taking his meals ? and saying that on the next occasion, I
needn't wait : I might set the things down and go. Having
uttered these words he left the house, slowly sauntered down
the garden path, and disappeared through the gate.
The hours erept anxiously by : another evening came. I did
not retire to rest till late, and when I did, I could not sleep. He
returned after midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut him-
self into the room beneath. I listened, and tossed about, and,
finally, dressed and descended. It was too irksome to lie there,
harassing my brain with a hundred idle misgivings.
I distinguished Mr. Heathchff's step, restlessly measuring the
floor, and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration,
resembling a groan. He muttered detached words also ; the
only one I could catch was the name of Catherine, coupled with
some wild term of endearment or suffering ; and spoken as one
would speak to a person present : low and earnest, and wrung
from the depth of his soul. I had not courage to walk straight
into the apartment ; but I desired to divert him from his reverie,
and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and began to
scrape the cinders. It drew him forth sooner than I expected.
He opened the door immediately, and said —
''Nelly, come here — is it morning ? Come in with your light. "
" It is striking four, " I answered. " You want a candle to
take upstairs : you might have lit one at this fire. "
" No, I don't wish to go upstairs, " he said. " Come in, and
kindle me a fire, and do anything there is to do about the
room. "
" I must blow the coals red first, before I can carry any, " I
replied, getting a chair and the bellows.
He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching
distraction ; his heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as
to leave no space for common breathing between.
" When day breaks I'll send for Green, " he said ; " I wish to
make some legal inquiries of him while I can bestow a thought
on those matters, and while I can act calmly. I have not written
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 293
my will yet ; and how to leave my property I cannot determine.
I wish I could annihilate it from the face of the earth. "
" I would not talk so, Mr. Heathchff, " I interposed. " Let
your will be a while : you'll be spared to repent of your many
injustices yet. I never expected that your nerves would be dis-
ordered : they are, at present, marvellously so, however ; and
almost entirely through your own fault. The way you've passed
these three last days might knock up a Titan. Do take some
food, and some repose. You need only look at yourself in a
glass to see how you require both. Your cheeks are hollow, and
your eyes bloodshot, like a person starving with hunger and
going blind with loss of sleep. "
" It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest, " he replied.
" I assure you it is through no settled designs. I'll do both,
as soon as I possibly can. But you might as well bid a man
struggling in the water rest within arm's length of the shore ! I
must reach it first, and then I'll rest. Well, nevermind Mr. Green :
as to repenting of my injustices, I've done no injustice, and I repent
of nothing. I'm too happy ; and yet I'm not happy enough.
My soul's bliss kills my body, but does not satisfy itself. "
" Happy, master? " I cried. " Strange happiness! If you
would hear me -without being angry, I might offer some advice
that would make you happier. "
" What is that ? " he asked. " Give it. "
" You are aware, Mr. Heathcliff, " I said, " that from the time
you were thirteen years old, you have lived a selfish, unchristian
life ; and probably hardly had a Bible in your hands during all
that period. You must have forgotten the contents of the book,
and you may not have space to search it now. Could it be hurtful
to send for some one — some minister of any denomination, it
does not matter which— to explain it, and show you how very far
you have erred from its precepts ; and how unfit you will be for
its heaven, unless a change takes place before you die? "
" I'm rather obliged than angry, Nelly, " he said, " for you
remind me of the manner in which I desire to be buried. It is
to be carried to the churchyard in the evening. You and Hareton
may, if you please, accompany me : and mind, particularly, to
notice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two
coffins ! No minister need come ; nor need anything be said
over me. — I tell you I have nearly attained my heaven ; and that
of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me. "
294 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
" And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and
died by that means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts
of the Kirk? " I said, shocked at his godless indifference. " How
would you like it ? "
" They won't do that, " he replied: " if they did, you must
have me removed secretly ; and if you neglect it you shall prove,
practically, that the dead are not annihilated ! "
As soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring
he retired to his den, and I breathed freer. But in the afternoon,
while Joseph and Hareton were at their work, he came into the
kitchen again, and, with a wild look, bid me come and sit in the
house : he wanted somebody with him. I declined ; telling him
plainly that his strange talk and manner frightened me, and I
had neither the nerve nor the will to be his companion alone.
" I believe you think me a fiend, " he said, with his dismal
laugh: " something too horrible to live under a decent roof, "
Then turning to Catherine, who was there, and who drew behind
me at his approach, he added, half sneeringly — " Will_;'6'?^ come,
chuck? I'll not hurt you. No ! to you I've made myself worse
than the devil. Well, there is 07ie who won't shrink from my
company ! By God ! she's relentless. Oh, damn it 1 It's un-
utterably too much for flesh and blood to bear — even mine. "
He solicited the society of no one more. At dusk, he went
into his chamber. Through the whole night, and far into the
morning, we heard him groaning and murmuring to himself.
Hareton was anxious to enter ; but I bid him fetch Mr.
Kenneth, and he should go in and see him. When he came,
and I requested admittance and tried to open the door, I found
it locked ; and Heathcliff bid us be damned. He was better,
and would be left alone ; sa the doctor went away.
The following evening was very wet : indeed it poured down
till day-da^vn ; and, as I took my morning walk round the house,
I observed the master's window swinging open, and the rain
driving straight in. He cannot be in bed, I thought : those
showers would drench him through. He must either be up or
out. But I'll make no more ado, I'll go boldly and look. "
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I
ran to unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant ; quickly
pushing them aside, I peeped in. Mr. Heathcliff was there-
laid on his back. His eyes met mine so keen and fierce, I
Started ; and then he seemed to smile. I could not think him
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29 > ,
dead : but his face and throat were washed with rain ; the bed-
clothes dripped, and he was perfectly still. The lattice, flapping
to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill ; na
blood trickled from the broken skin, and when I put my fingers
to it, I could doubt no more : he was dead and stark !
I hasped the window ; I combed his black long hair from
his forehead ; I tried to close his eyes : to extinguish, if possible,
that frightful, life-like gaze of exultation before any one else
beheld it. They would not shut : they seemed to sneer at my
attempts ; and his parted lips and sharp white teeth sneered
too ! Taken with another fit of cowardice, I cried out for
Joseph. Joseph shuffled up and made a noise, but resolutely
refused to meddle with him.
" Th'divil's harried off his soul, " he cried, " and he may hev
his carcass into t'bargin, for aught I care ! Ech ! what a
wicked un he looks girning at death ! " and the old sinner
grinned in mockery. I thought he intended to cut a caper round
the bed ; but, suddenly composing himself, he fell on his knees,
and raised his hands, and returned thanks that the lawful master
and the ancient stock were restored to their rights.
I felt stunned by the awful event ; and my mem.ory unavoid-
ably recurred to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness.
But poor Hareton, the most wronged, was the only one who
really suffered much. He sat by the corpse all night, weeping in
bitter earnest. He pressed its hand, and kissed the sarcastic,
savage face that every one else shrank from contemplating ; and
bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs naturally
from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel,
Mr. Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder
the master died. I concealed the fact of his having swallowed
nothing for four days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and
then, I am persuaded, he did not abstain on purpose : it was
the consequence of his strange illness, not the cause.
We buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood,
as he wished. Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six men to
carry the coffin, comprehended the whole attendance. The six
men departed when they had let it down into the grave : we
stayed to see it covered. Hareton, with a streaming ^face, dug
green sods, and laid them over the brown mould himself: at
present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion mounds —
and I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. But the country folks.
296 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
if you ask them, would swear on the Bible that he walks : there
are those who speak to having met him near the church, and on
the moor, and even within this house. Idle tales, you'll say,
and so say I. Yet that old man by the kitclien fire affirms he
has seen two on'em, looking out of his chamber window, on
every rainy night since his death : — and an odd thing happened
to me about a month ago. I was going to the Grange one
evening — a dark evening, threatening thunder — and, just at the
turn of the Heights, I encountered a little boy with a sheep and
two lambs before him ; he was crying terribly ; and I supposed
the lambs were skittish, and would not be guided.
" What is the matter, my little man? " I asked.
" There's Heathcliff and a woman, yonder, under t'nab, " he
blubbered, " un'I darnut pass'em. "
I saw nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would go on ; so
I bid him take the road lower down. He probably raised the
phantoms from thinking, as he traversed the moors alone, on the
nonsense he had heard his parents and companions repeat. Yet,
Still, I don't like being out in the dark now ; and I don't like
being left by myself in this grim house : I cannot help it ; I shall
be glad when they leave it, and shift to the Grange.
" They are going to the Grange, then? " I said.
" Yes, " answered Mrs. Dean, " as soon as they are married,
and that will be on New Year's day. "
" And who will live here then? "
" Why, Joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a
lad to keep him company. They will live in the kitchen, and
the rest will be shut up. "
" For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it, " I ob-
served.
" No, Mr. Lockwood, " said Nelly, shaking her head. " I
believe the dead are at peace : but it is not right to speak of
them with levity. "
At that moment the garden gate swung to ; the ramblers were
returning.
" They are afraid of nothing, " I grumbled, watching their
approach through the window.''Together, they would brave
Satan and all his legions. "
As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a
last look at the moon — or, more correctly, at each other by her
light— I felt irresistibly impelled to escape them again ; and,
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 297
pressing a remembrance into the hand of Mrs. Dean, and dis-
regarding her expostulations at my rudeness, I vanished through
the kitchen as they opened the house-door : and so should have
confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his fellow-servant's gay indis-
cretions, had he not fortunately recognised me for a respectable
character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet.
j\Iy walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction
of the kirk. When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had
made progress, even in seven months : many a window showed
black gaps deprived of glass ; and slates jutted off, here and
there, beyond the right line of the roof, to be gradually worked
off in coming autumn storms.
I sought, and soon discovered, the three head-stones on the
slope next the moor : the middle one grey, and half buried in
heath ; Edgar Linton's only harmonised by the turf and moss
creeping up its foot ; Heathcliff's still bare.
I lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the
moths fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the
soft wind breathing through the grass, and wondered how any
one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that
quiet earth.
END OF " WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
K2
AGNES GREY
ACTON " BFXL.
AGNES GREY.
CHAPTER I.
THE parsonage:.
ALL true histories contain instruction ; though, in some, the
- treasure may be hard to find, and when found, so trivial
in quantity, that the dry, shrivelled kernel scarcely compensates
for the trouble of cracking the nut. Whether this be the case
with my history or not, I am hardly competent to judge. I some-
times think it might prove useful to some, and entertaining to
others ; but the world may judge for itself. Sliielded by my own
obscurity, and by the lapse of years, and a few fictitious names,
I do not fear to venture ; and will candidly lay before the public
what I would not disclose to the most intimate friend.
My father was a clergyman of the north of England, who was
deservedly respected by all who knew him ; and, in his younger
days, lived pretty comfortably on the joint income of a small in-
cumbency and a snug little property of his own. My mother,
who married him against the wishes of her friends, was a squire's
daughter, and a woman of spirit. In vain it was represented to
her, that if she became the poor parson's wife, she must relinquish
her carriage and her lady's-maid, and all the luxuries and
elegances of affluence ; which to her were little less than the
necessaries of life, A carriage and a lady's-maid were great con-
veniences ; but, thank Heaven, she had feet to carry her, and
hands to minister to her own necessities. An elegant house and
spacious grounds were not to be despised ; but she would rather
live in a cottage with Richard Grey than in a palace with any
other man in the world.
Finding arguments of no avail, her father, at length, told the
lovers they might marry if they pleased ; but, in so doing, his
daughter would forfeit every fraction of her fortune. He ex-
302 AGNES GREY.
pected this would cool the ardour of both ; but he was mistaken.
My father knew too well my mother's superior worth not to be
sensible that she was a valuable fortune in herself : and if she
would but consent to embellish his humble hearth, he should be
happy to take her on any terms ; while she, on her part, would
rather labour with her own hands than be divided from the man
she loved, whose happiness it would be her joy to make, and who
was already one with her in heart and soul. So her fortune went
to swell the purse of a wiser sister, who had married a rich nabob ;
and she, to the wonder and compassionate regret of all who knew
her, went to bury herself in the homely village parsonage among
the hills of . And yet, in spite of all this, and in spite of my
mother's high spirit and my father's whims, I believe you might
search all England through, and fail to find a happier couple.
Of six children, my sister Mary and myself were the only two
that survived the perils of infancy and early childhood. I, being
the younger by five or six years, was always regarded as the
child, and the pet of the family : father, mother, and sister, all
combined to spoil me — not by foolish indulgence, to render me
fractious and ungovernable, but by ceaseless kindness, to make
me too helpless and dependent — too unfit for buffeting with the
cares and turmoils of life.
Mary and I were brought up in the strictest seclusion. My
mother, being at once highly accomphshed, well informed, and
fond of employment, took the whole charge of our education on
herself, with the exception of Latin — which my father undertook
to teach us— so that we never even went to school ; and, as there
was no society in the neighbourhood, our only intercourse with the
world consisted in a stately tea-party, now and then, with the
principal farmers and tradespeople of the vicinity (just to avoid
being stigmatised as too proud to consort with our neighbours),
and an annual visit to our paternal grandfather's ; where him-
self, our kind grandmamma, a maiden aunt, and two or three
elderly ladies and gentlemen, were the only persons we ever saw.
Sometimes our mother would amuse us with stories and anecdotes
of her younger days, which, while they entertained us amazingly,
frequently awoke — in me, at least — a secret wish to see a little
more of the world.
I thought she must have been very happy : but she never
seemed to regret past times. My father, however, whose temper
was neither tranquil nor cheerful by nature, often unduly vexed
AGNES GREY. 305
himself with thinking of the sacrifices his dear wife had made for
him ; and troubled his head with revolving endless schemes for
the augmentation of his little fortune for her sake and ours. In
vain my mother assured him she was quite satisfied ; and if he
would but lay by a little for the children, we should all have
plenty, both for time present and to come : but saving was not
my father's forte. He would not run in debt (at least, my mother
took good care he should not), but while he had money he must
spend it : he liked to see his house comfortable, and his wife and
daughters well clothed, and well attended ; and besides, he was
charitably disposed, and liked to give to the poor, according to
his means : or, as some might think, beyond them.
At length, however, a kind friend suggested to him a means of
doubling his private property at one stroke ; and further in-
creasing it, hereafter, to an imtold amount. This friend was a
merchant, a man of enterprising spirit and undoubted talent,
who was somewhat straitened in his mercantile pursuits for
want of capital ; but generously proposed to give my father a
fair share of his profits, if he would only entrust him with what
he could spare ; and he thought he might safely promise that
whatever sum the latter chose to put into his hands, it should
bring him in cent, per cent. The small patrimony was speedily
sold, and the whole of its price was deposited in the hands of the
friendly merchant ; who as promptly proceeded to ship his cargo,
and prepare for his voyage.
My father was delighted, so were we all, with our brightening
prospects. For the present, it is true, we were reduced to the
narrow income of the curacy ; but my father seemed to think
there was no necessity for scrupulously restricting our expendi-
ture to that ; so with a standing bill at ^^Ir. Jackson's, another at
Smith's, and a third at Hobson's, we got along even more com-
fortably than before : though ray mother affirmed we had better
keep within bounds, for our prospects of wealth were but pre-
carious, after all ; and if my father would only trust everything
to her management, he should never feel himself stinted ; but he,
for once, was incorrigible.
What happy hours Mary and I have passed, while sitting at
our work by the fire, or wandering on the heath-clqd hills, or
idling under the weeping birch (the only considerable tree in the
garden, talking of future happiness to ourselves and our parents,
of what we would do, and see, and possess ; with no firmer
304 AGNES GREY.
foundation for our goodly superstructure, than the riches that
were expected to flow in upon us from the success of the worthy
merchant's speculations. Our father was nearly as bad as our-
selves : only that he affected not to be so much in earnest :
expressing his bright hopes and sanguine expectations, in jests
and playful sallies, that always struck me as being exceedingly
witty and pleasant. Our mother laughed with delight to see
him so hopeful and happy : but still she feared he was setting
his heart too much upon the matter ; and once I heard lier
whisper as she left the room,''God grant he be not disappointed I
1 know not how he would bear it. "
Disappointed he was ; and bitterly, too. It came like a
thunder-clap on us all, that the vessel which contained our fortune
had been wrecked, and gone to the bottom with all its stores,
together with several of the crew, and the unfortunate merchant
himself. I was grieved for him ; I was grieved for the overthrow
of all our air-built castles : but, with the elasticity of youth, I
soon recovered the shock.
Though riches had charms, poverty had no terrors for an
inexperienced girl like me. Indeed, to say the truth, there was
something exhilarating in the idea of being driven to straits, and
thrown upon our own resources. I only wished papa, mamma,
and Mary, were all of the same mind as myself ; and then, instead
of lamenting past calamities, we might all cheerfully set to work
to remedy them ; and the greater the difficulties, the harder our
present privations, the greater should be our cheerfulness to
endure the latter, and our vigour to contend against the former.
Mary did not lament, but she brooded continually over the
misfortune, and sank into a state of dejection from which no
effort of mine could rouse her. I could not possibly bring her to
regard the matter on its bright side as I did : and indeed I was
so fearful of being charged with childish frivolity, or stupid in-
sensibihty, that I carefully kept most of my bright ideas and cheer-
ing notions to myself; well knowing they could not be appreciated.
My mother thought only of consoling my father, and paying
our debts and retrenching our expenditure by every available
means ; but my father was completely overwhelmed by the
calamity : health, strength, and spirits sank beneath the blow ;
and he never wholly recovered them. In vain my mother strove
to cheer him, by appealing to his piety, to his courage, to
bis affection for herself and us. That verv affection was his
AGNES GREY. 30$
greatest torment : it was for our sakes he had so ardently longed
to increase his fortune — it was our interest that had lent such
brightness to his hopes, and that imparted such bitterness to
his present distress. He now tormented himself with remorse
at having neglected my mother's advice ; which would at least
have saved him from the additional burden of debt— he vainly
reproached himself for having brought her from the dignity,
the ease, the luxury of her former station to toil with him
through the cares and toils of poverty. It was gall and
wormwood to his soul to see that splendid, highly accomplished
woman, once so courted and admired, transformed into an active
managing housewife, with hands and head continually occupied
with household labours and household economy. The very
willingness with which she performed these duties, the cheerful-
ness with which she bore her reverses, and the kindness which
withheld her from imputing the smallest blame to him, were all
perverted by this ingenious self-tormentor, into further aggrava-
tions of his sufferings. And thus the mind preyed upon the
body, and disordered the system of the nerves, and they in turn
increased the troubles of the mind, till by action and reaction his
health was seriously impaired ; and not one of us could convince
him that the aspect of our affairs was not half so gloomy, so
utterly hopeless, as his morbid imagination represented it to be.
The useful pony phaeton was sold, together with the stout
well-fed pony — the old favourite that we had fully determined
should end its days in peace, and never pass from our hands ; the
little coach-house and stable were let ; the servant boy, and the
more efficient (being the more expensive) of the two maid-servants
were dismissed. Our clothes were mended, turned, and darned
to the utmost verge of decency ; our food, always plain, was now
simplified to an unprecedented degree — except my father's
favourite dishes ; our coals and candles were painfully economised
— the pair of candles reduced to one, and that most sparingly
used ; the coals carefully husbanded in the half-empty grate :
especially when my father was out on his parish duties, or con-
fined to bed through illness — then we sat with our feet on the
fender, scraping the perishing embers together from time to time,
and occasionally adding a slight scattering of the -dust and
fragments of coal, just to keep them alive. As for our carpets,
they in time, were worn threadbare, and patched and darned even
to a greater extent than our garments. To save the expense of a
3o6 AGNES GREV.
gardener, Mary and I undertook to keep the garden in order ;
and all the cooking and household work that could not easily be
managed by one servant girl, was done by my mother and sister,
with a little occasional help from me : only a little, because, though
a woman in my own estimation, I was still a child in theirs ; and
my mother, like most active, managing women, was not gifted
with very active daughters : for this reason — that being so clever
and diligent herself, she was never tempted to trust her affairs to
a deputy, but on the contrary, was willing to act and think for
others as well as for number one ; and whatever was the business
in hand, she was apt to think that no one could do it so well as
herself : so that whenever I offered to assist her, I received such
an answer as — " No, love, you cannot indeed — there's nothing
here you can do. Go and help your sister, or get her to take a
walk with you — tell her she must not sit so much, and stay so
constantly in the house as she does — she may well look thin and
dejected. "
" Mary, mamma says I'm to help you ; or get you to take a
walk with me : she says you may well look thin and dejected, if
you sit so constantly in the house. "
" Help me you cannot, Agnes ; and I cannot go out -with you
— I have far too much to do, "
" Then let me help you, "
" You cannot, indeed, dear child. Go and practise your
music, or play with the kitten. "
There was always plenty of sewing on hand ; but I had not
been taught to cut out a single garment, and except plain
hemming and seaming, there was little I could do, even in that
line ; for they both asserted that it was far easier to do the work
themselves than to prepare it for me : and, besides, the}- liked
better to see me prosecuting my studies, or amusing myself— it was
time enough for me to sit bending over my work, like a grave
matron, when my favourite little pussy was become a steady old cat.
Under such circumstances, although I was not many degrees more
useful than the kitten, my idleness was not entirely without excuse.
Through all our troubles, I never but once heard my mother
complain of our want of money. As summer was coming on,
she observed to Mary and me, " What a desirable thing it would
be for your papa to spend a few weeks at a watering-place. I am
convinced the sea-air and the change of scene would be of in-
calculable service to him. But then, you see, there's no mor^y, "
AGNES GREY, 307
she added, with a sigh. We both wished exceedingly that the
thing might be done, and lamented greatly that it could not.
" Well, well! " said she, " it's no use complaining. Possibly
something might be done to further the project after all. Mar}-,
you are a beautiful drawer. What do you say to doing a few-
more pictures in your best style, and getting them framed, with
the water-coloured drawings you have already done, and trying
to dispose of them to some liberal picture-dealer, who has the
sense to discern their merits ? "
" Mamma, I should be delighted if you think they could be
sold ; and for anything worth while. "
" It's worth while trying, however, my dear: do you procure
the drawings, and I'll endeavour to find a purchaser. "
" I wish / could do something. " said I.
" You, Agnes ! well, who knows? You draw pretty well, too :
if you choose some simple piece for your subject, I dare say
you will be able to produce something we shall all be proud to
exhibit. "
" But I have another scheme in my head, mamma, and have
had long, only I did not like to mention it. "
" Indeed ! pray tell us what it is. "
''I should like to be a governess. "
My mother uttered an exclamation of surprise, and laughed.
My sister dropped her work in astonishment, exclaiming, " You
a governess, Agnes ! What can you be dreaming of ! "
" Well! I don't see anything so z'^?/^ extraordinary in it. I
do not pretend to be able to instruct great girls ; but surely, I
could teach little ones : and I should like it so much : I am so
fond of children. Do let me, mamma ! "
''But, my love, you have not learned to take care of yourself
yet : and young children require more judgment and experience
to manage than elder ones. "
" But, mamma, I am above eighteen, and quite able to take
care of myself, and others too. You do not know half the wisdom
and prudence I possess, because I have never been tried. "
" Only think, " said Mary, " what would you do in a house
full of strangers, without me or mamma to speak and act for you
— with a parcel of children, besides yourself, to attend to ; and
no one to look to for advice ? You would not even know what
clothes to put on. " <
" You think, because I always do as you bid me, I have no
308 AGNES GREY.
judgment of my own : but only try me — that ts all I a::k — and
you shall see what I can do. "
At that moment my lather entered, and the subject of our
discussion was explained to him.
" What, my little Agnes a governess ! " cried he, and, in spite
of his dejection, he laughed at the idea.
" Yes, papa, don't you say anything against it : I should like
it so much ; and I am sure I could manage delightfully. "
" But, my darling, we could not spare you. " And a tear
glistened in his eye as he added — " No, no ! afflicted as we are,
surely we are not brought to that pass yet. "
" Oh, no ! " said my mother. " There is no necessity what-
ever for such a step ; it is merely a whim of her own. So you
must hold your tongue, you naughty girl ; for, though you are so
ready to leave us, you know very well we cannot part witli you. "
I was silenced for that day, and for many succeeding ones ;
but still I did not wholly relinquish my darling scheme. Mary
got her drawing materials, and steadily set to work. I got mine
too ; but while I drew, I thought of other things. How delight-
ful it would be to be a governess ! To go out into the world ;
to enter upon a new life ; to act for myself ; to exercise my
unused faculties ; to try my unknown powers ; to earn my o\\a
maintenance, and something to comfort and help my father,
mother, and sister, besides exonerating them from the provision
of my food and clothing ; to show papa what his little Agnes
could do ; to convince mamma and Mary that I was not quite
the helpless, thoughtless being they supposed. And then, how
charming to be entrusted with the care and education of children !
Whatever others said, I felt I was fully competent to the task :
the clear remembrance of my own thoughts in early childhood
would be a surer guide than the instructions of the most mature
adviser. I had but to turn from my little pupils to myself at
their age, and I should know, at once, how to win their con-
fidence and affections : how to waken the contrition of the erring ;
how to embolden the timid, and console the afflicted ; how to
make Virtue practicable. Instruction desirable, and Religion
lovely and comprehensible.
" Delightful task !
To teach the young idea how to shoot ! "
To train the tender plants, and watch their buds unfolding day
by day !
AGNES GREY. 3C9
Influenced by so many inducements, I determined still to per-
severe ; though the fear of displeasing my mother, or distressing
my father's feelings, prevented me from resuming the subject for
several days. At length, again, I mentioned it to my mother in
private ; and, with some difficulty, got her to promise to assist
me with her endeavours. My father's reluctant consent was next
obtained, and then, though Mary still sighed her disapproval,
my dear, kind mother began to look out for a situation for me.
She wrote to my father's relations, and consulted the newspaper
advertisements— her own relations she had long dropped all
communication with : a formal interchange of occasional letters
was all she had ever had since her marriage, and she would not
at any time have applied to them in a case of this nature. But
so long and so ent > re had been my parents'seclusion from the
world, that many weeks elapsed before a suitable situation could
be procured. At last, to my great joy, it was decreed that I
should take charge of the young family of a certain Mrs. Bloom-
field ; whom my kind, prim aunt Grey had known in her youth,
and asserted to be a very nice woman. Her husband was a
retired tradesman, who had realised a very comfortable fortune ;
but could not be prevailed upon to give a greater salary than
twenty-five pounds to the instructress of his children. I, how-
ever, was glad to accept this, rather than refuse the situation—
which my parents were inclined to think the better plan.
But some weeks more were yet to be devoted to preparation.
How long, how tedious those weeks appeared to me ! Yet they
were happy ones in the main — full of bright hopes and ardent
expectations. With what peculiar pleasure I assisted at the
making of my new clothes, and, subsequently, the packing of
my trunks ! But there was a feeling of bitterness mingling with
the latter occupation too ; and when it was done — when all was
ready for my departure on the morrow, and the last night at
home approached — a sudden anguish seemed to swell my heart.
My dear friends looked so sad, and spoke so very kindly, that I
could scarcely keep my eyes from overflowing : but I still affected
to be gay. I had taken my last ramble with Mary on the moors,
my last walk in the garden, and round the house ; I had fed,
with her, our pet pigeons for the last time — the pretty creatures
that we had tamed to peck their food from our hands : I had
given a farewell stroke to all their silky backs as they crowded
in my lap. I had tenderly kissed my own peculiar favourites.
3IO AGNES GREY.
the pair of snow-white fantails ; I had played ray last tune on
the old familiar piano, and sung my last song to papa : not the
last, I hoped, but the last for, what appeared to me, a very long
time. And, perhaps, when I did these things again, it would
be with different feelings : circumstances might be changed, and
this house might never be my settled home again. My dear little
friend, the kitten, would certainly be changed : she was already
growing a fine cat ; and when I returned, even for a hasty visit
at Christmas, would, most likely, have forgotten both her play-
mate and her merry pranks. I had romped with her for the
last time ; and when I stroked her soft bright fur, while she lay
purring herself to sleep in my lap, it was with a feeling of sadness
I could not easily disguise. Then, at bed-time, when I retired
-with Mary to our quiet little chamber, where already my drawers
were cleared out and my share of the bookcase was empty — and
where, hereafter, she would have to sleep alone, in dreary solitude,
as she expressed it — my heart sank more than ever : I felt as if I
had been selfish and wrong to persist in leaving her ; and when I
knelt once more beside our little bed, I prayed for a blessing on
her and on my parents more fervently than ever I had done
before. To conceal my emotion, I buried my face in my hands,
and they were presently bathed in tears. I perceived, on rising,
that she had been crying too : but neither of us spoke ; and in
silence we betook ourselves to our repose, creeping more closely
together from the consciousness that we were to part so soon.
But the morning brought a renewal of hope and spirits. I
was to depart early ; that the conveyance which took me (a gig,
hired from Mr. Smith, the draper, grocer, and tea-dealer of the
village) might return the same day. I rose, washed, dressed,
swallowed a hasty breakfast, received the fond embraces of my
father, mother, and sister, kissed the cat, to the great scandal of
Sally, the maid — shook hands with her, mounted the gig, drew
my veil over my face, and then, but not till then, burst into a
flood of tears. The gig rolled on ; I looked back ; my dear
mother and sister were still standing at the door, looking after
me, and waving their adieux. I returned their salute, and prayed
God to bless them from my heart : we descended the hill, and I
could see them no more.
" It's a coldish mornin'for you, Miss Agnes, " observed
Smith; " and a darksome un too; but we's, happen, get to
yon'spot afore there come much rain to signify. "
AGNES GREY. 31I
*'Yes, I hope so, " replied I, as calmly as I could.
*'It's corned a good sup last night too. "
" Yes. "
" But this cold wind will, happen, keep it off. "
" Perhaps it will. "
Here ended our colloquy. We crossed the valley, and began
to ascend the opposite hill. As we were toiling up, I looked
back again : there was the village spire, and the old grey par-
sonage beyond it, basking in a slanting beam of sunshine — it
was but a sickly ray, but the village and surrounding hills were
all in sombre shade, and I hailed the wandering beam as a
propitious omen to my home. With clasped hands, I fervently
implored a blessing on its inhabitants, and hastily turned away ;
for I saw the sunshine was departing ; and I carefully avoided
another glance, lest I should see it in gloomy shadow, like the
rest of the landscape.
CHAPTER n.
FIRST LESSONS IN THE ART OF INSTRUCTION.
As we drove along, my spirits revived again, and I turned, with
pleasure, to the contemplation of the new life upon which I
was entering. But though it was not far past the middle of
September, the heavy clouds and strong north-easterly wind
combined to render the day extremely cold and dreary ; and
the journey seemed a very long one, for, as Smith observed, the
roads were " very heavy; " and certainly, his horse was very
heavy too : it crawled up the hills, and crept down them, and
only condescended to shake its sides in a trot where the road
was at a dead level or a very gentle slope, which was rarely the
case in those rugged regions ; so that it was nearly one o'clock
before we reached the place of our destination. Yet, after all,
when we entered the lofty iron gateway, when we drove softly
up the smooth, well-rolled carriage road, with the green lawn
on each side, studded with young trees, and approached the
ne\\^ but stately mansion of Wellwood, rising above its mush-
room poplar-groves, my heart failed me, and I wished it were
a mile or two farther off. For the first time in my life, I must
stand alone : there was no retreating now. I must enter that
house, and introduce myself among its strange inhabitants.
312 AGNES GREY.
But how was it to be done? True, I was near nineteen; but,
thanks to my retired life and the protecting care of my mother
and sister, I well knew that many a girl of fifteen, or under, was
gifted with a more womanly address, and greater ease and self-
possession, than I was. Yet, if Mrs. Bloomfield were a kind,
motherly woman, I might do very well, after all ; and the
children, of course, I should soon be at ease with them — and
Mr. Bloomfield, I hoped, I should have but little to do with,
" Be calm, be calm, whatever happens, " I said within myself;
and truly I kept this resolution so well, and was so fully occupied
in steadying my nerves and stilling the rebellious flutter of my
heart, that when I was admitted into the hall, and ushered into
the presence of Mrs. Bloomfield, I almost forgot to answer her
polite salutation ; and it afterwards struck me, that the little
I did say was spoken in the tone of one half-dead or half-
asleep. The lady, too, was somewhat chilly in her manner,
as I discovered when I had time to reflect. She was a tall,
spare, stately woman, with thick black hair, cold grey eyes, and
extremely sallow complexion.
With due politeness, however, she showed me my bedroom,
and left me there to take a little refreshment. I was somewhat
dismayed at my appearance on looking in the glass : the cold
wind had swelled and reddened my hands, uncurled and en-
tangled my hair, and dyed my face of a pale purple ; add to
this my collar was horridly crumpled, my frock splashed with
mud, my feet clad in stout new boots, and as the trunks were
not brought up, there was no remedy ; so having smoothed my
hair as well as I could, and repeatedly twitched my obdurate
collar, I proceeded to clomp down the two flights of stairs,
philosophising as I went ; and with some difficulty found my
way into the room where Mrs. Bloomfield awaited me.
She led me into the dining-room, where the family luncheon
had been laid out. Some beefsteaks and half-cold potatoes were
set before me ; and while I dined upon these, she sat opposite,
watching me (as I thought) and endeavouring to sustain some-
thing like a conversation— consisting chiefly of a succession of
commonplace remarks, expressed with frigid formality : but this
might be more my fault than hers, for I really could noi converse.
In fact, my attention was almost wholly absorbed in my dinner :
not from ravenous appetite, but from distress at the toughness of
the beefsteaks, and the numbness of my hands, almost palsied by
AGNES GREY. 315
their five hours'exposure to the bitter wind. I would gladly have
eaten the potatoes and let the meat alone, but having got a large
piece of the latter on to my plate, I could not be so impolite as
to leave it ; so, after many awkward and unsuccessful attempts
to cut it with the knife, or tear it with the fork, or pull it asunder
between them, sensible that the awful lady was a spectator to the
whole transaction, I at last desperately grasped the knife and fork
in my fists, like a child of two years old, and fell to work with all
the little strength I possessed. But this needed some apology —
with a feeble attempt at a laugh, I said, " My hands are so
benumbed with the cold that I can scarcely handle my knife
and fork. "
" I dare say you would find it cold, " replied she, with a cool,
immutable gravity that did not serve to re-assure me.
When the ceremony was concluded she led me into the sitting-
room again, where she rang and sent for the children.
" You will find them not very far advanced in their attain-
ments, " said she, " for I have had so little time to attend to their
education myself, and we have thought them too young for a
governess till now ; but I think they are clever children, and very
apt to learn, especially the little boy : he is, I think, the flower
of the flock— a generous, noble-spirited boy, one to be led, but
not driven, and remarkable for always speaking the truth. He
seems to scorn deception " (this was good news). " His sister
Mary Ann will require watching, " continued she,''but she is a
very good girl upon the whole : though I wish her to be kept out
of the nursery as much as possible, as she is now almost six years
old, and might acquire bad habits from the nurses. I have
ordered her crib to be placed in your room, and if you will be so
kind as to overlook her washing and dressing, and take charge
of her clothes, she need have nothing further to do with the
nursery-maid. "
I replied I was quite willing to do so ; and at that moment my
young pupils entered the apartment, with their two younger
sisters. Master Tom Bloomfield was a well-grown boy of seven,
with a somewhat wiry frame, flaxen hair, blue eyes, small turned-
up nose, and fair complexion. Mary Ann was a tall girl too,
somewhat dark hke her mother, but with a round full face and a
high colour in her cheeks. The second sister was Fanny, a very
pretty little girl ; Mrs. Bloomfield assured me she was a re-
markably gentle child, and required encouragement : she bad
314 AGNES GREV.
not learned anything yet ; but in a few days she would-be four
years old, and then she might take her first lesson in the alphabet,
and be promoted to the schoolroom. The remaining one was
Harriet, alittle broad, fat, merry, playful thing of scarcely two, that
I coveted more than all the rest— but with her I had nothing to do.
I talked to my little pupils as well as I could, and tried to render
myself agreeable ; but with little success I fear, for their mother's
presence kept me under an unpleasant restraint. They, how-
ever, were remarkably free from shyness. They seemed bold,
lively children, and I hoped I should soon be on friendly terms
with them — the little boy especially, of whom I had heard such
a favourable character from his mamma. In Mary Ann there
was a certain affected simper, and a craving for notice, that I was
sorry to observe. But her brother claimed all my attention to
himself ; he stood bolt upright between me and the fire, with his
hands behind his back, talking away like an orator, occasionally
interrupting his discourse with a sharp reproof to his sisters when
they made too much noise.
" O Tom, what a darling you are ! " exclaimed his mother.
" Come and kiss dear mamma ; and then won't you show I^.Iiss
Grey your schoolroom, and your nice new books? "
" I won't kiss you, mamma ; but I will show Miss Grey my
.?;choolroom, and my new books. "
" And my schoolroom, and my new books, Tom, " said Mary
Ann. " They're mine too. "
" ThQj'xQ jfiine, " replied he decisively. " Come along. Miss
Grey — I'll escort you. "
When the room and books had been shown, with some
bickerings between the brother and sister that I did my utmost
to appease or mitigate, Mary Ann brought me her doll, and
began to be very loquacious on the subject of its fine clothes, its
bed, its chest of drawers, and other appurtenances ; but Tom
told her to hold her clamour, that Miss Grey might see his rocking
horse, which, with a most important bustle, he dragged forth from
its corner into the middle of the room, loudly calling on me to
attend to it. Then, ordering his sister to hold the reins, he
mounted, and made me stand for ten minutes, watching how
manfully lie used his whip and spurs. Meantime, however, I
admired Mary Ann's pretty doll, and all its possessions ; and
then told Mr. Tom he was a capital rider, but I hoped he would
not tisc his whip and spurs so much when he rode a real pony.
AGNES GREY. 315
" Oh, yes, I will ! " said he, laying on with redoubled ardour.
" I'll cut into him like smoke 1 Eeh ! my word ! but he shall
sweat for it. "
This was very shocking : but I hoped in time to be able to
work a reformation.
" Now you must put on your bonnet and shawl, " said the
little hero, " and I'll show you my garden. "
" And vii?ie, " said Mary Ann.
Tom lifted his fist with a menacing gesture ; she uttered a loud,
shrill scream, ran to the other side of me, and made a face at him,
" Surely, Tom, you w'ould not strike your sister! I hope I
shall nez'er see you do that. "
" You will sometimes : I'm obliged to do it now and then to
keep her in order. "
''But it is not your business to keep her in order, you know-
that is for "
" Well, now go and put on your bonnet. "
" I don't know — it is so very cloudy and cold, it seems likely
to rain ; — and you know I have had a long drive. "
" No matter — you vmst come ; I shall allow of no excuses, "
replied the consequential little gentleman. And as it was the
first day of our acquaintance, I thought I might as well indulge
him. It was too cold for Mary Ann to venture, so she stayed
with her mamma ; to the great relief of her brother, who liked
to have me all to himself.
The garden was a large one, and tastefully laid out ; besides
several splendid dahlias, there were some other fine flowers still
in bloom : but my companion would not give me time to examine
them : I must go with him, across the wet grass, to a remote
sequestered corner, the most important place in the grounds,
because it contained //zV garden. There were two round beds,
stocked with a variety of plants. In one there was a pretty httle
rose tree. I paused to admire its lovely blossoms.
" Oh, never mind that ! " said he contemptuously. " That's
only Mary Ann s garden ; look, THIS is mine. "
After I had observed every flower, and listened to a disquisition
on every plant, I w'as permitted to depart ; but first, with great
pomp, he plucked a polyanthus and presented it to me, as one
conferring a prodigious favour. I observed, on the grass about
his garden, certain apparatus of sticks and cord, and asked what
thev were.
3l6 AGNES GREY.
" Traps for birds. "
''Why do you catch them ? "
''Papa says they do harm. "
.''And what do you do with them when you catch them ? "
" Different things. Sometimes I give them to the cat ; some-
times I cut them in pieces with my penknife ; but the next, I
mean to roast alive. "
" And why do you mean to do such a horrible thing? "
" For two reasons; first, to see how long it will live — and
then, to see what it will taste like. "
''But don't you know it is extremely wicked to do such things.
Remember, the birds can feel as well as you ; and think, how
would you like it yourself. "
" Oh, that's nothing ! I'm not a bird, and I can't feel what I
do to them. "
" But you will have to feel it some time, Tom : you have heard
where wicked people go to when they die ; and if you don't leave
off torturing innocent birds, remember, you will have to go there,
and suffer just what you have made them suffer. "
" Oh, pooh ! I shan't. Papa knows how I treat them, and he
never blames me for it : he says it is just what he used to do when
he was a boy. Last summer, he gave me a nest full of young
sparrows, and he saw me pulling off their legs and wings, and
heads, and never said anything ; except that they were nasty
things, and I must not let them soil my trousers : and Uncle
Robson was there too, and he laughed, and said I was a fine boy. "
" But what would your mamma say? "
''Oh, she doesn't care ! she says it's a pity to kill the pretty sing-
ing birds, but the naughty sparrows, and mice and rats, I may do
what I like with. So now, Miss Grey, you see it is not wicked. "
" I still think it is, Tom ; and perhaps your papa and mamma
would think so too, if they thought much about it. — However, "
I internally added,''they may say what they please, but I am
determined you shall do nothing of the kind, as long as I have
power to prevent it. "
He next took me across the lawn to see his mole-traps, and
then into the stack-yard to see his weasel-traps : one of which, to
his great joy, contained a dead weasel ; and then into the stable
to see, not the fine carriage horses, but a little rough colt, which
he informed me had been bred on purpose for him, and he was
to ride it as soon as it was properly trained. I tried to amuse
AGNES GREY. 317
the little fellow, and listened to all his chatter as complacently as
I could ; for I thought if he had any affections at all, I would
endeavour to win them ; and then, in time, I might be able to
show him the error of his ways : but I looked in vain for that
generous, noble spirit his mother talked of; though I could see
he was not without a certain degree of quickness and penetra-
tion, when he chose to exert it.
When we re-entered the house it was nearly tea-time. Master
Tom told me that, as papa was from home, he and I and Mary
Ann were to have tea with mamma, for a treat ; for, on such
occasions, she always dined at luncheon time with them, instead
of at six o'clock. Soon after tea, Mary Ann went to bed, but
Tom favoured us with his company and conversation till eight.
After he was gone, Mrs. Broomfield further enlightened me on
the subject of her children's dispositions and acquirements, and
on what they were to learn, and how they were to be managed,
and cautioned me to mention their defects to no one but herself.
My mother had warned me before to mention them as httle as
possible to her, for people did not like to be told of their children's
faults, and so I concluded I was to keep silence on them altogether.
About half-past nine, Mrs. Bloomfield invited me to partake of
a frugal supper of cold meat and bread. I was glad when that
was over, and she took her bedroom candlestick and retired to
rest ; for though I wished to be pleased with her, her company
was extremely irksome to me ; and I could not help feeling that
she was cold, grave, and forbidding — the very opposite of the
kind, warm-hearted matron my hopes had depicted her to be.
CHAPTER III.
A FEW MORE LESSONS.
I ROSE next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration, in
spite of the disappointments already experienced ; but I found
the dressing of Mary Ann was no light matter, as her abundant
hair was to be smeared with pomade, plaited in three long tails,
and tied with bows of ribbon : a task my unaccustomed fingers
found great difficulty in performing. She told me her nurse
could do it in half the time, and, by keeping up a constant fidget
of impatience, contrived to render me still longer, \^'^hen all
31 8 AGNES GREY.
was done, we went into the schoolroom, where I met ray othei
pupil, and chatted with the two till it was time to go down tc
breakfast. That meal being concluded, and a few civil words
having been exchanged with Mrs. Bloomfield, we repaired to thi
schoolroom again, and commenced the business of the day. 1
found my pupils very backward, indeed ; but Tom, though
averse to every species of mental exertion, was not without
abilities. Maiy Ann could scarcely read a word, and was sc
careless and inattentive that I could hardly get on with her al
all. However, by dint of great labour and patience, I managed
to get something done in the course of the morning, and then
accompanied my young charge out into the garden and adjacent
grounds, for a little recreation before dinner. There we got
along tolerably together, except that I found they had no notion
of going with vie : I must go with them wherever they chose tc
lead me. I must run, walk, or stand, exactly as it suited theii
fancy. This, I thought, was reversing the order of things ; and
I found it doubly disagreeable, as on this as well as subsequent
occasions, they seemed to prefer the dirtiest places and the most
dismal occupations. But there was no remedy ; either I must
follow them, or keep entirely apart from them, and thus appear
neglectful of my charge. To-day, they manifested a particular
attachment to a well at the bottom of the lawn, where they per-
sisted in dabbling with sticks and pebbles for above half-an-hour.
I was in constant fear that their mother would see them from the
window, and blame me for allowing them thus to draggle their
clothes and wet their feet and hands, instead of taking exercise ;
but no arguments, commands, or entreaties could draw them
away. If she did not see them, some one else did — a gentleman
on horseback had entered the gate and was proceeding up the
road ; at the distance of a few paces from us he paused, and
calling to the children in a waspish penetrating tone, bade them
" Keep out of that water. " " Miss Grey,'said he, " (I suppose
it is Miss Grey,) I am surprised that you should allow them to
dirty their clothes in that manner ! Don't you see how Miss
Bloomfield has soiled her frock ? and that Master Bloomfield's
socks are quite wet? and both of them without gloves? Dear,
dear ! Let me request that in future you will keep them decent
at least ! " so saying, he turned away, and continued his ride up
to the house. This was Mr. Bloomfield. I was surprised that
he should nominate hie cliildren Master and Miss Bloomfield ;
AGNES GREY. 319
and still more so, that lie should speak so uncivilly to me, their
governess, and a perfect stranger to himself. Presently the bell
rang to summon us in. I dined with the children at one, while
he and his lady took their luncheon at the same table. His
conduct there did not greatly raise him in my estimation. He
was a man of ordinary stature — rather below than above— and
rather thin than stout, apparently between thirty and forty years
of age : he had a large mouth, pale, dingy complexion, milky
blue eyes, and hair the colour of a hempen cord. There was a
roast leg of mutton before him : he helped Mrs. Bloomfield, the
children, and me, desiring me to cut up the children's meat ;
then, after twisting about the mutton in various directions, and
eyeing it from different points, he pronounced it not fit to be
eaten, and called for the cold beef.
" What is the matter with the mutton, my dear? " asked his
mate.
" It is quite overdone. Don't you taste, Mrs. Bloomfield,
that all the goodness is roasted out of it? And can't you see
that all that nice, red gravy is completely dried away? "
" Well I think the /Jftywill suit you. "
The beef was set before him, and he began to cai-ve, but with
the most imeful expressions of discontent,
" What is the matter with the i > ee/, Mr. Bloomfield? I'm sure
I thought it was very nice. "
" And so it was very nice. A nicer joint could not be ; but it
is quite spoiled, " replied he dolefully.
" How so? "
" How so ! Why, don't you see how it is cut ? Dear — dear !
it is quite shocking ! "
" They must have cut it wrong in the kitchen, then, for I'm
sure I carved it quite properly here yesterday. "
" No dozidf they cut it wrong in the kitchen — the savages!
Dear — dear ! Did ever any one see such a fine piece of beef so
completely ruined ? But remember that, in future, when a decent
dish leaves this table, they shall not tottc/i it in the kitchen.
Remember tkaf, Mrs. Bloomfield ! "
Notwithstanding the ruinous state of the beef, the gentleman
managed to cut himself some delicate slices, part of which he ate
in silence. When he next spoke, it was, in a less querulous tone,
to ask what there M'as for dinner,
" Turkey and grouse, " was the concise reply.
320 AGNES GREY.
''And what besides ? "
" Fish. "
" Wliat kind of fish ? "
. " I don't know. "
" Yo2i don't knoivf " cried he, looking solemnly up from his
plate, and suspending his knife and fork in astonishment.
" No. I told the cook to get some fish — I did not particularise
what. "
" Well, that beats everything! A lady professes to keep
house, and doesn't even know what fish is for dinner ! professes
to order fish, and doesn't specify what ! "
" Perhaps, Mr. Bloomfield, you will order dinner yourself in
future. "
Nothing more was said ; and I was very glad to get out of the
room with my pupils ; for I never felt so ashamed and uncomfort-
able in my life for anything that was not my own fault.
In the afternoon we applied to lessons again : then went out
again ; then had tea in the schoolroom ; then I dressed Mary
Ann for dessert ; and when she and her brother had gone down
to the dining-room, I took the opportunity of beginning a letter
to my dear friends at home : but the children came up before I
had half completed it. At seven I had to put Mary Ann to bed ;
then I played with Tom till eight, when he, too, went ; and I
finished my letter and unpacked my clothes, which I had hitherto
found no opportunity for doing, and, finally, went to bed myself.
But this is a very favourable specimen of a day's proceed-
ings.
My task of instruction and surveillance, instead of becoming
easier as my charges and I got better accustomed to each other,
became more arduous as their characters unfolded. The name
of governess, I soon found, was a mere mockery as applied to
nie : my pupils had no more notion of obedience than a wild,
unbroken colt. The habitual fear of their father's peevish temper,
and the dread of the punishments he was wont to inflict when
irritated, kept them generally within bounds in his immediate
presence. The girls, too, had some fear of their mother's anger ;
and the boy might occasionally be bribed to do as she bid him
by the hope of reward : but I had no rewards to offer ; and as
for punishments, I was given to understand, the parents reserved
that privilege to themselves ; and yet they expected me to keep
my pupils in order. Other children might be guided by the
AGNES GREY. 321
fear of anger, and the desire of approbation ; but neither the
one nor the other had any effect upon these.
Master Tom, not content with refusing to be ruled, must
needs set up as a ruler, and manifested a determination to keep,
not only his sisters, but his governess in order, by violent manual
and pedal applications ; and, as he was a tall, strong boy of his
years, this occasioned no trifling inconvenience. A few sound
boxes on the ear, on such occasions, might have settled the
matter easily enough : but as, in that case, he might make up
some story to his mother, which she would be sure to believe,
as she had such unshaken faith in his veracity — though I had
already discovered it to be by no means unimpeachable — I
determined to refrain from striking him, even in self-defence ;
and, in his most violent moods, my only resource was to throw
him on his back, and hold his hands and feet till the frenzy was
somewhat abated. To the difficulty of preventing him from
doing what he ought not, was added that of forcing him to do
what he ought. Often he would positively refuse to learn, or to
repeat his lessons, or even to look at his book. Here, again, a
good birch rod might have been serviceable ; but, as my powers
were so limited, I must make the best use of what I had.
As there were no settled hours for study and play, I resolved
to give my pupils a certain task, Vvhich, with moderate attention,
they could perform in a short time ; and till this was done, how-
ever weary I was, or however perverse they might be, nothing
short of parental interference should induce me to suffer them
to leave the schoolroom ; even if I should sit with my chair
against the door to keep them in. Patience, Firmness, and
Perseverance, were my only weapons ; and these I resolved to
use to the utmost. I determined always strictly to fulfil the
threats and promises I made; and, to that end, I must be
cautious to threaten and promise nothing that I could not per-
form. Then, I would carefully refrain from all useless irritability
and indulgence of my own ill-temper : when they behaved toler-
ably, I would be as kind and obliging as it was in my power to be,
in order to make the widest possible distinction between good
and bad conduct ; I would reason with them, too, in the sim-
plest and most effective manner. When I reproved them, or
refused to gratify their wishes, after a glaring fault, it should be
more in sorrow than in anger : their little hymns and prayers I
would make plain and clear to their understanding ; when they
322 AGNES GREY.
said their prayers at night, and asked pardon for their offences,
I would remind them of the sins of the past day, solemnly, but
in perfect kindness, to avoid raising a spirit of opposition ; peni-
tential hymns should be said by the naughty ; cheerful ones by
the comparatively good ; and every kind of instruction I would
convey to them, as much as possible, by entertaining discourse
— apparently with no other object than their present amusement
in view.
By these means I hoped, in time, both to benefit the children
and to gain the approbation of their parents ; and also to con-
vince my friends at home that I was not so wanting in skill and
prudence as they supposed. I knew the difficulties I had to
contend with were great ; but I knew (at least I believed) unre-
mitting patience and perseverance could overcome them ; and
night and morning I implored Divine assistance to this end.
But either the children were so incorrigible, the parents so
iinreasonable, or myself so mistaken in my views, or so unable
to carry them out, that my best intentions and most strenuous
efforts seemed productive of no better result than sport to
the children, dissatisfaction to their parents, and torment to
myself.
The task of instruction was as arduous for the body as the
mind. I had to run after my pupils to catch them, to carry or
drag them to the table, and often forcibly to hold them there till
the lesson was done. Tom I frequently put into a corner, seat-
ing myself before him in a chair, with a book which contained
the little task that must be said or read, before he was released,
in my hand. He was not strong enough to. push both me and
the chair away, so he would stand twisting his body and face
into the most grotesque and singular contortions— laughable,
no doubt, to an unconcerned spectator, but not to me — and
uttering loud yells and doleful outcries, intended to represent
weeping, but wholly without the accompaniment of tears. I
knew this was done solely for the purpose of annoying me ; and,
therefore, however I might inwardly tremble with impatience
and irritation, I manfully strove to suppress all visible signs of
molestation, and affected to sit with calm indifference, waiting
till it should please him to cease this pastime, and prepare for a
run in the garden, by casting his eye on the book and reading
or repeating the few words he was required to say. Sometimes
he was determined to do his writing badly ; and I had to hold
AGNES GREY. 323
his hand to prevent him from purposely blotting or disfiguring
the paper. Frequently I threatened that, if he did not do better,
he should have another line : then he would stubbornly refuse to
write this line ; and I, to save my word, had finally to resort to
the expedient of holding his fingers upon the pen, and forcibly
drawing his hand up and down, till, in spite of his resistance,
the line was in some sort completed.
Yet Tom w-as by no means the most unmanageable of my
pupils : sometimes, to my great joy, he would have the sense to
see that his wisest policy was to finish his tasks, and go out and
amuse himself till I and his sisters came to join him ; which fre-
quently was not at all, for Mary Ann seldom followed his example
in this particular : she apparently preferred rolling on the floor
to any other amusement : down she would drop like a leaden
weight ; and when I, with great difficulty, had succeeded in
rooting her thence, I had still to hold her up with one arm, while
with the other I held the book from which she was to read or
spell her lesson. As the dead weight of the big girl of six became
too heavy for one arm to bear, I transferred it to the other ; or,
if both were weary of the burden, I carried her into a corner, and
told her she might come out when she should find the use of her
feet, and stand up : but she generally preferred lying there like
a log till dinner or tea time, when, as I could not deprive her of
her meals, she must be liberated, and would come crawling out
with a grin of triumph on her round, red face. Often she would
stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word in her
lesson ; and now I regret the lost labour I have had in striving
to conquer her obstinacy. If I had passed it over as a matter of
no consequence, it would have been better for both parties, than
vainly striving to overcome it as I did ; but I thought it my
absolute duty to crush this vicious tendency in the bud ; and so
it was, if I could have done it ; and, had my powers been less
limited, I might have enforced obedience ; but, as it was, it was
a trial of strength between her and me, in which she generally
came off victorious ; and every victory served to encourage and
strengthen her for a future contest. In vain I argued, coaxed,
entreated, threatened, scolded ; in vain I kept her in from play,
or, if obliged to take her out, refused to play with her, or__to speak
kindly, or have anything to do with her ; in vain I tried to set
before her the advantages of doing as she was bid, and being
loved, and kindly treated in consequence, and the disadvantages
324 AGNES GREY.
of persisting in her absurd perversity. Sometimes, when she
would ask me to do something for her, I would answer —
" Yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will onlysay that word. Come !
you'd better say it at once, and have no more trouble about it. "
" No. "
" Then, of course, I can do nothing for you. "
With me, at her age, or under, neglect and disgrace were the
most dreadful of punishments ; but on her they made no impres-
sion. Sometimes, exasperated to the utmost pitch, I would shake
her violently by the shoulder, or pull her long hair, or put her in
the corner ; for which she punished me with loud, shrill, piercing
screams, that went through my head like a knife. She knew I
hated this, and when she had shrieked her utmost, would look
into my face with an air of vindictive satisfaction, exclaiming — •
''Now, then ! that " s for you ! " And then shriek again and again ,
till I was forced to stop my ears. Often these dreadful cries would
bring Mrs. Bloomfield up to inquire what was the matter?
" Mary Ann is a naughty girl, ma'am. "
" But what are these shocking screams ? "
" She is screaming in a passion. "
" I never heard such a dreadful noise ! You might be killing
her. Why is she not out with her brother ? "
" I cannot get her to finish her lessons. "
" But Mary Ann must be 2. good girl, and finish her lessons. "
This was blandly spoken to the child. " And I hope I shall
never hear such terrible cries again ! "
And fixing her cold, stony eyes upon me with a look that could
not be mistaken, she would shut the door, and walk away. Some-
times I would try to take the little obstinate creature by surprise,
and casually ask her the word while she was thinking of something
else ; frequently she would begin to say it, and then suddenly
check herself, with a provoking look that seemed to say, " Ah I
I'm too sharp for you ; you shan't trick it out of me, either. "
On another occasion, I pretended to forget the whole affair ;
and talked and played with her as usual, till night, when I put
her to bed ; then bending over her, while she lay all smiles and
good-humour, just before departing, I said, as cheerfully and
kindly as before—-
" Now, Mary Ann, just tell me that word before I kiss you
good-night : you are a good girl now, and, of course, you will
say it. "
AGNES GREY. 325
" No, I won't. "
" Then I can't kiss you. "
" Well, I don't care. "
In vain I expressed my sorrow ; in vain I lingered for some
symptom of contrition ; she really " didn't care, " and I left her
alone, and in darkness, wondering most of all at this last proof
of insensate stubbornness. In my childhood I could not imagine
a more afflictive punishment, than for my mother to refuse to
kiss me at night : the very idea was terrible. More than the
idea I never felt, for, happily, I never committed a fault that
was deemed worthy of such a penalty ; but once I remember, for
some transgression of my sister's, our mother thought proper to
inflict it upon her : what she felt, I cannot tell ; but my sym-
pathetic tears and suffering for her sake, I shall not soon forget.
Another troublesome trait in Mary Ann, was her incorrigible
propensity to keep running into the nursery, to play with her
little sisters and the nurse. This was natural enough, but, as
it was against her mother's express desire, I, of course, forbade
her to do so, and did my utmost to keep her with me ; but that
only increased her relish for the nursery, and the more I strove
to keep her out of it, the oftener she went, and the longer she
stayed : to the great dissatisfaction of Mrs. Bloomfield, who,
I well knew, would impute all the blame of the matter to me.
Another of my trials was the dressing in the morning : at one
time she would not be washed ; at another she would not be
dressed, unless she might wear some particular frock, that I
knew her mother would not like her to have ; at another she
would scream and run away if I attempted to touch her hair.
So that, frequently, when, after much trouble and toil, I had, at
length, succeeded in bringing her down, the breakfast was nearly
half over; and black looks from " mamma, " and testy obser-
vations from " papa, " spoken at me, if not to me, were sure to
be my meed : for few things irritated the latter so much as
want of punctuality at meal times. Then, among the minor
annoyances, was my inability to satisfy !Mrs. Bloomfield with
her daughter's dress ; and the child's hair " was never fit to be
seen. " Sometimes, as a powerful reproach to me, she would
perform the office of tire-woman herself, and then complain
bitterly of the trouble it gave her.
When little Fanny came into the schoolroom, I hoped she
would be mild and inoffensive, at least ; but a few days, if not
326 AGNES GREY.
a few hours, sufficed to destroy the illusion : I found her a mis-
chievous, intractable little creature, given up to falsehood and
deception, young as she was, and alarmingly fond of exercising
her two favourite weapons of offence and defence ; that of
spitting in the faces of those who incurred her displeasure, and
bellowing lilce a bull when her unreasonable desires were not
gratified. As she, generally, was pretty quiet in her parents'
presence, and they were impressed with the notion of her being
a remarkably gentle child, her falsehoods were readily believed,
and her loud uproars led them to suspect harsh and injudicious
treatment on my part ; and when, at length, her bad disposition
became manifest even to their prejudiced eyes, I felt that the
whole was attributed to me.
" What a naughty girl Fanny is getting! " Mrs. Bloomfield
would say to her spouse. " Don't you observe, my dear, how
she is altered since she entered the schoolroom ? She will soon
be as bad as the other two ; and, I am sorry to say, they have
quite deteriorated of late. "
" You may say that, " was the answer. " I've been thinking
that same myself. I thought when we got them a governess
they'd improve ; but, instead of that, they get worse and worse :
I don't know how it is with their learning ; but their habits, I
know, make no sort of improvement ; they get rougher, and
dirtier, and more unseemly, every day. "
I knew this was all pointed at me ; and these, and all similar
innuendoes, affected me far more deeply than any open accu-
sations would have done ; for against the latter I should have
been roused to speak in my own defence : now I judged it my
wisest plan to subdue every resentful impulse, suppress every
sensitive shrinking, and go on persevering ly, doing my best ;
for, irksome as my situation was, I earnestly wished to retain
it. I thought, if I could struggle on with unremitting firm-
ness and integrity, the children would in time become more
humanised : every month would contribute to make them some
little wiser, and, consequently, more manageable ; for a child
of nine or ten as frantic and ungovernable as these at six and
seven would be a maniac.
I flattered myself I was benefiting my parents and sister by my
continuance here ; for small as the salary was, I still was earning
something, and with strict economy I could easily manage to have
.something to spare for them, if they would favour me by taking
AGNES GREY. 327
it. Then it was by my own will that I had got the place : I had
brought all this tribulation on myself, and I was determined to
bear it ; nay, more than that, I did not even regret the step I
had taken. I longed to show my friends that, even now, I was
competent to undertake the charge, and able to acquit myself
honourably to the end ; and if ever I felt it degrading to submit
so quietly, or intolerable to toil so constantly, I would turn
towards my home, and say within myself—
" They may crush, but they shall not subdue me !
Tis of thee that I think, not of them. "
About Christmas I was allowed to visit home ; but my holiday
was only of a fortnight's duration : " for, " said Mrs. Bloomfield,
''I thought, as you had seen your friends so lately, you would
not care for a longer stay. " I left her to think so still : but she
little knew how long, how wearisome those fourteen weeks of
absence had been to me ; how intensely I had longed for my
holidays, how greatly I was disappointed at their curtailment.
Yet she was not to blame in this ; I had never told her my
feelings, and she could not be expected to divine them ; I had
not been with her a full term, and she was justified in not allow-
insr me a full vacation.
CHAPTER IV.
THE GRANDMAMMA.
I SPARE my readers the account of my delight on coming home,
my happiness while there — enjoying a brief space of rest and
liberty in that dear, familiar place, among the loving and the
loved — and my sorrow on being obliged to bid them, once more,
a long adieu.
I returned, however, with unabated vigour to my work — a
more arduous task than any one can imagine, who has not felt
something like the misery of being charged with the care and
direction of a set of mischievous turbulent rebels, whom his
utmost exertions cannot bind to their duty ; while, at^ the same
time, he is responsible for their conduct to a higher power, who
exacts from him what cannot be achieved without the aid of the
superior's more potent authority: which, either from indolence,
or the fear of becoming unpopular with the said rebellious gang.
328 AGNES GREY.
the latter refuses to give. I can conceive few situations more
harassing than that wherein, however you may long for success,
however you may labour to fulfil your duty, your efforts are
baffled and set at naught by those beneath you, and unjustly
censured and misjudged by those above.
I have not enumerated half the vexatious propensities of my
pupils, or half the troubles resulting from my heavy responsi-
bilities, for fear of trespassing too much upon the reader's
patience; as, perhaps, I have already done: but my design,
in writing the few last pages, was not to amuse, but to benefit
those whom it might concern : he that has no interest in such
matters will doubtless have skipped them over with a cursory
glance, and, perhaps, a malediction against the prolixity of the
writer ; but if a parent has, therefrom, gathered any useful hint,
or an unfortunate governess received thereby the slightest benefit,
I am well rewarded for my pains.
To avoid trouble and confusion, I have taken my pupils one
by one, and discussed their various qualities ; but this can give
no adequate idea of being worried by the whole three together ;
when, as was often the case, all were determined to " be naughty,
and to tease Miss Grey, and put her in a passion. "
Sometimes, on such occasions, the thought had suddenly
occurred to me — " If they could see me now! " meaning, of
course, my friends at home ; and the idea of how they would
pity me has made me pity myself^so greatly that I have had
the utmost difficulty to restrain my tears : but I have restrained
them, till my little tormentors were gone to. dessert, or cleared
off to bed (my only prospects of deliverance), and then, in all
the bliss of solitude, I have given myself up to the luxury of an
unrestricted burst of weeping. But this was a weakness I did
not often indulge : my employments were too numerous, my
leisure moments too precious, to admit of much time being given
to fruitless lamentations.
I particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon, soon after
my return in January ; the children had all come up from dinner,
loudly declaring that they meant " to be naughty ; " and they had
well kept their resolution, though I had talked myself hoarse, and
wearied every muscle in my throat, in the vain attempt to reason
them out of it. I had got Tom pinned up in a corner, whence,
I told him, he should not escape till he had done his appointed
task. Meantime, Fanny had possessed herself of my work-bag,
AGNES GREY. 329
and was rifling its contents — and spitting into it besides. I told
her to let it alone, but to no purpose, of course. " Burn it,
Fanny ! " cried Tom ; and this command she hastened to obey.
I sprang to snatch it from the fire, and Tom darted to the door.
" Mary Ann, throw her desk out of the window ! " cried he : and
my precious desk, containing my letters and papers, my small
amount of cash, and all my valuables, was about to be precipitated
from the three-storey window. I flew to rescue it. Meanwhile
Tom had left the room, and was rushing down the stairs, followed
by Fanny. Having secured my desk, I ran to catch them, and
Mary Ann came scampering after. All three escaped me, and
ran out of the house into the garden, where they plunged about
in the snow, shouting and screaming in exultant glee.
What must I do? If I followed them, I should probably be
unable to capture one, and only drive them farther away ; if I did
not, how was I to get them in ? and what would their parents
think of me, if they saw or heard the children rioting, hatless,
bonnetless, gloveless, and bootless, in the deep, soft snow?
While I stood in this perplexity, just without the door, trying,
by grim looks and angry words, to awe them into subjection, I
heard a voice behind me, in harshly piercing tones exclaiming —
" Miss Grey ! Is it possible? What, in the devil's name, can
you be thinking about ? "
" I can't get them in, sir, " said I, turning round, and behold-
ing Mr. Bloomfield, with his hair on end, and his pale blue eyes
bolting from their sockets.
" But I INSIST upon their being got in ! " cried he, approach-
ing nearer, and looking perfectly ferocious.
" Then, sir, you must call them yourself, if you please, for
they won't listen to me, " I replied, stepping back,
" Come in with you, you filthy brats ; or I'll horsewhip you
every one ! " roared he ; and the children instantly obeyed,
" There, you see ! they come at the first word ! "
" Yes, whenjjw/ speak. "
''And it's very strange, that when you've the care of'em,
you've no better control over them than that ! — Now, there they
are — gone upstairs with their nasty snowy feet ! Do go after'em
and see them made decent, for Heaven's sake ! "
That gentleman's mother was then staying in the house ; and,
as I ascended the stairs and passed the drawing-room door, I had
the satisfaction of hearing the old lady declaiming aloud to her
L 2
330 AGNES GREY.
daughter-in-law to this effect (for I could only distinguish th'^
most emphatic words) —
" Gracious Heavens! never in all my life ! g-
their death as sure as ! Do you think, my dear, she's it
proper person ? Take my word for it "
I heard no more ; but that sufficed.
The senior Mrs. Bloomfield had been very attentive and civil
to me ; and till now, I had thought her a nice, kind-hearted,
chatty old body. She would often come to me and talk in a con-
fidential strain ; nodding and shaking her head, and gesticulating
with hands and eyes, as a certain class of old ladies are wont to
do : though I never knew one that carried the peculiarity to so
great an extent. She would even sympathise with me for the
trouble I had with the children, and express at times, by half
sentences, interspersed with nods and knowing winks, her sense
of the injudicious conduct of their mamma in so restricting my
power, and neglecting to support roe with her authority. Such
a mode of testifying disapprobation was not much to my taste ;
and I generally refused to take it in, or understand anything
more than was openly spoken ; at least, I never went farther
than an implied acknowledgment that, if matters were otherwise
ordered, ray task would be a less difficult one, and I should be
better able to guide and instruct my charge ; but now I must be
doubly cautious. Hitherto, though I saw the old lady had her
defects (of which one was a proneness to proclaim her perfections),
I had always been wishful to excuse them, and to give her credit
for all the virtues she professed, and even imagine others yet un-
told. Kindness, which had been the food of my life through so
many years, had lately been so entirely denied me, that I wel-
comed with grateful joy the slightest semblance of it. No wonder,
then, that my heart warmed to the old lady, and always glad-
dened at her approach and regretted her departure.
But now, the few words luckily or unluckily heard in passing
bad wholly revolutionised my ideas respecting her : now I looked
Tipon her as hypocritical and insincere, a flatterer, and a spy upon
my words and deeds. Doubtless it would have been my interest
still to meet her with the same cheerful smile and tone of respectful
cordiality as before ; but I could not, if I would : my manner
altered with my feelings, and became so cold and shy that she
could not fail to notice it. She soon did notice it, and her
manner altered too : the famihar nod was changed to a stiff bow,
AGNES GREY. 331
the gracious smile gave place to a glare of Gorgon ferocity ; her
vivacious loquacity was entirely transferred from me to " the
darling boys and girls, " whom she flattered and indulgedmore
absurdly than ever their mother had done.
I confess I was somewhat troubled at this change : I feared the
consequences of her displeasure, and even made some efforts to
recover the ground I had lost — and with better apparent success
than I could have anticipated. At one time, I, merely in common
civility, asked after her cough ; immediately her long visage re-
laxed into a smile, and she favoured me with a particular history
of that and her other infirmities, followed by an account of her
pious resignation, delivered in the usual emphatic, declamatory
style, which no writing can portray.
" But there's one remedy for all, my dear, and that's resigna-
tion " (a toss of the head), " resignation to the will of Heaven ! "
(an uplifting of the hands and eyes). " It has always supported
me through all my trials, and always will do " (a succession of
nods).''But then, it isn't everybody that can say that " (a shake
of the head) ; " but I'm one of the pious ones, Miss Grey ! " (a
very significant nod and toss). " And, thank Heaven, I always
was " (another nod), " and I glory in it ! " (an emphatic clasping
of the hands and shaking of the head). And with several texts
of Scripture, misquoted or misapplied, and religious exclamations
so redolent of the ludicrous in the style of delivery and manner
of bringing in, if not in the expressions themselves, that I decline
repeating them, she withdrew ; tossing her large head in high
good-humour — with herself at least — and left me hoping that,
after all, she was rather weak than wicked.
At her next visit to Welhvood House, I went so far as to say
I was glad to see her looking so well. The effect of this was
magical : the words, intended as a mark of civility, were received
as a flattering compHment ; her countenance brightened up, and
from that moment she became as gracious and benign as heart
could wish— in outward semblance at least. From what I now
saw of her, and what I heard from the children, I knew that, in
order to gain her cordial friendship, I had but to utter a word of
flattery at each convenient opportunity : but this was against my
principles', and for lack of this, the capricious old dkme soon
deprived me of her favour again, and I believe did me much
secret injury.
She could not greatly influence her daughter-in-law against me,
352 AGNES GREY.
because, between that lady and herself, there was a mutual dis-
like—chiefly shown by her in secret detractions and calumnia-
tions ; by the other, in an excess of frigid formality in her
demeanour ; and no fawning flattery of the elder could thaw
away the wall of ice which the younger interposed between them.
But with her son, the old lady had better success : he would listen
to all she had to say, provided she could soothe his fretful temper,
and refrain from irritating him by her own asperities ; and I have
reason to believe that she considerably strengthened his prejudice
against me. She would tell him that I shamefully neglected the
children, and even his wife did not attend to them as she ought
and that he must look after them himself, or they would all go
to ruin.
Thus urged, he would frequently give himself the trouble ol
watching them from the windows during their play ; at times, he
would follow them through the grounds, and too often came
suddenly upon them while they were dabbling in the forbidden
well, talking to the coachman in the stables, or revelling in the
filth of the farm-yard— and I, meanwhile, wearily standing by,
having previously exhausted my energy in vain attempts to gel
them away. Often, too, he would unexpectedly pop his head
into the schoolroom while the young people were at meals, and
fiad them spilling their milk over the table and themselves,
plunging their fingers into their own or each other's mugs, oi
quarrelling over their victuals like a set of tiger's cubs. If I were
quiet at the moment, I was conniving at their disorderly conduct;
if (as was frequently the case) I happened to be exalting m}
voice to enforce order, I was using undue violence, and setting
the girls a bad example by such ungentleness cf toneandlanguage.
I remember one afternoon in spring when, owing to the rain,
they could not go out ; but, by some amazing good fortune,
they had all finished their lessons, and yet abstained fron
running down to tease their parents— a trick that annoyed nu
greatly, but which, on rainy days, I seldom could prevent theii
doing ; because, below, they found novelty and amusement—
especially when visitors were in the house ; and their mother,
though she bid me keep them in the schoolroom, would nevei
chide them for leaving it, or trouble herself to send them back.
But this day they appeared satisfied with their present abode,
and what is more wonderful still, seemed disposed to play to-
gether without depending on me for amusement, and without
AGNES GREY. $35
quarrelling with each other. Their occupation was a somewhat
Duzzling one : they were all squatted together on the floor by the
.vindow, over a heap of broken toys and a quantity of birds'eggs
—or rather eggshells, for the contents had luckily been abstracted.
These shells they had broken up and were pounding into small
Tagments, to what end I could not imagine ; but so long as they
,vere quiet and not in positive mischief, I did not care ; and, with
1 feeling of unusual repose, I sat by the fire, putting the finishing
stitches to a frock for Mary Ann's doll ; intending, when that
,vas done, to begin a letter to my mother. Suddenly, the door
Dpened, and the dingy head of Mr. Bloomfield looked in.
''All very quiet here ! What are you doing ? " said he.''Xo
.larm to-day, at least, " thought I. But he was of a different
opinion. Advancing to the window, and seeing the children's
occupations, he testily exclaimed— " What in the world are you
about? "
" We're grinding egg-shells, papa ! " cried Tom.
" How dare you make such a mess, you little devils? Don't
you see what confounded work you're making of the carpet? "
(the carpet was a plain, brown drugget). " Miss Grey, did you
know what they were doing? "
" Yes, sir. "
''You knew it ? "
" Yes. "
''You knew it ! and you actually sat there and permitted
them to go on, without a word of reproof! "
" I didn't think they were doing any harm. "
''Any harm ! Why, look there ! Just look at that carpet, and
see— was there ever anything like it in a Christian house before?
No wonder your room is not fit for a pigsty— no wonder your
pupils are worse than a litter of pigs !— no wonder— Oh ! I de-
clare, it puts me quite past my patience ! " and he departed, shut-
ting the door after him with a bang, that made the children laugh.
" It puts me quite past my patience too ! " muttered I, getting
up ; and, seizing the poker, I dashed it repeatedly into the
cinders, and stirred them up with unwonted energy ; thus easing
my irritation, under pretence of mending the fire.
After this, Mr. Bloomfield was continually looking in'to see if
the schoolroom was in order ; and, as the children were continu-
ally littering the floor with fragments of toys, sticks, stones,
stubble, leaves, and other rubbish, which I could not prevent
534 AGNES GREY.
their bringing, or oblige them to gather up, and which the
servants refused to " clean after them, " I had to spend a con-
siderable portion of my valuable leisure moments on my knees
upon the floor, in painfully reducing things to order. Once I
told them that they should not taste their supper till they had
picked up everything from the carpet ; Fanny might have hers
when she had taken up a certain quantity, Mary Ann when she
had gathered twice as many, and Tom was to clear away the rest.
Wonderful to state, the girls did their part ; but Tom was in such
a fury that he flew upon the table, scattered the bread and milk
about the floor, struck his sisters, kicked the coals out of the
coal-pan, attempted to overthrow the table and chairs, and
seemed inclined to make a Douglas-larder of the whole contents
of the room : but I seized upon him, and, sending Mary Ann to
call her mamma, held him, in spite of kicks, blows, yells, and
execrations, till Mrs. Bloomfield made her appearance.
" What is the matter with my boy? " said she.
And when the matter was explained to her, all she did was to
send for the nursery-maid to put the room in order, and bring
Master Bloomfield his supper.
" There now, " cried Tom triumphantly, looking up from his
viands with his mouth almost too full for speech. " There now,
Miss Grey : you see I have got my supper in spite of you : and
I haven't picked up a single thing ! "
The only person in the house who had any real sympathy for
me was the nurse ; for she had suffered like afflictions, though
in a smaller degree ; as she had not the task of teaching, nor
was she so responsible for the conduct of her charge.
" Oh, Miss Grey! " she would say, " you have some trouble
with them childer ! "
" I have indeed, Betty ; and I dare say you know what it is. "
" Ay, I do so ! But I don't vex myself o'er'em as you do.
And then, you see, I hit'em a slap sometimes : and them little
uns — I gives'em a good whipping now and then : there's nothing
else will do for'em, as what they say. Howsoever, I've lost my
place for it. "
" Have you, Betty? I heard you were going to leave. "
''Eh, bless you, yes ! Missis gave me warning a three-wik sin'.
She told me afore Christmas how it mud be, if I hit'em again ;
but I couldn't hold my hand off'em at nothing, I know not how
you do, for Miss Mary Ann's worse by the half nor her sisters I "
AGNES GREY. 335-
CHAPTER V.
THE UNCLE.
Besides the old lady, there ^vas another relative of the family,
whose visits were a great annoyance to me-this was " Uncle
Robson, " Mrs. Bloomfield's brother ; ataU, self-sufficient fellow,
with dark hair and sallow complexion like his sister, a nose that
seemed to disdain the earth, and little grey eyes, frequently half
closed with a mixture of real stupidity and affected contempt of
all surrounding objects. He was a thick-set, strongly-built man.
but he had found some means of compressing his waist mto a
remarkably small compass ; and that, together with the unnatural
stiffness of his form, showed that the lofty-mmded, manly Mr.
Robson, the scorner of the female sex, was not above the foppery
of stays. He seldom deigned to notice me ; and, when he did.
it was with a certain supercilious insolence of tone and manner
that convinced me he was no gentleman : though it was intended
to have a contrary effect. But it was not for that I disliked his
coming, so much as for the harm he did the children-encour-
ao-ino- all their evil propensities, and undoing, m a few minutes,
the iTttle good it had taken me months of labour to achieve.
Fanny and little Harriet he seldom condescended to notice ; but
Mary Ann was something of a favourite. He was continually
encouraging her tendency to affectation (which I had done my
utmost to crush), talking about her pretty face, and filhng her head
with all manner of conceited notions concerning her personal ap-
pearance (which I had instructed her to regard as dust in the
balance compared with the cultivation of her mind and manners) ;
and I never saw a child so susceptible of flattery as she was.
Whatever was wrong, in either her or her brother, he would
encourao-e by laughing at, if not by actually praising : people
little know the injury they do to children by laughing at their
faults, and making a pleasant jest of what their true friends have
endeavoured to teach them to hold in grave abhorrence.
Though not a positive drunkard, Mr. Robson habitually swal-
lowed great quantities of wine, and took with relish an occasional
class of brandy and water. He taught his nephew to imitate him
Tn this to the utmost of his ability, and to believe that the more
wine and spirits he could take, and the better he liked them, the
more he manifested his bold and manly spirit, and rose superior to
his sisters. ^Iv. Bloomfield had not much to say against it, for his
536 AGNES GREY.
favourite beverage was gin and water ; of which he toolc a conside-
rable portion every day, by dint of constant sipping — and to that,
I chiefly attributed his dingy complexion and waspish temper.
Mr. Robson likewise encouraged Tom's propensity to perse-
cute the lower creation, both by precept and example. As he fre-
quently came to course or shoot over his brother-in-law's grounds,
he would bring his favourite dogs with him ; and he treated them
so brutally that, poor as I was, I would have given a sovereign
any day to see one of them bite him, provided the animal could
have done it with impunity. Sometimes, when in a very com-
placent mood, he would go a bird-nesting with the children : a
thing that irritated and annoyed me exceedingly ; as, by frequent
and persevering attempts, I flattered myself I had partly shown
them the evil of this pastime, and hoped, in time, to bring them
to some general sense of justice and humanity ; but ten minutes'
bird-nesting with Uncle Robson, or even a laugh from him at
some relation of their former barbarities, was sufficient at once
to destroy the effect of my whole elaborate course of reasoning
and persuasion. Happily, however, during that spring, they
never, but once, got anything but empty nests, or eggs — being too
impatient to leave them till the birds were hatched ; that once,
Tom, who had been with his uncle into the neighbouring planta-
tion, came running in high glee into the garden, with a brood of
little callow nestlings in his hands. Mary Ann and Fanny, whom
I was just bringing out, ran to admire his spoils, and to beg each
a bird for themselves. " No, not one ! " cried Tom. " They're
all mine : Uncle Robson gave them to me— one, two, three, four,
five — you shan't touch one of them ! no, not one, for your lives ! "
continued he exultingly ; laying the nest on the ground, and
standing over it with his legs wide apart, his hands thrust into
his breeches-pockets, his body bent forward, and his face twisted
into all manner of contortions in the ecstacy of his delight.
" But you shall see me fettle'em off. My word, but I will
wallop'em ! See if I don't now. By gum ! but there's rare
sport for me in that nest. "
" But, Tom, " said I, " I shall not allow you to torture those
birds. They must either be killed at once or carried back to the
place you took them from, that the old birds may continue to
feed them. "
" But you don't know where that is, madam : it's only me and
Uncle Robson that knows that. "
AGNES GREY.
337
" But if you don't tell me, I shall kill them myself— much as I
hate it. "
''You daren't. You daren't touch them for your life ! because
you know papa and mamma, and Uncle Robson, would be angry.
Ha, ha ! I've caught you there, miss ! "
" I shall do what I think right in a case of this sort without
consulting any one. If your papa and mamma don't happen to
approve of it, I shall be sorry to offend them ; but your Uncle
Robson's opinions, of course, are nothing to me. "
So saying — urged by a sense of duty — at the risk of both mak-
ing myself sick and incurring the wrath of my employers — I got
a large flat stone, that had been reared up for a mouse-trap by
the gardener, then, having once more vainly endeavoured to per-
suade the little tyrant to let the birds be carried back, I asked
what he intended to do with them. With fiendish glee he com-
menced a list of torments ; and while he was busied in the rela-
tion, I dropped the stone upon his intended victims and crushed
them flat beneath it. Loud were the outcries, terrible the execra-
tions, consequent upon this daring outrage ; Uncle Robson had
been coming up the walk with his gun, and was just then paus-
ing to kick his dog. Tom flew towards him, vowing he would
make him kick me instead of Juno. Mr. Robson leant upon his
gun, and laughed excessively at the violence of his nephew's
passion, and the bitter maledictions and opprobrious epithets
he heaped upon me. " Well, you arc a good'un ! " exclaimed
he, at length, taking up his weapon and proceeding towards the
house. " Damme, but the lad has some spunk in him, too.
Curse me, if ever I saw a nobler little scoundrel than that. He's
beyond petticoat government already ; by God ! he defies mother,
granny, governess, and all ! Ha, ha, ha ! Never mind, Tom,
I'll get you another brood to-morrow. "
" If you do, Mr, Robson, I shall kill them too, " said I.
" Humph ! " replied he, and having honoured me with a broad
stare— which, contrary to his expectations, I sustained without
flinching — he turned away with an air of supreme contempt, and
stalked into the house. Tom next went to tell his mamma. It
was not her way to say much on any subject ; but, when she
next saw me, her aspect and demeanour were doubly dark and
chill. After some casual remark about the weather, she ob-
served —
" I am sorry, Miss Grey, you should think it necessary to in-
338 AGNES GREV.
terfere with Master Bloomfield's amusements ; he was vay much
distressed about your destroying the birds. "
''When Master Bloomfield's amusements consist in injuring sen-
tient creatures, " I answered, " I think it my duty to interfere. "
" You seemed to have forgotten, " said she calmly, " that the
creatures were all created for our convenience. "
I thought that doctrine admitted some doubt, but merely re-
plied —
" If they were, we have no right to torment them for our
amusement. "
" I think, " said she, " a child's amusement is scarcely to be
weighed against the welfare of a soulless brute. "
" But, for the child's own sake, it ought not to be encouraged
to have such amusements, " answered I, as meekly as I could, to
make up for such unusual pertinacity.'''Blessed are the merci-
ful, for they shall obtain mercy.'"
" Oh ! of course ; but that refers to our conduct towards each
other. "
"'The merciful man shows mercy to his beast,'" I ventured
to add.
" I think yo2i have not shown much mercy, " replied she with
a short, bitter laugh; " killing the poor birds by Avholesale in
that shocking manner, and putting the dear boy to such misery
for a mere whim. "
I judged it prudent to say no more. This was the nearest
approach to a quarrel I ever had with Mrs. Bloomfield ; as well
as the greatest number of words I ever exchanged with her at
one time, since the day of my first arrival.
But Mr. Robson and old Mrs. Bloomfield were not the only
guests whose coming to Wellwood House annoyed me ; every visi-
tor disturbed me more or less ; not so much because they neglected
me (though I did feel their conduct strange and disagreeable in
that respect) as because I found it impossible to keep my pupils
away from them, as I was repeatedly desired to do : Tom must
talk to them, and Mary Ann must be noticed by them. Neither
the one nor the other knew what it was to feel any degree of
shame-facedness, or even common modesty. They would in-
decently and clamorously interrupt the conversation of their
elders, tease them with the most impertinent questions, roughly
collar the gentlemen, climb their knees uninvited, hang about
their shoulders or rifle their pockets, pull the ladies'gowns,
AGNES GREY. 539
disorder their hair, tumble their collars, and importunately beg
for their trinkets.
Mrs. Bloomfield had the sense to be shocked and annoyed at
all this, but she had not sense to prevent it : she expected me to
prevent it. But how could I— when the guests, with their fine
clothes and newfaces, continually flattered and indulged them, out
of complaisance to their parents — how could /, with my homely
garments, everyday face, and honest words, draw them away?
I strained every nerve to do so : by striving to amuse them, I
endeavoured to attract them to my side ; by the exertion of such
authority as I possessed, and by such severity as I dared to use,
I tried to deter them from tormenting the guests ; and by re-
proaching their unmannerly conduct, to make them ashamed to
repeat it. But they knew no shame ; they scorned authority
which had no terrors to back it ; and as for kindness and affec-
tion, either they had no hearts, or such as they had were so
strongly guarded, and so well concealed, that I, with all my
efforts, had not yet discovered how to reach them.
But soon my trials in this quarter came to a close — sooner than
I either expected or desired ; for one sweet evening towards the
close of May, as I was rejoicing in the near approach of the holi-
days, and congratulating myself upon having made some progress
with my pupils (as far as their learning went at least, for I had
instilled something into their heads, and I had at length brought
them to be a little — a very little — more rational about getting
their lessons done in time to leave some space for recreation,
instead of tormenting themselves and me all day long to no
purpose), Mrs, Bloomfield sent for me, and calmly told me that
after Midsummer my services would be no longer required. She
assured me that my character and general conduct were un-
exceptionable ; but the children had made so little improvement
since my arrival, that Mr. Bloomfield and she felt it their duty
to seek some other mode of instruction. Though superior to most
children of their years in abilities, they were decidedly behind
them in attainments : their manners were uncultivated, and their
tempers unruly. And this she attributed to a want of sufficient
firmness, and diligent, persevering care on my part.
Unshaken firmness, devoted diligence, unwearied perseverance,
unceasing care, were the very qualifications on which I had
secretly prided myself ; and by which I had hoped in time to
overcome all difficulties, and obtain success at last. I wished to
340 AGNES GREY.
say something in my own justification : but in attempting to
speak, I felt my voice falter ; and rather than testify any emotion,
or suffer the tears to overflow that were already gathering in my
eyes, I chose to keep silence, and bear all like a self-convicted
culprit.
Thus was I dismissed, and thus I sought my home. Alas !
what would they think of me? unable, after all my boasting,
to keep my place, even for a single year, as governess to three
small children, whose mother was asserted by my own aunt to
be a " very nice woman. " Having been thus weighed in the
balance and found wanting, I need not hope they would be will-
ing to try me again. And this was an unwelcome thought ; for
vexed, harassed, disappointed as I had been, and greatly as I
had learned to love and value my home, I was not yet weary of
adventure, nor willing to relax my efforts. I knew that all parents
were not like Mr. and Mrs. Bloomfield, and I was certain all
children were not like theirs. The next family must be different,
and any change must be for the better. I had been seasoned by
adversity, and tutored by experience, and I longed to redeem
my lost honour in the eyes of those whose opinion was more than
that of all the world to me.
CHAPTER VI.
THE PARSONAGE AGAIN.
For a few months I remained peaceably at home, in the quiet
enjoyment of liberty and rest, and genuine friendship, from all
of which I had fasted so long ; and in the earnest prosecution of
my studies, to recover what I had lost during my stay at Well-
wood House, and to lay in new stores for future use. My father's
health was still very infirm, but not materially worse than when
I last saw him ; and I was glad I had it in my power to cheer
him by my return, and to amuse him with singing his favourite
songs.
No one triumphed over my failure, or said I had better have
taken his or her advice, and quietly stayed at home. All were
glad to have me back again, and lavished more kindness than
ever upon me, to make up for the sufferings I had undergone ;
but not one would touch a shilling of what I had so cheerfully
earned and so carefully saved, in the hope of sharing it with
AGNES GREY. 341
them. By dint of pinching here, and scraping there, our debts
were already nearly paid. Mary had had good success with her
drawings ; but our father had insisted upon her likewise keeping
all the produce of her industry to herself. All we could spare from
the supply of our humble wardrobe and our little casual expenses,
he directed us to put into the savings'bank ; saying, we knew
not how soon we might be dependent on that alone for support ;
for he felt he had not long to be with us, and what would become
of our mother and us when he was gone, God only knew !
Dear papa ! if he had troubled himself less about the afflictions
that threatened us in case of his death, I am convinced that
dreaded event would not have taken place so soon. My mother
would never suffer him to ponder on the subject if she could
help it.
" Oh, Richard! " exclaimed she, on one occasion, " if you
would but dismiss such gloomy subjects from your mind, you
would live as long as any of us ; at least you would hve to see
the girls married, and yourself a happy grandfather, with a
canty old dame for your companion, "
My mother laughed, and so did my father :.but his laugh soon
perished in a dreary sigh.
" They married — poor penniless things ! " said he, " who will
take them, I wonder ! "
" Why, nobody shall that isn't thankful for them. Wasn't I
penniless when you took me ? and you pretended, at least, to be
vastly pleased with your acquisition. But it's no matter whether
they get married or not : we can devise a thousand honest ways
of making a livelihood. And I wonder, Richard, you can think
of bothering your head about our poverty in case of your death ;
as if that would be anything compared with the calamity of losing
you — an affliction that you well know would swallow up all
others, and which you ought to do your utmost to preserve us
from : and there is nothing like a cheerful mind for keeping the
body in health, "
" I know, Alice, it is wrong to keep repining as I do, but
I cannot help it : you must bear with me. "
" I wont bear with you, if I can alter you, " replied my mother :
but the harshness of her words was undone by the earnest affec-
tion of her tone and pleasant smile, that made my father smile
again, less sadly and less transiently than was his wont.
" Mamma, " said I, as soon as I could find an opportunity of
342 AGNES GREY.
speaking with her alone, " my money is but httle, and cannot
last long ; if I could increase it, it would lessen papa's anxiety,
on one subject at least. I cannot draw like Mary, and so the best
thing I could do would be to look out for another situation. "
" And so you would actually try again, Agnes? "
" Decidedly, I would. "
" Why, my dear, I should have thought you had had enough
of it. "
" I know, " said I, " everybody is not like Mr. and Mrs.
Bloomfield "
" Some are worse, " interrupted my mother.
" But not many, I think, " replied I, " and I'm sure all children
are not like theirs ; for I and Mary were not : we always did as
you bid us, didn't we? "
" Generally: but then, I did not spoil you; and you were
not perfect angels after all : Mary had a fund of quiet obstinacy,
and you were somewhat faulty in regard to temper; but you
were very good children on the whole. "
" I know I was sulky sometimes, and I should have been glad
to see these children sulky sometimes too ; for then I could have
understood them : but they never were, for they could not be
offended, nor hurt, nor ashamed : they could not be unhappy
in any way, except when they were in a passion. "
" Well, if they could not, it was not their fault : you cannot
•expect stone to be as pliable as clay. "
" No, but still it is very unpleasant to live with such unim-
pressible incomprehensible creatures. You cannot love them ;
and if you could, your love would be utterly thrown away : they
could neither return it, nor value, nor understand it. But, how-
ever, even if I should stumble on such a family again, which is
quite unlikely, I have all this experience to begin with, and I
should manage better another time ; and the end and aim of
this preamble is, let me try again. "
" Well, my girl, you are not easily discouraged, I see : I am
glad of that. But, let me tell you, you are a good deal paler
and thinner than when you first left home ; and we cannot have
you undermining your health to hoard up money, either for
yourself or others. "
" Mary tells me I am changed too ; and I don't much wonder
at it, for I was in a constant state of agitation and anxiety all day
long : but next time I am determined to take things coolly,

AGNES GREY. 343
After some further discussion, my mother promised once more
to assist me, provided I would wait and be patient ; and I left
her to broach the matter to my father, when and how she
deemed it most advisable : never doubting her ability to obtain
his consent. Meantime, I searched, with great interest, the ad-
vertising columns of the newspapers, and wrote answers to every
" Wanted a Governess, " that appeared at all eligible; but all
my letters, as well as the repUes, when I got any, were dutifully
shown to my mother ; and she, to my chagrin, made me reject
the situations one after another : these were low people, these
were too exacting in their demands, and these too niggardly in
their remuneration.
" Your talents are not such as every poor clergyman's
daughter possesses, Agnes, " she would say, " and you must
not tlirow them away. Remember, you promised to be patient :
there is no need of hurry : you have plenty of time before you,
and may have many chances yet. "
At length, she advised me to put an advertisement, myself,
in the paper, stating my qualifications, & c.
" Music, singing, drawing, French, Latin, and German, "
said she, " are no mean assemblage: many will be glad to
have so much in one instructor ; and this time, you shall try
your fortune in a somewhat higher family — in that of some
genuine, thorough-bred gentleman ; for such are far more likely
to treat you with proper respect and consideration, than those
purse-proud tradespeople and arrogant upstarts. I have known
several among the higher ranks who treated their governesses
quite as one of the family ; though some, I allow, are as insolent
and exacting as any one else can be : for there are bad and
good in all classes. "
The advertisement was quickly written and despatched. Of
the two parties who answered it, but one would consent to give
me fifty pounds, the sum my mother bade me name as the salary
I should require ; and here, I hesitated about engaging myself,
as I feared the children would be too old, and their parents
would require some one more showy, or more experienced, if
not more accomplished than I. But my mother dissuaded me
from declining it on that account : I should do vastly well, she
said, if I would only throw aside my diffidence, and acquire
a little more confidence in myself. I was just to give a plain,
true statement of my acquirements and qualifications, and name
344 AGNES GREY.
what stipulations I chose to make, and then await the result.
The only stipulation I ventured to propose, was that I might
be allowed two months'holidays during the year to visit my
friends, at Midsummer and Christmas. The unknown lady, in
her reply, made no objection to this, and stated that, as to my
acquirements, ishe had no doubt I should be able to give satis-
faction ; but in the engagement of governesses, she considered
those things as but subordinate points ; as, being situated in the
neighbourhood of O , she could get masters to supply any
deficiencies in that respect : but, in her opinion, next to un-
impeachable morality, a mild and cheerful temper and obliging
disposition were the most essential requisites.
My mother did not relish this at all, and now made many
objections to my accepting the situation ; in which my sister
warmly supported her: but, unwilling to be baulked again, I
overruled them all ; and, having first obtained the consent of my
father (who had, a short time previously, been apprised of these
transactions), I wrote a most obliging epistle to my unknown
correspondent, and, finally, the bargain was concluded.
It was decreed that on the last day of January, I was to enter
upon my new office as governess in the family of Mr. Murray,
of Horton Lodge, near O , about seventy miles from our
village : a formidable distance to me, as I had never been above
twenty miles from home in all the course of my twenty years'
sojourn on earth ; and as, moreover, every individual in that
family and in the neighbourhood was utterly unknown to myself
and all my acquaintances. But this rendered it only the more
piquant to me. I had now, in some measure, got rid of the
■mazivaise honte that had formerly oppressed me so much ; there
was a pleasing excitement in the idea of entering these unknown
regions, and making my way alone among its strange inhabi-
tants. I now flattered myself I was going to see something of
the world : Mr. Murray's residence was near a large town, and
not in a manufacturing district, where the people had nothing to
do but to make money ; his rank, from what I could gather,
appeared to be higher than that of Mr. Bloorafield ; and, doubt-
less, he was one of those genuine thorough-bred gentry my
mother spoke of, who would treat his governess with due con-
sideration as a respectable well-educated lady, the instructor and
guide of his children, and not a mere upper servant. Then, my
pupils being older, would be more rational, more teachable, and
AGNES GREY. 345
less troublesome than the last : they would be less confined to the
schoolroom, and not require that constant labour and incessant
watching ; and, finally, bright visions mingled with my hopes,
with which the care of children and the mere duties of a gover-
ness had little or nothing to do. Thus, the reader will see that
I had no claim to be regarded as a martyr to filial piety, going
forth to sacrifice peace and liberty for the sole purpose of laying
up stores for the comfort and support of my parents : thougli
certainly the comfort of my father, and the future support of my
mother, had a large share in my calculations ; and fifty pounds
appeared to me no ordinary sum. I must have decent clothes
becoming my station ; I must, it seemed, put out my washing,
and also pay for my four annual journeys between Horton Lodge
and home ; but with strict attention to economy, surely twenty
pounds, or little more, would cover those expenses, and then
there would be thirty for the bank, or little less : what a valu-
able addition to our stock ! Oh, I must struggle to keep this
situation, whatever it might be ! both for my own honour among
my friends and for the solid services I might render them by my
continuance there.
CHAPTER VII.
HORTON LODGE.
The 31st of January was a wild, tempestuous day : there was a
strong north wind, with a continual storm of snow drifting on the
ground and whirling through the air. iSIy friends would have
had me delay my departure, but fearful of prejudicing my em-
ployers against me by such want of punctuality at the commence-
ment of my undertaking, I persisted in keeping the appointment.
I will not inflict upon my readers an account of my leaving
home on that dark winter morning : the fond farewells, the long,
long journey to O , the solitary waitings in inns for coaches
or trains— for there were some railways then— and, finally, the
meeting at O with Mr. Murray's servant, who had been sent
with the phaeton to drive me from thence to Horton I^dge. I
will just state that the heavy snow had thrown such impediments
in the way of both horses and steam-engines, that it was dark
some hours before I reached my journey's end, and that a most
bewildering storm came on at last, which made the few mile^'
346 AGNES GREY.
space between O and Horton Lodge a long and formidable
passage. I sat resigned, with the cold, sharp snow driftin^s
through my veil and filling my lap, seeing nothing, and wonder
ing how the unfortunate horse and driver could make their wa)
even as well as they did : and indeed it was but a toilsome^
creeping style of progression, to say the best of it. At length w(
paused ; and, at the call of the driver, some one unlatched anc
rolled back upon their creaking hinges what appeared to be th(
park gates. Then we proceeded along a smoother road, whence
occasionally, I perceived some huge hoary mass gleaming througl
the darkness, which I took to be a portion of a snow-clad tree
After a considerable time we paused again, before the stately por
tico of a large house with long windows descending to the ground,
I rose with some difficulty from under the superincumben'
snow-drift, and alighted from the carriage, expecting that a kinc
and hospitable reception would indemnify me for the toils anc
hardships of the day. A gentlemanly person in black opened the
door, and admitted me into a spacious hall, lighted by an amber-
coloured lamp suspended from the ceihng ; he led me througl-
this, along a passage, and, opening the door of a back room,
told me that was the schoolroom. I entered, and found two young
ladies and two young gentlemen — my fu^ture pupils, I supposed.
After a formal greeting, the elder girl, who was trifling over a
piece of canvas and a basket of German wools, asked if I should
like to go upstairs. I replied in the affirmative, of course.
" Matilda, take a candle, and show her her room, " said she.
IMiss Matilda, a strapping hoyden of about fourteen, with a
short frock and trousers, shrugged her shoulders and made a
slight grimace, but took a candle and proceeded before me, up
the back stairs (a long, steep, double flight), and through a long,
narrow passage, to a small but tolerably comfortable room. She
then asked me if I would take some tea or coffee. I was about to
answer No ; but remembering that I had taken nothing since
seven o'clock that morning, and feeling faint in consequence, I
said I would take a cup of tea. Saying she would tell " Brown, "
the young lady departed ; and l3y the time I had divested
myself of my heavy, wet cloak, shawl, bonnet, & c., a mincing
damsel came to say the young ladies desired to know whether I
would take my tea up there or in the schoolroom. Under the
plea of fatigue, I chose to take it there. She withdrew ; and, after
a while, returned again with a small tea-tray, and placed it on the
AGNES GREY. 347
chest of drawers which served as a dressing-table. Having civilly
thanked her, I asked at what time I should be expected to rise in
the morning.
" The young ladies and gentlemen breakfast at half-past eight,
ma'am, " said she ; " they rise early ; but, as they seldom do any
lessons before breakfast, I should think it will do if you rise soon
after seven. "
I desired her to be so kind as to call me at seven, and,
promising to do so, she withdrew. Then, having broken my long
fast on a cup of tea and a httle thin bread and butter, I sat down
beside the small, smouldering fire, and amused myself with a
hearty fit of crying ; after which, I said my prayers, and then,
feeling considerably relieved, began to prepare for bed. Finding
that none of my luggage was brought up, I instituted a search for
the bell ; and failing to discover any signs of such a convenience
in any corner of the room, I took my candle and ventured through
the long passage, and down the steep stairs, on a voyage of
discovery, fleeting a well-dressed female on the way, I told
her what I wanted ; but not without considerable hesitation, as
I was not quite sure whether it was one of the upper servants, or
Mrs. Murray herself: it happened, however, to be the lady's-maid.
With the air of one conferring an unusual favour, she vouchsafed
to undertake the sending up of my things ; and when I had re-
entered my room, and waited and wondered a long time (greatly
fearing that she had forgotten or neglected to perform her promise,
and doubting whether to keep waiting or go to bed, or go down
again) my hopes, at length, were revived by the sound of voices
and laughter, accompanied by the tramp of feet along the
passage ; and presently the luggage was brought in by a rough-
looking maid and a man, neither of them very respectful in their
demeanour to me. Having shut the door upon their retiring
footsteps, and unpacked a few of my things, I betook myself to
rest ; gladly enough, for I was weary in body and mind.
It was with a strange feeling of desolation, mingled with a
strong sense of the novelty of my situation, and a joyless kind of
curiosity concerning what was yet unknown, that I awoke the
next morning ; feeling like one whirled away by enchantment,
and suddenly dropped from the clouds into a remote and unknown
land, widely and completely isolated from all he had ever seen or
known before ; or like a thistle-seed borne on the wind to some
strange nook of uncongenial soil, where it must lie long enough
348 AGNES GREY.
before it can take root and germinate, extracting nourishment
from what appears so alien to its nature : if, indeed, it ever can.
But this gives no proper idea of my feelings at all ; and no one
that has not lived such a retired, stationary life as mine, can
possibly imagine what they were : hardly even if he has known
what it is to awake some morning, and find himself in Port
Nelson, in New Zealand, with a world of waters between himself
and all that knew him.
I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with which I raised
my blind and looked out upon the unknown world : a wide, white
wilderness was all that met my gaze ; a waste of
" Deserts tossed in snow,
And heavy-laden groves. "
I descended to the schoolroom with no remarkable eagerness
to join my pupils, though not without some feeling of curiosity
respecting what a further acquaintance would reveak One
thing, among others of more obvious importance, I determined
with myself — I must begin with calling them Miss and Master.
It seemed to me a chilling and unnatural piece of punctilio
between the children of a family and their instructor and daily
companion ; especially where the former were in their early child-
hood, as at Wellwood House ; but even there my calling the
little Bloonifields by their simple names had been regarded as an
offensive liberty : as their parents had taken care to show me, by
carefully designating them Master and Miss Bloomfield, < S:c., in
speaking to me. I had been very slow to take the hint, because
the whole affair struck me as so very absurd ; but now I deter-
mined to be wiser, and begin at once with as much form and
ceremony as any member of the family would be likely to
require : and indeed, the children being so much older, there
would be less difhculty ; though the little words Miss and Master
seemed to have a surprising effect in repressing all familiar, open-
hearted kindness, and extinguishing every gleam of cordiality
that might arise between us.
As I cannot, like Dogberry, find it in my heart to bestow all
my tediousness upon the reader, I will not go on to bore him
with a minute detail of all the discoveries and proceedings of this
and the following day. No doubt he will be amply satisfied with
a slight sketch of the different members of the family, and a
general view of the first year or two of my sojourn among them.
AGNES GREY. 349
To begin with the head : Mr. Murray was, by all accounts, a
blustering, roystering, country'squire ; a devoted fox-hunter, a
skilful horse-jockey and farrier, an active, practical farmer, and
a hearty bon-vivant. By all accounts, I say ; for, except on
Sundays, when he went to church, I never saw him from month
to month : unless, in crossing the hall or walking in the grounds,
the figure of a tall, stout gentleman, with scarlet cheeks and
crimson nose, happened to come across me ; on which occasions,
if he passed near enough to speak, an unceremonious nod, accom-
panied by a " Morning, Miss Grey, " or some such brief salutation,
was usually vouchsafed. Frequently, indeed, his loud laugh
reached me from afar ; and oftener still I heard him swearing
and blaspheming against the footmen, groom, coachman, or
some other hapless dependent.
Mrs. Murray was a handsome, dashing lady of forty, who
certainly required neither rouge nor padding to add to her
charms ; and whose chief enjoyments were, or seemed to be, in
giving or frequenting parties, and in dressing at the very top of
the fashion. I did not see her till eleven o'clock on the morning
after my arrival ; when she honoured me with a visit, just as my
mother might step into the kitchen to see a new servant-girl :
yet not so, either, for my mother would have seen her inmie-
diately after her arrival, and not waited till the next day ; and,
moreover, she would have addressed her in a more kind and
friendly manner, and given her some words of comfort as well
as a plain exposition of her duties ; but IMrs. Murray did neither
the one nor the other. She just stepped into the schoolroom on
her return from oi-dering dinner in the housekeeper's room, bade
me good-morning, stood for tw^o minutes by the fire, said a few-
words about the weather and the " rather rough " journey I must
have had yesterday ; petted her youngest child — a boy of ten —
who had just been wiping his mouth and hands on her gown,
after indulging in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper's
stores ; told me what a sweet, good boy he was ; and then sailed
out, with a self-complacent smile upon her face : thinking, no
doubt, that she had done quite enough for the present, and
had been delightfully condescending into the bargain. Her
children evidently held the same opinion, and I alone thought
otherwise.
After this she looked in upon me once or twice, during the
absence of my pupils, to enlighten me concerning my duties to-
3$0 AGNES GREY.
wards them. For the girls she seemed anxious only to render
them as superficially attractive and showily accomplished as they
could possibly be made, without present trouble or discomfort
to themselves ; and I was to act accordingly — to study and strive
to amuse and oblige, instruct, refine, and polish, with the least
possible exertion on their part, and no exercise of authority on
mine. With regard to the two boys, it was much the same ;
only instead of accomplishments, I was to get the greatest possible
quantity of Latin grammar and Valpy's Delectus into their heads,
in order to fit them for school — the greatest possible quantity at
least without trouble to themselves. John might be a " little high-
spirited, " and Charles might be a little " nervous and tedious " —
" But at all events, Miss Grey, " said she, " I hope jj/oz^ will
keep your temper, and be mild and patient throughout ; espe-
cially with the dear little Charles : he is so extremely nervous and
susceptible, and so utterly unaccustomed to anything but the
tenderest treatment. You will excuse my naming these things
to you ; for the fact is, I have hitherto found all the governesses,
even the very best of them, faulty in this particular. They
wanted that meek and quiet spirit, which St. Matthew, or some
of them, says is better than the putting on of apparel — you will
know the passage to which I allude, for you are a clergyman's
daughter. But I have no doubt you will give satisfaction in this
respect as well as the rest. And remember, on all occasions,
when any of the young people do anything improper, if persuasion
and gentle remonstrance will not do, let one of the others come
and tell me ; for I can speak to them more plainly than it would
be proper for you to do. And make them as happy as you can,
Miss Grey, and I dare say you will do very well. "
I observed that while Mrs. Murray was so extremely solicitous
for the comfort and happiness of her children, and continually
talking about it, she never once mentioned mine ; though they
were at home surrounded by friends, and I an alien among
strangers ; and I did not yet know enough of the world, not to
be considerably surprised at this anomaly.
Miss Murray, otherwise Rosalie, was about sixteen when I
came, and decidedly a very pretty girl ; and in two years longer,
as time more completely developed her form and added grace to
her carriage and deportment, she became positively beautiful ;
and that in no common degree. She was tall and slender, yet
not thin ; perfectly formed, exquisitely fair, though not without
AGXES GREY. 3)1
a brilliant, healthy bloom ; her hair, which she wore in a profusion
of long ringlets, was of a very light brown inclining to yellow ;
her eyes were pale blue, but so clear and bright that few would
wish them darker ; the rest of her features were small, not quite
regular, and not remarkably otherwise : but altogether 5-0U could
not hesitate to pronounce her a very lovely girl. I wish 1 could say
as much for mind and disposition as I can for her form and face.
Yet think not I have any dreadful disclosures to make : she
was lively, light-hearted, and could be very agreeable, with those
who did not cross her will. Towards me, when I first came, she
was cold and haughty, then insolent and overbearing ; but on a
further acquaintance, she gradually laid aside her airs, and in
time became as deeply attached to me as it was possible for her
to be to one of my character and position : for she seldom lost
sight, for above half-an-hour at a time, of the fact of my being a
hireling and a poor curate's daughter. And yet, upon the whole,
I believe she respected me more than she herself was aware of ;
because I was the only person in the house who steadily professed
good principles, habitually spoke the truth, and generally en-
deavoured to make inclination bow to duty : and this I say, not,
of course, in commendation of myself, but to show the unfortunate
state of the family to which my services were, for the present,
devoted. There was no member of it in whom I regretted this
sad want of principle so much as Miss Murray herself ; not only
because she had taken a fancy to me, but because there was so
much of what was pleasant and prepossessing in herself, that, in
spite of her failings, I really liked her — when she did not rouse
my indignation, or ruffle my temper by too great a display of her
faults. These, however, I would fain persuade myself, were
rather the effect of her education than her disposition : she had
never been perfectly taught the distinction between right and
wrong ; she had, like her brothers and sisters, been suffered, from
infancy, to tyrannise over nurses, governesses, and servants ;
she had not been taught to moderate her desires, to control her
temper or bridle her will, or to sacrifice her own pleasure for the
good of others. Her temper being naturally good, she was never
violent or morose, but from constant indulgence and habitual
scorn of reason, she was often testy and capricious ; her mind
had never been cultivated : her intellect, at best, was somewhat
shallow ; she possessed considerable vivacity, some quickness of
perception, and some talent for music and the acquisition of
3)2 AGNES GREV.
languages, but till fifteen she had troubled herself to acquire
nothing ; — then the love of display had roused her faculties, and
induced her to apply herself, but only to the more showy accom-
plishments. And when I came it was the same : everything was
neglected but French, German, music, singing, dancing, fancy-
work, and a little drawing — such drawing as might produce the
greatest show with the smallest labour, and the principal parts
of which were generally done by me. For music and singing,
besides my occasional instructions, she had the attendance of the
best master the country afforded ; and in these accomplishments,
as well as in dancing, she certainly attained great proficiency.
To music, indeed, she devoted too much of her time : as,
governess though I was, I frequently told her ; but her mother
thought that if she liked it, she could not give too much time tc
the acquisition of so attractive an art. Of fancy-work I knew
nothing but what I gathered from my pupil and my own observa-
tion ; but no sooner was I initiated, than she made me useful in
twenty different ways : all the tedious parts of her work were
shifted on to my shoulders; such as stretching the frames, stitch-
ing in the canvas, sorting the wools and silks, putting in the
grounds, counting the stitches, rectifying mistakes, and finishing
the pieces she was tired of.
At sixteen, Miss Murray was something of a romp, yet not
more so than is natural and allowable for a girl of that age ;
but at seventeen, that propensity, like all other things, began to
give way to the ruling passion, and soon was swallowed up in
the all-absorbing ambition to attract and dazzle the other sex.
But enough of her : now let us turn to her sister.
Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoyden, of whom little
need be said. She was about two )'ears and a half younger than
her sister ; her features were larger, her complexion much darker.
She might possibly make a handsome woman ; but she was far
too big-boned and awkward ever to be called a pretty girl, and
at present she cared little about it. Rosalie knew all her charms,
and thought them even greater than they were, and valued them
more highly than she ought to have done, had they been three
times as great ; Matilda thought she was well enough, but cared
little about the matter ; still less did she care about the cultiva-
tion of her mind, and the acquisition of ornamental accomplish-
ments. The manner in which she learnt her lessons and practised
her music, was calculated to drive any governess to despair.
AGNES GREY. 353
Short-and easy as her tasks were, if done at all, they were slurred
over, at any time and in any way ; but generally at the least
convenient times, and in the way least beneficial to herself, and
least satisfactory to me : the short half-hour of practising was
horribly strummed through ; she, meantime, unsparingly abusing
me, either for interrupting her with corrections, or for not recti-
fying her mistakes before they were made, or something equally
unreasonable. Once or twice, I ventured to remonstrate with
her seriously for such irrational conduct ; but on each of those
occasions, I received such reprehensive expostulations from her
mother, as convinced me that, if I wished to keep the situation,
I must even let Miss Matilda go on in her own way.
When her lessons were over, however, her ill-humour was
generally over too : while riding her spirited pony, or romping
with the dogs or her brothers and sister, but especially with her
dear brother John, she was as happy as a lark. As an animal,
Matilda was all right, full of life, vigour, and activity ; as an in-
telligent being, she was barbarously ignorant, indocile, careless,
and irrational ; and, consequently, very distressing to one who
had the task of cultivating her understanding, reforming her
manners, and aiding her to acquire those ornamental attain-
ments which, unlike her sister, she despised as much as the rest.
Her mother was partly aware of her deficiencies, and gave me
many a lecture as to how I should try to form her tastes, and
endeavour to rouse and cherish her dormant vanity ; and, by
insinuating, skilful flattery, to win her attention to the desired
objects — which I would not do ; and how I should prepare and
smooth the path of learning till she could glide along it without
the least exertion to herself: which I could not, for nothing can
be taught to any purpose without some little exertion on the part
of the learner.
As a moral agent, Matilda was reckless, headstrong, violent,
and unamenable to reason. One proof of the deplorable state
of her mind was, that from her father's example she had learned
to swear like a trooper. Her mother was greatly shocked at the
" unladylike trick, " and wondered " how she had picked it up. "
" But you can soon break her of it. Miss Grey, " said she : " it is
only a habit, and if you will just gently remind her every time
she does so, I am sure she will soon lay it aside. " I not only
" gently reminded " her, I tried to impress upon her how wrong
it was, and how distressing to the ears of decent people ; but all
M
354 AGNES GREY.
in vain: I was only answered by a careless laugh, and, " Oh,
Miss Grey, how shocked you are ! I'm so glad ! " Or, " Well !
I can't help it ; papa shouldn't have taught me : I learned it all
from him ; and may be a bit from the coachman. "
Her brother John, alias Master Murray, was about eleven when
I came : a fine, stout, healthy boy, frank and good-natured in the
main, and might have been a decent lad had he been properly
educated ; but now he was as rough as a young bear, boisterous,
unruly, unprincipled, untaught, unteachable — at least, for a
governess under his mother's eye. His masters at school might
be able to manage him better — for to school he was sent, greatly
to my relief, in the course of a year ; in a state, it is true, of
scandalous ignorance as to Latin, as well as the more useful
though more neglected things : and this, doubtless, would all
be laid to the account of his education having been entrusted to
an ignorant female teacher, who had presumed to take in hand
what she was wholly incompetent to perform. I was not de-
livered from his brother till full twelve months after, when he
also was despatched in the same state of disgraceful ignorance
as the former.
Master Charles was his mother's peculiar darling. He was
little more than a year younger than John, but much smaller,
paler, and less active and robust ; a pettish, cowardly, capri-
cious, selfish little fellow, only active in doing mischief, and only
clever in inventing falsehoods : not simply to hide his faults, but,
in mere malicious wantonness, to bring odium upon others. In
fact. Master Charles was a very great nuisance to me : it was a
trial of patience to live with him peaceably ; to watch over him
was worse ; and to teach him, or pretend to teach him, was
inconceivable. At ten years old, he could not read correctly the
easiest line in the simplest book ; and as, according to his
mother's principle, he was to be told every word, before he had
time to hesitate or examine its orthography, and never even to
be informed, as a stimulant to exertion, that other boys were
more forward than he, it is not surprising that he made but little
progress during the two years I had charge of his education.
His minute portions of Latin grammar, & c., were to be repeated
over to him, till he chose to say he knew them, and then he was
to be helped to say them ; if he made mistakes in his little easy
sums in arithmetic, they were to be shown him at once, and the
sum done for him, instead of his being left to exercise his faculties
AGNES GREY. 3$5
in finding them out himself; so that, of course, he took no
pains to avoid mistakes, but frequently set down his figures at
random, without any calculation at all.
I did not invariably confine myself to these rules : it was
against my conscience to do so ; but I seldom could venture to
deviate from them in the slightest degree, without incurring the
wrath of my little pupil, and subsequently of his mamma ; to
whom he would relate my transgressions, maliciously exaggerated,
or adorned with embellishments of his own ; and often, in con-
sequence, was I on the point of losing or resigning my situation.
But, for their sakes at home, I smothered my pride and sup-
pressed my indignation, and managed to struggle on till my
little tormentor was despatched to school ; his father declaring
that home education was " no go for him, it was plain ; his
mother spoiled him outrageously, and his governess could make
no hand of him at all. "
A few more observations about Horton Lodge and its ongoings,
and I have done with dry description for the present. The house
was a very respectable one ; superior to Mr. Bloomfieli's, both
in age, size, and magnificence : the garden was not so tastefully
laid out ; but instead of the smooth-shaven lawn, the young trees
guarded by palings, the grove of upstart poplars, and the plan-
tation of firs, there was a wide park, stocked wdth deer, and
beautified by fine old trees. The surrounding country itself was
pleasant, as far as fertile fields, flourishing trees, quiet green
lanes, and smiling hedges with wild flowers scattered along their
banks, could make it ; but it was depressingly flat to one born
and nurtured among the rugged hills of .
We were situated nearly two miles from the village church,
and, consequently, the family carriage was put in requisition
every Sunday morning, and sometimes oftener. Mr. and Mrs.
Murray generally thought it sufficient to show themselves at
church once in the course of the day ; but frequently the children
preferred going a second time to wandering about the grounds
all the day with nothing to do. If some of my pupils chose to
walk and take me with them, it was well for me ; for otherwise,
my position in the carriage was, to be crushed into the corner
farthest from the open window, and with my back to the horses :
a position which invariably made me sick ; and, if I were not
actually obliged to leave the church in the middle of the service,
my devotions were disturbed with a feeling of languor and sick-
356 AGNES GREY.
liness, and the tormenting fear of its becoming worse ; and a
depressing headache was generally my companion throughout
the day, which would otherwise have been one of welcome rest,
and holy, calm enjoyment.
" It's very odd. Miss Grey, that the carriage should always
make you sick : it never makes vie, " remarked Miss Matilda.
" Nor me either, " said her sister, " but I dare say it would,
if I sat where she does — such a nasty, horrid place. Miss Grey ;•
I wonder how you can bear it ! "
I am obliged to bear it, since no choice is left me — I might have
answered ; but in tenderness for their feelings I only replied —
" Oh ! it is but a short way, and if I am not sick in church, I
don't mind it. "
If I were called upon to give a description of the usual divisions
and arrangements of the day, I should find it a very difficult matter.
I had all my meals in the schoolroom with my pupils, at such times
as suited their fancy : sometimes they would ring for dinner before
it was half-cooked ; sometimes they would keep it waiting on the
table for above an hour, and then be out of humour because the
potatoes were cold, and the gravy covered with cakes of solid fat ;
sometimes they would have tea at four ; frequently, they would
storm at the servants because it was not in precisely at five ; and
when these orders were obeyed, by way of encouragement to
punctuality, they would keep it on the table till seven or eight.
Their hours of study were managed in much the same way ; ray
judgment or convenience was never once consulted. Sometimes
Matilda and John would determine''to get all the plaguy business
over before breakfast, " and send the maid to call me up at half-
past five, without any scruple or apology ; sometimes, I was told
to be ready precisely at six, and, having dressed in a hurry, came
down to an empty room, and after waiting a long time in suspense,
discovered that they had changed their minds, and were still in
bed ; or perhaps, if it were a fine summer morning. Brown would
come to tell me that the young ladies and gentlemen had taken
a holiday, and were gone out ; and then, I was kept waiting for
breakfast till I was almost ready to faint : they having fortified
themselves with something before they went.
Often they would do their lessons in the open air ; which I had
nothing to say against : except that I frequently caught cold by
sitting on the damp grass, or from exposure to the evening dew,
or some insidious draught, which seemed to have no injurious
AGNES GREY. 357
effect on them. It was quite right that they should be hardy ;
yet, surely, they might have been taught some consideration for
others who were less so. But I must not blame them for what
was, perhaps, my own fault ; for I never made any particular
objections to sitting where they pleased ; foolishly choosing to
risk the consequences, rather than trouble them for my con-
venience. Their indecorous manner of doing their lessons was
quite as remarkable as the caprice displayed in their choice of time
and place. " While receiving my instructions, or repeating what
they had learned, they would lounge upon the sofa, lie on the rug,
stretch, yawn, talk to each other, or look out of the window;
whereas, I could not so much as stir the fire, or pick up the
handkerchief I had dropped, without being rebuked for inatten-
tion by one of my pupils, or told that " mamma would not like
me to be so careless. "
The servants, seeing in what little estimation the governess was
held by both parents and children, regulated their behaviour by
the same standard. I have frequently stood up for them, at the
risk of some injury to myself, against the tyranny and injustice of
their young masters and mistresses ; and I always endeavoured to
give them as little trouble as possible : but they entirely neglected
my comfort, despised my requests, and slighted my directions.
All servants, I am convinced, would not have done so ; but
domestics in general, being ignorant and little accustomed to
reason and reflection, are too easily corrupted by the carelessness
•and bad example of those above them ; and these, I think, were
not of the best order to begin with.
I sometimes felt myself degraded by the life I led, and ashamed
of submitting to so many indignities ; and sometimes I thought
myself a fool for caring so much about them, and feared I must
be sadly wanting in Christian humility, or that charity which
" suffereth long and is kind, seeketh not her own, is not easily
provoked, beareth all things, endureth all things. " But, with time
and patience, matters began to be slightly ameliorated : slowly,
it is true, and almost imperceptibly ; but I got rid of my male
pupils (that was no trifling advantage), and the girls, as I inti-
mated before concerning one of them, became a little less insolent,
and began to show some symptoms of esteem. " Miss Grey was
a queer creature : she never flattered, and did not praise them
half enough ; but whenever she did speak favourably of them, or
anything belonging to them, they could be quite sure her appro-
358 AGNES GREY.
bation was sincere. She was very obliging, quiet, and peaceable
in the main, but there were some things that put her out of
temper : they did not much care for that, to be sure, but still it
was better to keep her in tune ; as when she was hi a good humour
she would talk to them, and be very agreeable and amusing some-
times, in her way ; which was quite different to mamma's, but still
very well for a change. She had her own opinions on every sub-
ject, and kept steadily to them — very tiresome opinions they often
were ; as she was always thinking of what was right and what
was wrong, and had a strange reverence for matters connected
with religion, and an unaccountable liking for good people. "
CHAPTER VIII.
THE " COMING OUT. "
At eighteen. Miss Murray was to emerge from the quiet ob-
scurity of the schoolroom into the full blaze of the fashionable
world — as much of it, at least, as could be had out of London ;
for her papa could not be persuaded to leave his rural pleasures
and pursuits, even for a few weeks'residence in town. She
was to make her dihut on the 3rd of January, at a magnificent
ball, which her mamma proposed to give to all nobility and
choice gentry of O and its neighbourhood for twenty miles
round. Of course, she looked forward to it with the wildest im-
patience, and the most extravagant anticipations of delight.
" Miss Grey, " said she, one evening, a month before the all-
important day, as I was perusing a long and extremely interesting
letter of my sister's — which I had just glanced at in the morning
to see that it contained no very bad news, and kept till now, un-
able before to find a quiet moment for reading it — " Miss Grey,
do put away that dull, stupid letter, and listen to me ! I'm sure
my talk must be far more amusing than that. "
She seated herself on the low stool at my feet ; and I, sup-
pressing a sigh of vexation, began to fold up the epistle.
" You should tell the good people at home not to bore you
with such long letters, " said she ; " and above all, do bid them
write on proper note-paper, and not on those great vulgar sheets.
You shotald see the charming little ladylike notes mamma writes
to her friends. "
AGNES GREY.
3)9
" The good people at home, " replied I, " know very well that
the longer their letters are, the better I like them. I should be
very sorry to receive a charming little ladylike note from any of
them ; and I thought you were too much of a lady yourself,
Miss Murray, to talk about the'vulgarity'of writing on a large
sheet of paper. "
" Well, I only said it to tease you. But now I want to talk
about the ball ; and to tell you that you positively must put off
your holidays till it is over. "
" Why so? — I shall not be present at the ball. "
''No, but you will see the rooms decked out before it begins,
and hear the music, and, above all, see me in my splendid new
dress. I shall be so charming, you'll be ready to worship me—
you really must stay. "
''I should like to see you very much ; but I shall have many
opportunities of seeing you equally charming, on the occasion of
some of the numberless balls and parties that are to be, and I
cannot disappoint my friends by postponing my return so long. "
''Oh, never mind your friends ! Tell them we won't let you go. "
''But, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment to myself :
I long to see them as much as they to see me — perhaps more. "
" Well, but it is such a short time. "
" Nearly a fortnight by my computation ; and, besides, I can-
not bear the thoughts of a Christmas spent from home : and,
moreover, my sister is going to be married. "
" Is she — when? "
" Not till next month ; but I want to be there to assist her in
making preparations, and to make the best of her company
while we have her. "
" Why didn't you tell me before ? "
" I've only got the news in this letter, which you stigmatise as
dull and stupid, and won't let me read. "
" To whom is she to be married? "
" To Mr. Richardson, the vicar of a neighbouring parish. "
" Is he rich? "
" No ; only comfortable. "
" Is he handsome ? "
" No, only decent. "
" Young? "
" No ; only middling. "
''O mercy ! what a wretch ! What sort of a house is it ? "
360 AGNES GREY.
" A quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-clad porch, an old-
fashioned garden, and "
" O stop ! — you'll make me sick. How caji she bear it ? "
" I expect she'll not only be able to bear it, but to be very
happy. You did not ask me if Mr. Richardson were a good,
wise, or amiable man ; I could have answered Yes, to all these
questions — at least so Mary thinks, and I hope she will not find
herself mistaken. "
''But — miserable creature ! how can she think of spending
her life there, cooped up with that nasty old man ; and no hope
of change? "
" He is not old : he's only six or seven and thirty ; and she
herself is twenty-eight, and as sober as if she were fifty. "
" Oh ! that's better then — they're well matched : but do they
call him the'worthy vicar'? "
" I don't know ; but if they do, I believe he merits the epithet. "
" Mercy, how shocking ! and will she wear a white apron, and
make pies and puddings? "
" I don't know about the white apron, but I dare say she will
make pies and puddings now and then ; but that will be no
great hardship, as she has done it before. "
" And will she go about in a plain shawl, and a large straw
bonnet, carrying tracts and bone soup to her husband's poor
parishioners? "
" I'm not clear about that ; but I dare say she will do her best
to make them comfortable in body and mind, in accordance with
our mother's example. "
CHAPTER IX.
THE BALL,
" Now, Miss Grey, " exclaimed Miss Murray, immediately I
entered the schoolroom, after having taken off my outdoor gar-
ments, upon returning from my four weeks'recreation, " Now —
shut the door, and sit down, and I'll tell you all about the ball. "
" No, — damn it, no! " shouted Miss Matilda. " Hold your
tongue, can't ye ? and let me tell her about my new mare — such
a splendour. Miss Grey ! a fine blood mare "
" Do be quiet, Matilda ; and let me tell my news first, "
AGNES GREY. 36 1
" No, no, Rosalie ; you'll be such a damned long time over it
— she shall hear me first — I'll be hanged if she doesn't ! "
" I'm sorry to hear, Miss Matilda, that you've not got rid of
that shocking habit yet. "
" Well, I can't help it : but I'll never say a wicked word again,
if you'll only listen to me, and tell Rosahe to hold her confounded
tongue. "
Rosalie remonstrated, and I thought I should have been torn in
pieces between them ; but Miss Matilda having the loudest voice,
her sister at length gave in, and suffered her to tell her story first :
so I was doomed to hear a long account of her splendid mare, its
breeding and pedigree, its paces, its action, its spirit, & c. , and of
her own amazing skill and courage in riding it ; concluding with
an assertion that she could clear a five-barred gate''like winking, "
that papa said she might hunt the next time the hounds met, and
mamma had ordered a bright scarlet hunting-habit for her.
" Oh, Matilda ! what stories you are telling ! " exclaimed her
sister.
" Well, " answered she, no whit abashed, " I know I could
clear a five-barred gate, if I tried, and papa will say I may
hunt, and mamma will order the habit when I ask it. "
" Well, now get along, " replied Miss Murray ; " and do, dear
Alatilda, try to be a little more ladylike. Miss Grey, I wish you
7voi(ld tell her not to use such shocking words ; she will call her
horse a mare : it is so inconceivably shocking ! and then she uses
such dreadful expressions in describing it : she i?mst have learned
it from the grooms. It nearly puts me into fits when she begins. "
" I learned it from papa, you ass ! and his jolly friends, " said
the young lady, vigorously cracking a hunting-whip, which she
habitually carried in her hand. " I'm as good a judge of horse-
flesh as the best of'm. "
" Well, now get along, you shocking girl ! I really shall take a
fit if you go on in such a way. And now, Miss Grey, attend to
me ; I'm going to tell you about the ball. You must be dying to
hear about it, I know. Oh, sjich a ball ! You never saw or heard,
or read, or dreamt of anything like it in all your life ! The decora-
tions, the entertainment, the supper, the music were indescribable !
and then the guests ! There were two noblemen, three " baronets,
and five titled ladies, and other ladies and gentlemen innumerable.
The ladies, of course, were of no consequence to me, except to put
me in a good humour with myself, by showing how ugly and
362 AGNES GREY.
awkward most of them were ; and the best, mamma told me, —
the most transcendent beauties among them, were nothing to
me. As for mc, Miss Grey— I'm so sony you didn't see me ! I
was charming — wasn't I, Matilda? "
" Middling. "
" No, but I really was—'aX least so mamma said — and Brown
and Williamson. Brown said she was sure no gentleman could
set eyes on me without falling in love that minute ; and so I may
be allowed to be a little vain. I know you think me a shocking,
conceited, frivolous girl ; but then, you know, I don't attribute
it all to my personal attractions : I give some praise to the hair-
dresser, and some to my exquisitely lovely dress — you must see it
to-morrow — white gauze over pink satin — and so sweetly made !
and a necklace and bracelet of beautiful, large pearls ! "
" I have no doubt you looked very charming : but should that
delight you so very much? "
" Oh, no ! — not that alone ! but then, I was so much admired ;
and I made so majiy conquests in that one night — you'd be aston-
ished to hear "
" But what good will they do you? "
" What good ! Think of any woman asking that ! "
" Well, I should think one conquest would be enough ; and
too much, unless the subjugation were mutual. "
" Oh, but you know I never agree with you on those points.
Now, wait a bit, and I'll tell you my principal admirers — those
who made themselves very conspicuous that night and after : for
I've been to two parties since. Unfortunately the two noblemen,
Lord G and Lord F , were married, or I might have
condescended to be particularly gracious to them ; as it was, I
did not : though Lord F , who hates his wife, was evidently
much struck with me. He asked me to dance with him twice —
he is a charming dancer, by-the-bye, and so am I : you can't
think how well I did — I was astonished at myself. My lord was
very complimentary too— rather too much so in fact — and I
thought proper to be a little haughty and repellent ; but I had
the pleasure of seeing his nasty, cross wife ready to perish with
spite and vexation "
" Oh, Miss Murray ! you don't mean to say that such a thing
could really give you pleasure ! However cross or "
" Well, I know it's very wrong; — but never mind ! I mean
to be good some time — only don't preach now, there's a good
AGNES GREY. 36 J
■creature. I haven't told you half yet. Let me see. Oh ! I was
going to tell you how many unmistakable admirers I had : — Sir
Thomas Ashby was one, — Sir Hugh Meltham and Sir Broadley
Wilson are old codgers, only fit companions for papa and mamma.
Sir Thomas is young, rich, and gay ; but an ugly beast, never-
theless : however, mamma says I should not mind that after a
few months'acquaintance. Then, there was Henry Meltham,
Sir Hugh's younger son : rather good-looking, and a pleasant
fellow to flirt with : but being a younger son, that is all he is
good for ; then there was young Mr. Green, rich enough, but of
no family, and a great stupid fellow, a mere country booby ; and
then, our good rector, Mr. Hatfield : an humble admirer he
ought to consider himself ; but I fear he has forgotten to number
humility among his stock of Christian virtues. "
" Was Mr. Hatfield at the ball? "
" Yes, to be sure. Did you think he was too good to go? "
" I thought he might consider it unclerical. "
" By ;2t > means. He did not profane his cloth by dancing !
but it was with difficulty he could refrain, poor man : he looked
as if be were dying to ask my hand just for one set ; and— oh !
by-the-bye — he's got a new curate : that seedy old fellow Mr.
Bligh has got his long-wished-for living at last, and is gone. "
" And what is the new one like? "
" Oh, .f^^i:/^ a beast ! Weston his name is. I can give you his
•description in three words — an insensate, ugly, stupid block-
head. That's four, but no matter — enough oi him now. "
Then she returned to the ball, and gave me a further account
of her deportment there, and at the several parties she had since
attended ; and further particulars respecting Sir Thomas Ashby
and Messrs. Meltham, Green, and Hatfield, and the ineffaceable
impression she had wrought upon each of them.
" Well, which of the four do you like best ? " said I, suppress-
ing my third or fourth yawn,
" I detest them all ! " replied she, shaking her bright ringlets
in vivacious scorn.
" That means, I suppose, I like them all — but which most? "
" Xo, I really detest them all ; but Harry Meltham is the hand-
somest and most amusing, and Mr. Hatfield the cleverest, Sir
Thomas the wickedest, and Mr. Green the most stupid. But
the one I'm to have, I suppose, if I'm doomed to have any of
them, is Sir Thomas Ashby. "
364 AGNES GREY.
" Surely not, if he's so wicked, and if you dislike him? "
" Oh, I don't mind his being wicked : he's all the better for
that ; and as for disliking him — I shouldn't greatly object to being
Lady Ashby of Ashby Park, if I must marry. But if I could be
always young, I would be always single. I should like to enjoy
myself thoroughly, and coquet with all the world, till I am on the
verge of being called an old maid ; and then, to escape the infamy
of that, after having made ten thousand conquests, to break all
their hearts save one, by marrying some high-born, rich, indul-
gent husband, whom, on the other hand, fifty ladies were dying
to have. "
" Well, as long as you entertain these views, keep single by all
means, and never marry at all : not even to escape the infamy
of old-maidenhood. "
CHAPTER X.
THE CHURCH.
" Well, IVIiss Grey, what do you think of the new curate? "
asked Miss Murray, on our return from church the Sunday
after the recommencement of our duties.
" I can scarcely tell, " was my reply : " I have not even heard
him preach. "
" Well, but you saw him, didn't you? "
" Yes, but I cannot pretend to judge of a man's character by
a single, cursory glance at his face. "
" But isn't he ugly? "
" He did not strike me as being particularly so ; I don't dislike
that cast of countenance : but the only thing I particularly noticed
about him was his style of reading ; which appeared to me good
— infinitely better, at least, than Mr. Hatfield's. He read the
Lessons as if he were bent on giving full effect to every passage :
it seemed as if the most careless person could not have helped
attending, nor the most ignorant have failed to understand ;
and the prayers he read as if he were not reading at all, but
praying earnestly and sincerely from his own heart. "
" Oh, yes, that's all he is good for : he can plod through the
service well enough ; but he has not a single idea beyond it. "
" How do you know? "
" Oh ! I know perfectly well ; T am an excellent judge in such
AGNES GREY. 365
matters. Did you see how he went out of church? stumping
along — as if there were nobody there but himself— never looking
to the right hand or the left, and evidently thinking of nothing
but just getting out of the church, and, perhaps, home to his
dinner : his great stupid head could contain no other idea. "
''I suppose you would have had him cast a glance into the
squire's pew, " said I, laughing at the vehemence of her hostility.
''Indeed ! I should have been highly indignant if he had
dared to do such a thing ! " replied she, haughtily tossing her
head; then, after a moment's reflection, she added — " Well,
well ! I suppose he's good enough for his place : but I'm glad
I'm not dependent on him for amusement— that's all. Did you
see how Mr. Hatfield hurried out to get a bow from me, and be
in time to put us into the carriage? "
''Yes, " answered I ; internally adding, " and I thought it some-
what derogatory to his dignity as a clergyman to come flying from
the pulpit in such eager haste to shake hands with the squire,
and hand his wife and daughters into their carriage : and, more-
over, I owe him a grudge for nearly shutting me out of it ; " for,
in fact, though I was standing before his face, close beside the
carriage steps, waiting to get in, he would persist in putting them
up and closing the door, till one of the family stopped him by
calling out that the governess was not in yet ; then, without a
word of apology, he departed, wishing them good-morning, and
leaving the footman to finish the business.
Noia be?ie. — Mr. Hatfield never spoke to me, neither did Sir
Hugh or Lady Meltham, nor Mr. Harry or Miss Meltham, nor
Mr. Green or his sisters, nor any other lady or gentleman who
frequented that church : nor, in fact, any one that visited at
Horton Lodge.
Miss jMurray ordered the carriage again, in the afternoon, for
herself and her sister : she said it was too cold for them to enjoy
themselves in the garden : and besides, she believed Harry i\Iel-
tham would be at church. " For, " said she, smiling slily at her
o%vn fair image in the glass, " he has been a most exemplary
attendant at church these last few Sundays : you would think
he was quite a good Christian. And you may go with, us. Miss
Grey : I want you to see him ; he is so greatly improved since
be returned from abroad — you can't think ! And besides, then
you will have an opportunity of seeing the beautiful Mr. Weston
again, and of hearing him preach. "
366 AGNES GREY.
I did hear him preach, and was decidedly pleased with the evan-
gehcal truth of his doctrine, as well as the earnest simplicity of
his manner, and the clearness and force of his style. It was truly
refreshing to hear such a sermon, after being so long accustomed
to the dry, prosy discourses of the former curate, and the still less
edifying harangues of the rector. Mr. Hatfield would come sail-
ing up the aisle, or rather sweeping along like a whirlwind, with
this rich silk gown flying behind him and rustling against the pew
doors, mount the pulpit like a conqueror ascending his triumphal
car ; then, sinking on the velvet cushion in an attitude of studied
grace, remain in silent prostration for a certain time ; then mutter
over a Collect, and gabble through the Lord's Prayer, rise, draw
off one bright lavender glove, to give the congregation the benefit
of his sparkling rings, lightly pass his fingers through his well-
curled hair, flourish a cambric handkerchief, recite a very short
passage, or, perhaps, a mere phrase of Scripture, as a headpiece
to his discourse, and, finally, deliver a composition which, as a
composition, might be considered good, though far too studied
and too artificial to be pleasing to me : the propositions were
well laid down, the arguments logically conducted ; and yet, it
was sometimes hard to listen quietly throughout, without some
slight demonstrations of disapproval or impatience.
His favourite subjects were Church disciphne, rites and cere-
monies, apostoUcal succession, the duty of reverence and obedi-
ence to the clergy, the atrocious criminality of dissent, the absolute
necessity of observing all the forms of godliness, the reprehensible
presumption of individuals who attempted to think for themselves
in matters connected with religion, or to be guided by their own in-
terpretations of Scripture, and occasionally (to please his wealthy
parishioners) the necessity of deferential obedience from the poor
to the rich — supporting his maxims and exhortations throughout
with quotations from the Fathers : with whom he appeared to be
far better acquainted than with the Apostles and Evangelists, and
whose importance he seemed to consider at least equal to theirs.
But now and then he gave us a sermon of a different order — what
some would call a very good one ; but sunless and severe : repre-
senting the Deity as a terrible task-master, rather than a benevo-
lent father. Yet, as I listened, I felt inclined to think the man
was sincere in all he said : he must have changed his views, and
become decidedly religious ; gloomy and austere, yet still devout.
But such illusions were usually dissipated, on coming out of
AGNES GREY. 367
church, by hearing his voice in jocund colloquy with some of the
Melthams or Greens, or, perhaps, the Murrays themselves ; pro-
bably laughing at his own sermon, and hoping that he had given
the rascally people something to think about ; perchance, exult-
ing in the thought that old Betty Holmes would now lay aside
the sinful indulgence of her pipe, which had been her daily solace
for upwards of thirty years ; that George Higgins would be
frightened out of his Sabbath evening walks, and Thomas Jack-
son would be sorely troubled in his conscience, and shaken in his
sure and certain hope of a joyful resurrection at the last day.
Thus, I could not but conclude that Mr. Hatfield was one of
those who " bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and
lay them upon men's shoulders, while they themselves will not
move them with one of their fingers, " and who " make the word
of God of none effect by their traditions, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men. " I was well pleased to observe that
the new curate resembled him, as far as I could see, in none of
these particulars.
" Well, Miss Grey, what do you think of him now? " said Miss
Murray, as we took our places in the carriage after service.
" No harm still, " replied I.
" No harm ! " repeated she, in amazement. " What do you
mean
" I mean, I think no worse of him than I did before. "
" No worse ! I should think not indeed— quite the contrary !
Is he not greatly improved? "
" Oh, yes ; very much indeed, " replied I ; for I had now dis-
covered that it was Harry ^Meltham she meant, not Mr. Weston.
That gentleman had eagerly come forward to speak to the young
ladies : a thing he would hardly have ventured to d® had their
mother been present ; he had likewise politely handed them into
the carriage. He had not attempted to shut me out, like Mr,
Hatfield ; neither, of course, had he offered me his assistance (I
should not have accepted it, if he had), but as long as the door
remained open he had stood smirking and chatting with them,
and then lifted his hat and departed to his own abode : but I
had scarcely noticed him all the time. My companions, how-
ever, had been more observant ; and, as we rolled along, they
discussed between them not only his looks, words, and actions,
but every feature of his face, and every article of his apparel.
" You shan't have him all to yourself, Rosalie, " said Mis;
368 AGNES GREY.
Matilda at the close of this discussion ; " I like him : I know
he'd make a nice, jolly companion for me. "
" Well, you're quite welcome to him, Matilda, " replied her
sister, in a tone of affected indifference.
" And I'm sure, " continued the other, " he admires me quite
as much as he does you ; doesn't he. Miss Grey? "
" I don't know ; I'm not acquainted with his sentiments. "
" Well, but he does though. "
" My dear Matilda ! nobody will ever admire you till you get
rid of your rough, awkward manners. "
" Oh, stuff! Harry Meltham likes such manners; and so do
papa's friends. "
" Well, you may captivate old men, and younger sons ; but
nobody else, I am sure, will ever take a fancy to you. "
" I don't care: I'm not always grubbing after money, like
you and mamma. If my husband is able to keep a few good
horses and dogs, I shall be quite satisfied ; and all the rest may
go to the devil ! "
" Well, if you use such shocking expressions, I'm sure no real
gentleman will ever venture to come near you. Really, Miss
Grey, you should not let her do so. "
" I can't possibly prevent it. Miss Murray. "
''And you're quite mistaken, Matilda, in supposing that Harry
Meltham admires you : I assure you he does nothing of the
kind. "
Matilda was beginning an angry reply ; but, happily, our jour-
ney was now at an end ; and the contention was cut short by the
footman opening the carriage door, and letting down the steps
for our descent.
CHAPTER XI.
THE COTTAGERS.
As I had now only one regular pupil— though she contrived to
give me as much trouble as three or four ordinary ones, and
though her sister still took lessons in German and drawing — I had
considerably more time at my o\\ n disposal than I had ever been
blessed with before, since I had taken upon me the governess's
yoke ; which time I devoted partly to correspondence with my
AGNES GREY. 369
friends, partly to reading, study, and the practice of music, sing-
ing, & .C., partly to wandering in the grounds or adjacent fields,
with my pupils if they wanted me, alone if they did not.
Often, when they had no more agreeable occupation at hand,
the Misses Murray would amuse themselves with visiting the
poor cottagers on their father's estate, to receive their flattering
homage, or to hear the old stories or gossiping news of the garru-
lous old women ; or, perhaps, to enjoy the purer pleasure of mak
ing the poor people happy with their cheering presence and their
occasional gifts, so easily bestowed, so thankfully received. Some-
times, I was called upon to accompany one or both of the sisters
in these visits ; and sometimes I was desired to go alone, to fulfil
some promise which they had been more ready to make than
to perform ; to carry some small donation, or read to one who
was sick or seriously disposed : and thus I made a few acquaint-
ances among the cottagei's ; and, occasionally, I went to see them
on my own account.
I generally had more satisfaction in going alone than with either
of the young ladies ; for they, chiefly owing to their defective educa-
tion, comported themselves towards their inferiors in a manner
that was highly disagreeable for me to witness. They never, in
thought, exchanged places with them; and, consequently, had
no consideration for their feelings, regarding them as an ordei
of beings entirely different from themselves. They would watch
the poor creatures at their meals, making uncivil remarks about
their food, and their manner of eating ; they would laugh at their
simple notions and provincial expressions, till some of them
scarcely durst venture to speak ; they would call the grave elderly
men and women old fools and silly old blockheads to their faces ;
and all this without meaning to offend. I could see that the
people were often hurt and annoyed by such conduct, though
their fear of the " grand ladies " prevented them from testifying
any resentment ; but ^ksj never perceived it. They thought that,
as these cottagers were poor and untaught, they must be stupid
and brutish ; and as long as they, their superiors, condescended
to talk to them, and to give them shillings and half-crowns, or
articles of clothing, they had a right to amuse themselves, even
at their expense ; and the people must adore them as " angels of
light, condescending to minister to their necessities, and enlighten
their humble dwellings.
I made many and various attempt? to deliver m^- pupils from
370 AGNES GREY.
these delusive notions without alarming their pride — which was f
easily offended, and not soon appeased — but with little apparent i
result ; and I know not which was the more reprehensible of the
two : Matilda was more rude and boisterous ; but from Rosalie's
womanly age and ladylike exterior better things were expected :
yet she was as provokingly careless and inconsiderate as a giddy
child of twelve.
One bright day in the last week of February, I was walking in
the park, enjoying the threefold luxury of solitude, a book, and
pleasant weather ; for Miss Matilda had set out on her daily
ride, and Miss Murray was gone in the carriage with her mamma
to pay some morning calls. But it struck me that I ought to
leave these selfish pleasures, and the park with its glorious canopy
of bright blue sky, the west wind sounding through its yet leafless
branches, the snow-wreaths still lingering in its hollows, but
melting fast beneath the sun, and the graceful deer browsing on
its moist herbage, already assuming the freshness and verdure of
spring — and go to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow,
whose son was at work all day in the fields, and who was afflicted
with an inflammation in the eyes ; which had for some time
incapacitated her from reading : to her own great grief, for she
was a woman of a serious, thoughtful turn of mind. I accord-
ingly went, and found her alone, as usual, in her httle, close,
dark cottage, redolent of smoke and confined air, but as tidy and
clean as she could make it. She was seated beside her little fire
(consisting of a few red cinders and a bit of stick), busily knitting,
with a small sackcloth cushion at her feet, placed for the accom-
modation of her gentle friend the cat ; who was seated thereon
with her long tail half encircling her velvet paws, and her half-
closed eyes dreamily gazing on the low, crooked fender.
" Well, Nancy, how are you to-day ? "
" Why, middling, miss, i'myseln — my eyes is no better, but
I'm a deal easier i'my mind nor I have been, " replied she, rising
to welcome me with a contented smile : which I was glad to see,
for Nancy had been somewhat afflicted with religious melancholy.
I congratulated her upon the change. She agreed that it was a
great blessing, and expressed herself''right down thankful for
it ; " adding, " If it please God to spare my sight, and make me
so as I can read my Bible again, I think I shall be as happy as
a queen. "
" I hope He will, Nancy, " replied I; " and, meantime, I'll
AGNES GREY. 37 1
come and read to )^ou now and then, when I have a httle time
to spare. "
With expressions of gi-ateful pleasure, the poor woman moved
to get me a chair ; but, as I saved her the trouble, she busied
herself with stirring the fire, and adding a few more sticks to the
decaying embers ; and then, taking her well-used Bible from the
shelf, dusted it carefully, and gave it me. On my asking if there
was any particular part she should like me to read, she answered —
" Well, Miss Grey, if it's all the same to you I should like to
hear that chapter in the First Epistle of St. John, that says,'God
is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God
in him.'"
With a little searching, I found these words in the fourth
chapter. When I came to the seventh verse she interrupted me,
and, with needless apologies for such a liberty, desired me to
read it very slowly, that she might take it all in, and dwell on
every word ; hoping I would excuse her, as she was but a''simple
body. "
" The wisest person, " I replied, " might think over each of
these verses for an hour, and be all the better for it ; and I would
rather read them slowly than not. "
Accordingly, I finished the chapter as slowly as need be, and
at the same time as impressively as I could ; my auditor listened
most attentively all the while, and sincerely thanked me when I
had done. I sat still about half a minute to give her time to
reflect upon it ; when, somewhat to my surprise, she broke the
pause by asking me how I liked Mr. Weston ?
" I don't know, " I replied, a little startled by the suddenness
of the question ; " I think he preaches very well. "
" Ay, he does so ; and talks well too. "
" Does he? "
" He does. Maybe, you haven't seen him — not to talk to
him much, yet? "
" No, I never see any one to talk to— except the young ladies
of the hall. "
" Ah ; they're nice, kind young ladies ; but they can't talk as
he does. "
''Then he comes to see you, Nancy ? "
" He does, miss ; and I'se thankful for it. He comes to see
all us poor bodies a deal ofter nor Maister Bligh, or th'Rector
ever did ; an'it's well he does, for he's always welcome : we
372 AGNES GREY.
can't say as much for th'Rector — there is'at says they're fair
feared on him. When he comes into a liouse, they say he's sure
to find summut wrong, and begin a cahing'em as soon as he
crosses th'doorstuns : but maybe he thinks it his duty-hke to
tell'em what's wrong. And very oft he comes o'purpose to
reprove folk for not coming to church, or not kneeling an'stand-
ing when other folk does, or going to the Methody chapel, or
summut o'that sort : but I can't say'at he ever fund much fault
wi'me. He came to see me once or twice, afore Maister Weston
come, when I was so ill troubled in my mind ; and as I had only
very poor health besides, I made bold to send for him — and he
came right enough. I was sore distressed. Miss Grey — thank
God, it's owered now — but when I took my Bible, I could get
no comfort of it at all. That very chapter'at you've just been
reading troubled me as much as aught —'He tliat loveth not,
knoweth not God.'It seemed fearsome to me ; for I felt that
I loved neither God nor man as I should do, and could not, if
I tried ever so. And th'chapter afore, where it says —'He that
is born of God cannot commit sin.'And another place where
it says—'Love is the fulfilling of the Law.'And many, many
others, miss ; I should fair weary you out, if I was to tell them
all. But all seemed to condemn me, and to show me'at I was
not in the right way ; and as I knew not how to get into it, I
sent our Bill to beg Maister Hatfield to be as kind as look in on
me some day ; and when he came, 1 telled him all my troubles. "
" And what did he say, Nancy ? "
" Why, miss, he seemed to scorn me. I might be mista'en—
but he like gave a sort of a whistle, and I saw a bit of a smile
on his face ; and he said,'Oh it's all stuff! You've been among
the Methodists, my good woman.'But I telled him I'd never
been near the Methodies. And then he said—
"'Well,'says he,'you must come to church, where you'll
hear the Scriptures properly explained, instead of sitting poring
over your Bible at home.'
" But I telled him I always used coming to church when I
had my health ; but this very cold winter weather I hardly durst
venture so far — and me so bad wi'th'rheumatiz and all.
" But he says,'It'll do your rheumatiz good to hobble to
church : there's nothing like exercise for the rheumatiz. You
can walk about the house well enough ; why can't you walk to
church ? The fact is,'says he,'you're getting too fond of your
AGNES GREY. 575
ease. It's always easy to find excuses for shirking one's
duty.'
" But then, you know, Miss Grey, it wasn't so. However,
I telled him I'd try.'But please, sir, " says I, " if I do go to
church, what the better shall I be? I want to have my sins
blotted out, and to feel that they are remembered no more
against me, and that the love of God is shed abroad in my heart ;
and if I can get no good by reading my Bible an'saying my
prayers at home, what good shall I get by going to church?'
"'The church,'says he,'is the place appointed by God for
His worship. It's your duty to go there as often as you can.
If you want comfort, you must seek it in the path of duty'— an'
a deal more he said, but I cannot remember all his fine words.
However, it all came to this, that I was to come to church as
oft as ever I could, and bring my Prayer-book with me, an'read
up all the sponsers after the clerk, an'stand, an'kneel, an'sit,
an'do all as I should, and take the Lord's Supper at every
opportunity, an'hearken his sermons, and Maister Bligh's, an'
it'ud be all right : if I went on doing my duty, I should get
a blessing at last.
"'But if you get no comfort that way,'says he,'it's all up.'
"'Then sir,'says I,'should you think I'm a reprobate?'
"'Wliy,'says he — he says,'if you do your best to get to
heaven and can't manage it, you must be one of those that seek
to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able.'
" An'then he asked me if I'd seen any of the ladies o'th'Hall
about that mornin'; so I telled him where I had seen the young
missis go on th'Moss-lane ; — an'he kicked my poor cat right
across th'floor, an'went after'em as gay as a lark : but I was
very sad. That last word o'his fair sunk into my heart, an'lay
there like a lump o'lead, till I was weary to bear it,
" Howsever, I follered his advice: I thought he meant it all
for th'best, though he had a queer way with him. But you
know, miss, he's rich an'young, and such like cannot right
understand the thoughts of a poor old woman such as me. But
howsever, I did my best to do all as he bade me — but maybe
I'm plaguing j'ou, miss, wi'my chatter. "
" Oh no, Nancy ! Go on, and tell me all. "
" Well, my rheumatiz got better — I know not whether wi'
going to church or not, but one frosty Sunday I got this cold
i'my eyes. Th'inflammation didn't come on all at once like.
374 AGNES GREY.
but bit by bit — but I wasn't going to tell you about my eyes,
I was talking about my trouble o'mind ; — and to tell the truth,
Miss Grey, I don't think it was anyways eased by coming to
church — nought to speak on, at least : I like got my health
better ; but that didn't mend my soul. I hearkened and heark-
ened the ministers, and read an'read at my Prayer-book ; but it
was all like sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal : the sermons
I couldn't understand, an'th'Prayer-book only served to show
me how wicked I was, that I could read such good words an'
never be no better for it, and oftens feel it a sore labour an'a
heavy task beside, instead of a blessing and a privilege as all
good Christians does. It seemed like as all were barren an'
dark to me. And then, them dreadful words,'Many shall seek
to enter in, and shall not be able.'They like as they fair dried
up my sperrit.
''But one Sunday, when Maister Hatfield gave out about the
sacrament, I noticed where he said,'If there be any of you that
cannot quiet his own conscience, but requireth further comfort
or counsel, let him come to me, or some other discreet and
learned minister of God's word, and open his grief !'So, next
Sunday morning, afore service, I just looked into the vestry,
an'began a talking to th'Rector again. I hardly could fashion
to take such a liberty, but I thought when my soul was at stake
I shouldn't stick at a trifle. But he said he hadn't time to
attend to me then.
"'And, indeed,'says he,'I've nothing to say to you but
what I've said before. Take the sacrament, of course, and go
on doing your duty ; and if that won't serve you, nothing will.
So don't bother me any more.'
" So then, I went away. But I heard Maister Weston — •
Maister Weston was there, miss — this was his first Sunday at
Horton, you know, an'he was i'th'vestry in his surplice,
helping th'Rector on with his gown. "
" Yes, Nancy. "
" And I heard him ask Maister Hatfield who I w^as ; an'he
says,'Oh, she's a canting old fool'
" And I was very ill grieved, Miss Grey; but I went to my
seat, and I tried to do my duty as aforetime : but I like got no
peace. An'I even took the sacrament ; but I felt as though I
were eating and drinking to my own damnation all th'time.
So I went home, sorely troubled.
AGNES GREY. 375
*• But next day, afore I'd gotten fettled up— for indeed, miss,
['d no heart to sweeping an'fettling, an'washing pots ; so I sat
lie down i'th " muck— who should come in but ^laister Weston !
I started siding stuff then, an " sweeping an'doing ; and I ex-
pected he'd begin a calling me for my idle ways, as Maister
Hatfield would a'done ; but I was mista'en : he only bid me good
mornin'like, in a quiet dacent way. So I dusted him a chair, an "
fettled up th'fireplace a bit ; but I hadn't forgotten th'Rector's
words, so says I,'I wonder, sir, you should give yourself that
trouble, to come so far to see a " canting old fool, " such as me.'
" He seemed taken aback at that ; but he would fain persuade
me'a; the Rector was only in jest ; and when that wouldn't go,
he says,'Well, Nancy, you shouldn't think so much about it :
Mr. Hatfield was a little out of humour just then : you know
we're none of us perfect— even Moses spoke unadvisedly with his
Hp^ But now sit down a minute, if you can spare the time, and
tell me all your doubts and fears ; and I'll try to remove them.
" So I sat me down anent him. He was quite a stranger,
you know. Miss Grey, and even younger nor Maister Hatfield,
I believe ; an'I had thought him not so pleasant-looking as
him, and rather a bit crossish, at first to look at ; but he spake
so civil like-and when th'cat, poor thing, jumped on to his
knee, he only stroked her, and gave a bit of a smile : so i
thought that was a good sign ; for once, when she did so to th
Rector, he knocked her off. like as it might be in scorn and
anger, poor thing. But you can't expect a cat to know manners
like a Christian, you know, Miss Grey. "
" No ; of course not. Nancy. But what did Mr. Weston say
then? " , . .• ,
" He said naught ; but he listened to me as steady an patient
as could be, an'never a bit o'scorn about him ; so I went on,
an'telled him all, just as I've telled you— an'more too.
"'Well,'says he.'Mr. Hatfield was quite right in telling you
to persevere in doing your duty ; but in advising you to go to
church and attend to the service, and so on. he didn't mean that
was the whole of a Christian's duty : he only thought you might
there learn what more was to be done, and be led to take delight
in those exercises, instead of finding them a task and a burden.
And if you had asked him to explain those words that trouble
you so much. I think he would have told you, that if many shall
seek to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able, it is
376 AGNES GREY.
their own sins that hinder them ; just as a man with a large sack
on his bacic might wish to pass through a narrow doorway, and
find it impossible to do so unless he would leave his sack behind
him. But you, Nancy, I dare say, have no sins that you would
not gladly throw aside, if you knew how?'
"'Indeed, sir, yoti speak truth,'said I.
"'Well,'says he,'you know the first and great command-
ment — and the second, which is like unto it — on which two com-
mandments hang all the law and the prophets? You say you
cannot love God ; but it strikes me that if you rightly consider
who and what He is, you cannot help it. He is your father, your
best friend : every blessing, everything good, pleasant, or useful,
comes from Him ; and everything evil, everything you have reason
to hate, to shun, or to fear, comes from Satan— /zVi- enemy as
well as ours. And for this cause was God manifest in the flesh,
that He might destroy the works of the devil : in one word, God
is LOVE ; and the more of love we have within us, the nearer we
are to Him, and the more of His spirit we possess.'
"'Well, sir,'I said,'if I can always think on these things, I
think I might well love God : but how can I love my neighbours,
when they vex me, and be so contrairy and sinful as some on
'em is?'
"'It may seem a hard matter,'says he,'to love our neigh-
bours, who have so much of what is evil about them, and whose
faults so often awaken the evil that lingers within ourselves ; but
remember that He made them, and He loves them ; and whoso-
ever loveth him that begat, loveth him that is begotten also.
And if God so loveth us, that He gave His only begotten Son to
die for us, we ought also to love one another. But if you cannot
feel positive affection for those who do not care for you, you can
at least try to do to them as you would they should do unto you :
you can endeavour to pity their failings and excuse their offences,
and to do all the good you can to those about you. And if you
accustom yourself to this, Nancy, the very effort itself will make
you love them in some degree — to say nothing of the goodwill
your kindness would beget in them, though they might have little
else that is good about them. If we love God and wish to serve
Him, let us try to be like Him, to do His work, to labour for His
glory — which is the good of man — to hasten the coming of His
kingdom, which is the peace and happiness of all the world:
however powerless we may seem to be, in doing all the good we
AGNES GREY.'3^']']
can through life, the humblest of us may do much towards it ;
and let us dwell in love, that He may dwell in us and we in Him.
The more happiness we bestow, the more we shall receive, even
here ; and the greater will be our reward in heaven when we
rest from our labours.'I believe, miss, them is his very words,
for I've thought'em ower many a time. An'then he took that
Bible, an'read bits here and there, an* explained'em as clear as
the day : and it seemed like as a new light broke in on my soul ;
an'I felt fair a glow about my heart, an'only wished poor Bill
an'all the world could ha'been there, an'heard it all, and re-
joiced wi'me.
" After he was gone, Hannah Rogers, one o'th'neighbours,
came in and wanted me to help her to wash. I telled her I
couldn't just then, for I hadn't set on th'potaties for th'dinner,
nor washed up th'breakfast stuff yet. So then she began a call-
ing me for my nasty idle ways. I was a little bit vexed at first,
but I never said nothing wrong to her : I only telled her, like all
in a quiet way,'at I'd had th'new parson to see me ; but I'd get
done as quick as ever I could, an'then come an'help her. So
then she softened down ; and my heart like as it warmed towards
her, an'in a bit we was very good friends. An'so it is. Miss
Grey,'a soft answer turneth away wrath ; but grievous words
stir up anger.'It isn't only in them you speak to, but in
yourself. "
" Very true, Nancy, if we could always remember it. "
" Ay, if we could ! "
" And did Mr. Weston ever come to see you again? "
" Yes, many a time ; and since my eyes has been so bad, he's
sat an'read to me by the half-hour together : but you know,
miss, he has other folks to see, and other things to do — God bless
him ! An'that next Sunday he preached szich a sermon ! His
text was,'Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest,'and them two blessed verses that follows.
You wasn't there, miss, you was with your friends then — but it
made me so happy ! And I am happy now, thank God ! an'I
take a pleasure, now, in doing little bits o'jobs for ray neigh-
bours — such as a poor old body'a'ts half blind can-do; and
they take it kindly of me, just as he said. You see, miss, I'm
knitting a pair o'stockings now ; — they're for Thomas Jackson ;
he's a queerish old body, an'we've had many a bout at threap-
ing, one anent t'other ; an'at times we've differed sorely. So I
378 AGNES GREY.
thought I couldn't do better nor knit him a pair o'warm stock-
ings ; an'I've felt to like him a deal better, poor old man, sin'I
began. It's turned out just as Maister Weston said, "
" Well, I'm very glad to see you so bappy, Nancy, and so
wise : but I must go now ; I shall be wanted at the hall, " said
I ; and bidding her good-bye, I departed, promising to come
again when I had time, and feeling nearly as happy as her-
self.
At another time, I went to read to a poor labourer who was in
the last stage of consumption. The young ladies had been to
see him, and somehow a promise of reading had been extracted
from them ; but it was too mu:h trouble, so they begged me to
do it instead. I went, willing.'y enough ; and there too I was
gratified with the praises of Mr. Weston, both from the sick man
and his wife. The former told me that he derived great comfort
and benefit from the visits of the new parson, who frequently
came to see him, and was " another guess sort of man " to Mr.
Hatfield ; who before the other's arrival at Horton had now and
then paid him a visit ; on which occasions he would always insist
upon having the cottage door kept open, to admit the fresh air
for his own convenience, without considering how it might injure
the sufferer : and having opened his Prayer-book and hastily
read over a part of the Service for the Sick, would hurry away
again : if he did not stay to administer some harsh rebuke to the
afflicted wife, or to make some thoughtless, not to say heartless,
observation, radier calculated to increase than diminish the
troubles of the suffering pair.
" Whereas, " said the man, " Maister Weston'uU pray with
me quite in a different fashion, an'talk to me as kind as owt ;
an'oft read to me too, an'sit beside me just like a brother. "
" Just for all the world ! " exclaimed his wife ; " an about a
three wik sin', when he seed how poor Jem. shivered wi'cold, an'
what pitiful fires we kept, he axed if wer stock of coals was neady
done. I telled him it was, an'we was ill set to get more : but
you know,. mum, I didn't think o'him helping us ; but howsever,
he sent us a sack o'coals next day ; an'we've had good fires
ever sin : an'a great blessing it is, this winter time. But that's
his way, Miss Grey : when he comes into a poor body's house
a seein'sick folk, he like notices what they most stand i'need
on; an'if he thinks they can't readily get it therseln, he never
says nowt about it, but just gets it for'cm. .'Xn'it isn't every-
AGNES GREV. 379
body'at'ud do that,'at has as Httle as he has : for you know,
mum, he's nowt at all to hve on but what he gets fra'th'rector,
an'that's httle enough they say. "
I remembered then, with a species of exultation, that he had
frequently been styled a vulgar brute by the amiable Miss
Murray, because he wore a silver watch, and clothes not quite
so bright and fresh as Mr. Hatfield's.
In returning to the lodge I felt very happy, and thanked God
that I had now something to think about : something to dwell
on as a relief from the weary monotony, the lonely drudgery, of
my present life : for I was lonely. Never, from month to month,
from year to year, except during my brief intervals of rest at
home, did I see one creature to whom I could open my heart,
or freely speak my thoughts with any hope of sympathy, or even
comprehension : never one, unless it were poor Nancy Brown,
with whom I could enjoy a single moment of real social inter-
course, or whose conversation was calculated to render me
better, wiser, or happier than before ; or who, as far as I could
see, could be greatly benefited by mine. My only companions
had been unamiable children, and ignorant, wrong-headed girls ;
from whose fatiguing folly, unbroken solitude was often a relief
most earnestly desired and dearly prized. But to be restricted
to such associates was a serious evil, both in its immediate effects
and the consequences that were likely to ensue. Never a new
idea or stirring thought came to me from without : and such as
rose within me were, for the most part, miserably crushed at
once, or doomed to sicken and fade away, because they could
not see the light.
Habitual associates are known to exercise a great influence
over each other's minds and manners. Those whose actions are
for ever before our eyes, whose words are ever in our ears, will
naturally lead us, albeit against our will, slowly, gradually,
imperceptibly, perhaps, to act and speak as they do. I will
not presume to say how far this irresistible power of assimilation
extends ; but if one civilised man were doomed to pass a dozen
years amid a race of intractable savages, unless he had power
to improve them, I greatly question whether, at the close of that
period, he would not have become, at least, a barbarian himself.
And I, as I could not make my young companions better, feared
exceedingly that they would make me worse— would gradually
bring my feelings, habits, capacities, to the level of their own ;
380 AGNES GREY.
without, however, imparting to me their light-heartedness and
cheerful vivacity.
Already, I seemed to feel my intellect deteriorating, my heart
petrifying, my soul contracting ; and I trembled lest my very
moral perceptions should become deadened, my distinctions of
right and wrong confounded, and all my better faculties be sunk,
at last, beneath the baneful influence of such a mode of life. The
gross vapours of earth were gathering around me, and closing in
upon my inward heaven ; and thus it was that Mr. Weston rose
at length upon me, appearing like the morning-star in my horizon,
to save me from the fear of utter darkness ; and I rejoiced that I
had now a subject for contemplation that was above me, not
beneath. I was glad to see that all the world was not made up
of Bloomfields, Murrays, Hatfields, Ashbys, & :c. ; and that human
excellence was not a mere dream of the imagination. When we
hear a little good and no harm of a person, it is easy and pleasant
to imagine more : in short, it is needless to analyse all my
thoughts ; but Sunday was now become a day of peculiar delight
to me (I. was now almost broken-in to the back corner in the
carriage), for I liked to hear him — and I liked to see him, too ;
though I knew he was not handsome, or even what is called
agreeable, in outward aspect : but, certainly, he was not
ugly.
In stature he was a little, a very little, above the middle size ;
the outline of his face would be pronounced too square for beauty,
but to me it announced decision of character ; his dark brown hair
was not carefully curled, like Mr. Hatfield's, but simply brushed
aside over a broad white forehead ; the eyebrows, I suppose,
were too projecting, but from under those dark brows there
gleamed an eye of singular power, brown in colour, not large,
and somewhat deep-set, but strikingly brilliant, and full of ex-
pression ; there was character, too, in the mouth, something that
bespoke a man of firm purpose and a habitual thinker ; and when
he smiled — but I will not speak of that yet, for, at the time I
mention, I had never seen him smile : and, indeed, his general
appearance did not impress me with the idea of a man given to
such a relaxation, nor of such an individual as the cottagers
described him. I had early formed my opinion of him ; and, in
spite of Miss Murray's objurgations, was fully convinced that he
was a man of strong sense, firm faith, and ardent piety, but
thoughtful and stern : and when I found that, to his other good
AGNES GREW 3^1
qualities, was added that of true benevolence and gentle, con-
siderate kindness, the discovery, perhaps, delighted me the more,
as I had not been prepared to expect it.
CHAPTER XII.
THE SHOWER.
The next visit I paid to Nancy Brown was in the second week
in March : for, though I had many spare minutes during the day,
I seldom could look upon an hour as entirely my own ; since,
where everything was left to the caprices of Miss Matilda and her
sister, there could be no order or regularity. Whatever occupa-
tion I chose, when not actually busied about them or their
concerns, I had, as it were, to keep my loins girded, my shoes on
my feet, and my staff in my hand ; for not to be immediately
forthcoming when called for, was regarded as a grave and in-
excusable offence : not only by my pupils and their mother, but
by the very servant, who came in breathless haste to call me,
exclaiming, " You're to go to the schoolroom directly, mum—
the young ladies is waiting ! ! " Climax of horror ! actually
waiting for their governess ! ! !
But this time I was pretty sure of an hour or two to myself ;
for Matilda was preparing for a long ride, and Rosalie was
dressing for a dinner party at Lady Ashby's : so I took the
opportunity of repairing to the widow's cottage, where I found
her in some anxiety about her cat, which had been absent all
day. I comforted her with as many anecdotes of that animal's
roving propensities as I could recollect. " I'm feared o'th'
gamekeepers, " said she,''that's all'at I think on. If th'young
gentlemen had been at home, I should a'thought they'd been
setting their dogs at her, an'worried her, poor thing, as they did
many a poor thing's cat ; but I haven't that to be feared on now.'
Nancy's eyes were better, but still far from well : she had been
trying to make a Sunday shirt for her son, but told me she could
only bear to do a httle bit at it now and then, so that it progressed
but slowly, though the poor lad wanted it sadly. So I proposed
to help her a little, after I had read to her, for I had plenty of
time that evening, and need not return till dusk. She thankfully
382 AGNES GREY.
accepted the offer. " An'you'll be a bit o'company for me too,
miss, " said she ; " I like as I feel lonesome without my cat. " But
when I had finished reading, and done the half of a seam, with
Nancy's capacious brass thimble fitted on to my finger by means
of a roll of paper, I was disturbed by the entrance of Mr, Weston,
with the identical cat in his arms. I now saw that he could
smile, and very pleasantly too.
" I've done you a piece of good service, Nancy, " he began:
then seeing me, he acknowledged my presence by a slight bow.
I should have been invisible to Hatfield, or any other gentleman
of those parts. " I've dehvered your cat, " he continued, " from
the hands, or rather the gun, of Mr. Murray's gamekeeper. "
" God bless you, sir ! " cried the grateful old woman, ready to
weep for joy as she received her favourite from his arms.
" Take care of it, " said he, " and don't let it go near the rabbit
warren, for the gamekeeper swears he'll shoot it if he sees it there
again : he would have done so to-day, if I had not been in time
to stop him. — I believe it is raining, Miss Grey, " added he, more
quietly, observing that I had put aside my work, and was pre-
paring to depart. " Don't let me disturb you— I shan't stay two
minutes. "
" You'll both stay while this shower gets owered, " said Nancy,
as she stirred the fire, and placed another chair beside it; " what !
there's room for all. "
" I can see better here, thank you, Nancy, " replied I, taking
my work to the window, where she had the goodness to suffer me
to remain unmolested, while she got a brush to remove the cat's
hairs from Mr. Weston's coat, carefully wiped the rain from his
hat, and gave the cat its supper, busily talking all the time :
now thanking her clerical friend for what he had done ; now
wondering how the cat had found out the warren ; and now-
lamenting the probable consequences of such a discovery. He
listened with a quiet, good-natured smile, and at length took a
seat in compliance with her pressing invitations, but repeated
that he did not mean to stay.
" I have another place to go to, " said he, " and I see " (glanc-
ing at the book on the table)''some one else has been reading
to you. "
" Yes, sir ; Miss Grey has been as kind as read me a chapter ;
an'now she's helping mje with a shirt for our Bill— but I'm feared
she'll be cold there. Won't you come to th'fire, miss? "
AGNES GREY. 383
" No, thank you, Nancy, I'm quite warm. I must go as soon
as this shower is over. "
" Oh, miss ! You said you could stop while dusk ! " cried the
provoking old woman, and Mr. Weston seized his hat.
" Nay, sir, " exclaimed she, " pray don't go now, while it rains
so fast. "
" But it strikes me I'm keeping your visitor away from the
fire. "
" No, you're not, Mr. Weston, " replied I, hoping there was
no harm in a falsehood of that description.
" No, sure ! " cried Nancy. " What, there's lots o'room ! "
" Miss Grey, " said he, half-jestingly, as if he felt it necessary
to change the present subject, whether he had anything particular
to say or not, " I wish you would make my peace with the squire,
when you see him. He was by when I rescued Nancy's cat, and
did not quite approve of the deed. 1 told him I thought he might
better spare all his rabbits than she her cat, for which audacious
assertion he treated me to some rather ungentlemanly language ;
and I fear I retorted a trifle too warmly. "
" Oh, lawful sir ! I hope you didn't fall out wi'th'maister for
sake o'my cat ! he cannot bide answering again— can th'maister. "
" Oh ! it's no matter, Nancy : I don't care about it, really ; I
said nothing very uncivil ; and I suppose Mr. Murray is accus-
tomed to use rather strong language when he's heated. "
" Ay, sir ; it's a pity ! "
" And now, I really must go. I have to visit a place a mile
beyond this ; and you would not have me to return in the dark :
besides, it has nearly done raining now— so good evening, Nancy.
Good evening, Aliss Grey. "
" Good evening, Mr. Weston ; but don't depend upon me for
making your peace with Mr. Murray, for I never see him— to
speak to. "
" Don't you? it can't be helped then, " replied he in dolorous
resignation: then with a peculiar half-smile, he added, " But
never mind ; I imagine the squire has more to apologise for than
I. " And left the cottage.
I went on with my sewing as long as I could see, and then bade
Nancy good-evening ; checking her too lively gratitude by the
undeniable assurance that I had only done for her what she would
have done for me, if she had been in my place and I in hers. I
hastened back to Horton Lodge, where having entered the school-
384 AGNES GREY.
room, I found the tea-table all in confusion, the tray flooded with
slops, and Miss Matilda in a most ferocious humour.
" Miss Grey, whatever have you been about? I've had tea
half-an-hour ago, and had to make it myself, and drink it all
alone ! I vi^ish you would come in sooner ! "
" I've been to see Nancy Brown. I thought you would not
be back from your ride. "
" How could I ride in the rain, I should like to know? That
damned pelting shower was vexatious enough — coming on when
I was just in full swing : and then to come and find nobody in
to tea ! — and you know I can't make the tea as I like it. "
" I didn't think of the shower, " replied I (and indeed, the
thought of its driving her home had never entered my head).
''No, of course ; you were under shelter yourself, and you
never thought of other people. "
I bore her coarse reproaches with astonishing equanimity, even
with cheerfulness ; for I was sensible that I had done more good
to Nancy Brown than harm to her : and perhaps some other
thoughts assisted to keep up my spirits, and impart a relish to
the cup of cold, overdrawn tea, and a charm to the otherwise
unsightly table ; and— I had almost said — to Miss Matilda's
unamiable face. But she soon betook herself to the stables,
and left me to the quiet enjoyment of my solitary meal.
CHAPTER XIII.
THE PRIMROSES.
Miss Murray now always went twice to church, for she so loved
admiration that she could not bear to lose a single opportunity
of obtaining it ; and she was so sure of it wherever she showed
herself, that whether Harry Meltham and Mr. Green were there
or not, there was certain to be somebody present who would not
be insensible to her charms : besides the Rector, whose official
capacity generally obliged him to attend. Usually, also, if the
weather permitted, both she and her sister would walk home;
Matilda, because she hated the confinement of the carriage ; she,
because she disliked the privacy of it, and enjoyed the company
that generally enlivened the first mile of the journey in walking
AGNES GREY. 385
from the church to Mr. Green's park-gates : near w hich com-
menced the private road to Horton Lodge, which lay in the
opposite direction ; while the highway conducted in a straight-
forward course to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh
Meltham. Thus there was always a chance of being accom-
panied, so far, either by Harry Meltham, with or without Miss
Meltham, or Mr. Green, with perhaps one or both of his sisters,
and any gentlemen visitors they might have.
Whether I walked with the young ladies or rode with their
parents, depended upon their own capricious will : if they chose
to " take " me, I went ; if, for reasons best known to themselves,
they chose to go alone, I took my seat in the carriage. I :liked
walking better, but a sense of reluctance to obtrude my presence
on any one who did not desire it, always kept me passive on
these and similar occasions ; and I never inquired into the causes
of their varying whims. Indeed, this was the best policy — for
to submit and oblige was the governess's part, to consult their
own pleasure was that of the pupils. But when I did walk, the
first half of the journey was generally a great nuisance to me.
As none of the before-mentioned ladies and gentlemen ever
noticed me, it was disagreeable to walk beside them, as if listen-
ing to what they said, or wishing to be thought one of them,
while they talked over me, or across ; and if their eyes, in speak-
ing, chanced to fall on me, it seemed as if they looked on vacancy
— as if they either did not see me, or were very desirous to make
it appear so. It was disagreeable, too, to walk behind, and
thus appear to acknowledge my own inferiority ; for, in truth, I
considered myself pretty nearly as good as the best of them,
and wished them to know that I did so, and not to imagine that
I looked upon myself as a mere domestic, who knew her own
place too well to walk beside such fine ladies and gentlemen as
they were — though her young ladies might choose to have her
with them, and even condescend to converse with her when no
better company were at hand. Thus — I am almost ashamed to
confess it — but indeed I gave myself no little trouble in my en-
deavours (if I did keep up with them) to appear perfectly uncon-
scious or regardless of their presence, as if I were wholl}'absorbed
in my own reflections, or the contemplation of surrounding
objects ; or, if I lingered behind, it was some bird or insect,
some tree or flower, that attracted my attention, and having
duly examined that, I would pursue my w^alk alone, at a leisurely
N
386 AGNES GREY.
pace, until my pupils had bidden adieu to their companions,
and turned off into the quiet, private road.
One such occasion I particularly well remember : it was a
lovely afternoon about the close of March ; Mr. Green and his
sisters had sent their carriage back empty, in order to enjoy the
bright sunshine and balmy air in a sociable walk home along with
their visitors, Captain Somebody and Lieutenant Somebody-else
(a couple of military fops), and the Misses Murray, who, of course,
contrived to join them. Such a party was highly agreeable to
Rosalie ; but not finding it equally suitable to my taste, T pre-
sently fell back, and began to botanise and entomologise along
the green banks and budding hedges, till the company was con-
siderably in advance of me, and I could hear the sweet song of
the happy lark ; then my spirit of misanthropy began to melt
away beneath the soft, pure air and genial sunshine : but sad
thoughts of early childhood, and yearnings for departed joys, or
for a brighter future lot, arose instead. As my eyes wandered
over the steep banks covered with young grass and green-leaved
plants, and surmounted by budding hedges, I longed intensely
for some familiar flower that might recall the woody dales or
green hill-sides of home : the brown moorlands, of course, were
out of the question. Such a discovery would make my eyes gush
cut with water, no doubt ; but that was one of my greatest enjoy-
ments now. At length I descried, high up between the twisted
roots of an oak, three lovely primroses, peeping so sweetly from
their hiding-place that the tears already started at the sight ; but
they grew so high above me, that I tried in vain to gather one or
two, to dream over and to carry with me : I could not reach them
unless I climbed the bank, which I was deterred from doing by
hearing a footstep at that moment behind me, and was, therefore,
about to turn away, when I was startled by the words, " Allow
me to gather them for you. Miss Grey, " spoken in the grave,
low tones of a well-known voice. Immediately the flowers were
gathered, and in my hand. It was Mr. Weston, of course— who
else would trouble himself to do so much for me ?
I thanked him ; whether warmly or coldly, I cannot tell : bnt
certain I am that I did not express half the gratitude I felt. It
was foolish, perhaps, to feel any gratitude at all ; but it seemed
to me, at that moment, as if this were a remarkable instance of
his good-nature : an act of kindness which I could not repay,
but never should forget : so utterly unaccustomed was I to receive
AGNES GREY. 2^7
such civilities, so little prepared to expect them from any one
within fifty miles of Horton Lodge. Yet this did not prevent me
from feeling a little uncomfortable in his presence ; and I pro-
ceeded to follow my pupils at a much quicker pace than before ;
though perhaps, if ^Mr. Weston had taken the hint and let me
pass without another word, I might have repented it an hour
after : but he did not. A somewhat rapid wallc for me, was but
an ordinary pace for him.
" Your young ladies have left you alone, " said he.
" Yes, they are occupied witii more agreeable company. "
" Then don't trouble yourself to overtake them. "
I slackened my pace ; but next moment regretted having done
so : my companion did not speak ; and I had nothing in the
world to say, and feared he might be in the same predicament.
At length, however, he broke the pause by asking, with a certain
quiet abruptness peculiar to himself, if I liked flowers.
" Yes ; very much, " I answered : " wild flowers especially. "
" / hke wild flowers, " said he; " others I don't care about,
because I have no particular associations connected with them — ■
except one or two. What are your favourite flowers ? "
" Primroses, blue-bells, and heath-blossoms. "
" Not violets? "
" No ; because, as you say, I have no particular associations
connected with them ; for there are no sweet violets among the
hills and valleys round my home. "
" It must be a great consolation to you to have a home, Miss
Grey, " observed my companion after a short pause: " how-
ever remote, or however seldom visited, still it is something to
look to. "
" It is so much that I think I could not live without it, " replied
I, with an enthusiasm of which I immediately repented ; for I
thought it must have sounded essentially silly.
" Oh yes ; you could, " said he, with a thoughtful smile, " The
ties that bind us to life are tougher than you imagine, or than
any one can who has not felt how roughly they may be pulled
without breaking. You might be miserable without a home, but
even yo?^ could live ; and not so miserably as you suppose. The
human heart is like Indian-rubber : a little swells it, but a great
deal will not burst it. If'little more than nothing will disturb
it, little less than all things will suffice'to break it. As in the
outer members of our frame, there is a vital power inherent in
388 AGNES GREY.
itself, that strengthens it against external violence. Every blow
that shakes it will serve to harden it against a future stroke ; as
constant labour thickens the skin of the hand, and strengthens
its muscles instead of wasting them away : so that a day of
arduous toil that might excoriate a lady's palm, would make no
sensible impression on that of a hardy ploughman.
''I speak from experience — partly my own. There was a time
when I thought as you do — at least, I was fully persuaded that
home and its affections were the only things that made life toler-
able : that, if deprived of these, existence would become a burden
hard to be endured ; but now I have no home — unless you would
dignify my two hired rooms at Horton by such a name ; — and
not twelve months ago, I lost the last and dearest of my early
friends ; and yet, not only I live, but I am not wholly destitute
of hope and comfort, even for this life : though I must acknow-
ledge that I can seldom enter even an humble cottage at the close
of day, and see its inhabitants peaceably gathered around their
cheerful hearth, without a feeling almost of envy at their domestic
enjoyment. "
" You don't know what happiness lies before you yet, " said I :
" you are now only in the commencement of your journey. "
" The best of happiness, " replied he, " is mine already — the
power and the will to be useful. "
We now approached a style communicating with a footpath
that conducted to a farm-house, where, I suppose, Mr. Weston
purposed to make himself " useful ; " for he presently took leave
of me, crossed the style, and traversed the path with his usual
firm, elastic tread, leaving me to ponder his words as I continued
my course alone. I had heard before that he had lost his mother
not many months before he came. She then was the last and
dearest of his early friends ; and he had no home. I pitied him
from my heart : I almost wept for sympathy. And this, I thought,
accounted for the shade of premature thoughtfulness that so fre-
quently clouded his brow, and obtained for him the reputation
of a morose and sullen disposition with the charitable Miss
Murray and all her kin. " But, " thought I, " he is not so miser-
able as I should be under such a deprivation : he leads an active
life ; and a wide field for useful exertion lies before him. He
can make friends ; and he can make a home too, if he pleases ;
and, doubtless, he will please some time. God grant the partner
of that home may be worthy of his choice, and make it a happy
AGNES GREY. 389
one — such a home as he deserves to have ! And how delightful
it would be to " But no matter what I thought.
I began this book with the intention of conceahng nothing •
that those who liked might have the benefit of perusing a fellow-
creature's heart : but we have some thoughts that all the angels
in heaven are welcome to behold, but not our brother-men — not
even the best and kindest amongst them.
By this time the Greens had taken themselves to their own
abode, and the Murrays had turned down the private road,
whither I hastened to follow them. I found the two girls warm
in an animated discussion on the respective merits of the two
young officers ; but on seeing me Rosalie broke off in the middle
of a sentence to exclaim, with malicious glee —
" Oh, ho. Miss Grey! you're come at last, are you? No
wonder you lingered so long behind ; and no ivonder you always
stand up so vigorously for Mr. Weston when I abuse him. Ah,
ha ! I see it all now ! "
" Now, come. Miss Murray, don't be foolish, " said I, attempt-
ing a good-natured laugh ;''you know such nonsense can make
no impression on me. "
But she still went on talking such intolerable stuff— her sister
helping her with appropriate fiction coined for the occasion — that
I thought it necessary to say something in my own justification.
" What folly all this is! " I exclaimed. " If Mr. Weston's
road happened to be the same as mine for a few yards, and if he
chose to exchange a word or two in passing, what is there so
remarkable in that ? I assure you, I never spoke to him before :
except once. "
" Where? where? and when? " cried they eagerly.
" In Nancy's cottage. "
" Ah, ha! you've met him there, have you? " exclaimed
Rosalie, with exultant laughter. " Ah! now, Matilda, I've
found out why she's so fond of going to Nancy Brown's ! she
goes there to flirt with Mr. Weston. "
" Really, that is not worth contradicting ! — I only saw him
there once, I tell you— and how could I know he was coming? "
Irritated as I was at their foolish mirth and vexatious imputa-
tions, the uneasiness did not continue long ; when they'had had
their laugh out, they returned again to the captain and lieutenant ;
and, while they disputed and commented upon them, my indigna-
tion rapidly cooled ; the cause of it was quickly forgotten, and I
390 AGNES GREY.
turned my thoughts into a pleasanter channeL Thus we pro-
ceeded up the park, and entered the hall ; and as I ascended the
stairs to my own chamber, I had but one thought within me :
my heart was filled to overflowing with one single earnest wish.
Having entered the room, and shut the door, I fell upon my knees
and offered up a fervent but not impetuous prayer : " Thy will be
done, " I strove to say throughout ; but, " Father, all things are
possible with Thee, and may it be Thy will, " was sure to follow.
That wish — that prayer — both men and women would have scorned
me for — " But Father, Thou wilt 7iot despise ! " I said, and felt
that it was true. It seemed to me that another's welfare was at
least as ardently implored for as my own ; nay, even that was
the principal object of my heart's desire. I might have been
deceiving myself; but that idea gave me confidence to ask, and
power to hope I did not ask in vain. As for the primroses, I
kept two of them in a glass in my room until they were com-
pletely withered, and the housemaid threw them out ; and the
petals of the other I pressed between the leaves of my Bible— I
have them still, and mean to keep them always.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE RECTOR.
The following day was as fine as the preceding one. Soon after
breakfast Miss Matilda, having galloped and blundered through
a few unprofitable lessons, and vengeably thumped the piano for
an hour, in a terrible humour with both me and it, because her
mamma would not give her a holiday, had betaken herself to her
favourite places of resort, the yards, the stables, and the dog-
kennels ; and Miss Murray was gone forth to enjoy a quiet ramble
with a new fashionable novel for her companion, leaving me in
the schoolroom hard at work upon a water-colour drawing which
I had promised to do for her, and which she insisted upon my
finishing that day.
At my feet lay a little rough terrier. It was the property of
Miss Matilda ; but she hated the animal, and intended to sell it,
alleging that it was quite spoiled. It was really an excellent
AGNES GREY. 39!
dog of its kind ; but she affirmed it was fit for nothing, and had
not even the sense to Icnow its own mistress.
The fact was, she had purchased it when but a small puppy,
insisting at first that no one should touch it but herself ; but, soon
becoming tired of so helpless and troublesome a nursling, she had
gladly yielded to my entreaties to be allowed to take charge of it ;
and I, by carefully nursing the little creature from infancy to
adolescence, of course, had obtained its affections : a reward I
should have greatly valued, and looked upon as far outweighing
all the trouble I had had with it, had not poor Snap's grateful
feelings exposed him to many a harsh word and many a spiteful
kick and pinch from his owner, and were he not now in danger
of being " put away, " in consequence, or transferred to some
rough, stony-hearted master. But how could I help it? I could
not make the dog hate me, by cruel treatment ; and she would
not propitiate him by kindness.
However, while I thus sat, working away with my pencil, Mrs.
^Murray came, half-sailing, half-bustling, into the room.
" Miss Grey, " she began, — " dear ! how can j^ou sit at your
drawing such a day as this? " (She thought I was doing it for
my own pleasure.) " I luonder you don't put on your bonnet
and go out with the young ladies. "
" I think, ma'am. Miss Murray is reading ; and Miss Matilda
is amusing herself with her dogs. "
" If you would try to amuse ^liss Matilda yourself a little more,
I think she would not be driven to seek amusement in the com-
panionship of dogs and horses, and grooms, so much as she is ;
and if you would be a little more cheerful and conversable with
Miss Murray, she would not so often go wandering in the fields
with a book in her hand. However, I don't want to vex you, "
added she, seeing, I suppose, that my cheeks burned and my
hand trembled with some unamiable emotion. " Do, pray, try
not to be so touchy, — there's no speaking to you else. And tell
me if you know where Rosalie is gone : and why she likes to be
so much alone? "
''She says she likes to be alone when she has a new book to
read. "
''But why can't she read it in the park or the garden ? — why
should she go into the fields and lanes ? And how is it that that
Mr. Hatfield so often finds her out? She told me last week he'd
walked his horse by her side all up Moss Lane ; and now I'm
392 AGNES GREY.
sure it was he I saw from my dressing-room window, wallcing so
briskly past the park-gates, and on towards the field where she
so frequently goes, I wish you would go and see if she is there ;
and just gently remind her that it is not proper for a young lady
of her rank and prospects to be wandering about by herself in
that manner, exposed to the attentions of any one that presumes
to address her ; like some poor neglected girl that has no park
to walk in, and no friends to take care of her : and tell her that
her papa would be extremely angry if he knew of her treating
Mr. Hatfield in the familiar manner that I fear she does ; and
— oh ! if you — if any governess had but half a mother's watch-
fulness — half a mother's anxious care, I should be saved this
trouble ; and you would see at once the necessity of keeping your
eye upon her, and making your company agreeable to
Well, go — go ; there's no time to be lost, " cried she, seeing that
I had put away my drawing materials, and was waiting in the
doorway for the conclusion of her address.
According to her prognostications, I found Miss Murray in
her favourite field just without the park ; and, unfortunately, not
alone ; for the tall, stately figure of Mr. Hatfield was slowly
sauntering by her side.
Here was a poser for me. It was my duty to interrupt the
tete-a-tete : but how was it to be done ? Mr, Hatfield could not
be driven away by so insignificant a person as I ; and to go and
place myself on the other side of Miss Murray, and intrude my
unwelcome presence upon her without noticing her companion,
was a piece of rudeness I could not be guilty of : neither had I
the courage to cry aloud from the top of the field that she was
wanted elsewhere. So I took the intermediate course of walking
slowly, but steadily towards them ; resolving, if my approach
failed to scare away the beau, to pass by and tell Miss Murray
her mamma wanted her.
She certainly looked very charming as she strolled, lingering
along under the budding horse-chestnut trees that stretched their
long arms over the park-palings, with her closed book in one
hand, and in the other a graceful sprig of myrtle, which served
her as a very pretty plaything ; her bright ringlets escaping pro-
fusely from her little bonnet, and gently stirred by the breeze,
her fair cheek flushed with gratified vanity, her smiling blue
eyes, now slyly glancing towards her admirer, now gazing
downward at her myrtle sprig. But Snap, running before me,
AGNES GREY. 39^
interrupted her in the midst of some half-pert, half-playful re-
partee, by catching hold of her dress and vehemently tugging
thereat ; till Mr. Hatfield, with his cane, administered a re-
sounding thwack upon the animal's skull, and sent it yelping
back to me, with a clamorous outcry that afforded the reverend
gentleman great amusement : but seeing me so near, he thought,
I suppose, he might as well be taking his departure ; and as I
stooped to caress the dog, with ostentatious pity to show my
disapproval of his severity, I heard him say —
" When shall I see you again. Miss Murray? "
" At church, I suppose, " replied she, " unless your business
chances to bring you here again, at the precise moment when I
happen to be walking by. "
" I could always manage to have business here, if I knew
precisely when and where to find you. "
" But if I would, I could not inform you, for I am so im-
methodical, I never can tell to-day what I shall do to-morrow. "
" Then give me that, meantime, to comfort me, " said he, half
jestingly and half in earnest, extending his hand for the sprig of
myrtle.
" No, indeed, I shan't. "
" Do ! fray do ! I shall be the most miserable of men if you
don't. You cannot be so cruel as to deny me a favour so easily
granted, and yet so highly prized ! " pleaded he, as ardently as
if his life depended on it.
By this time, I stood within a very few^ yards of them, im-
patiently waiting his departure.
" There then ! take it and go, " said Rosalie.
He joyfully received the gift, murmured something that made
her blush and toss her head, but with a little laugh that showed
her displeasure was entirely affected ; and then with a courteous
salutation withdrew.
" Did you ever see such a man. Miss Grey ? " said she, turning
to me ; " I'm so glad you came ! I thought I never should get
rid of him ; and I was so terribly afraid of papa seeing him. "
" Has he been with you long? "
" No, not long, but he's so extremely impertinent i a:nd he's
always hanging about, pretending his business or his clerical
duties require his attendance in these parts, and really watching
for poor me, and pouncing upon me wherever he sees me. "
" Well, your mamma thinks you ought not to go beyond the
N 2
394 AGNES GREY.
park or garden without some discreet, matronly person like mo
to accompany you, and keep off all intruders. She descried Mr,
Hatfield hurrying past the park-gates, and forthwith despatched
me with instructions to seek you up and to take care of you, and
likewise to warn "
" Oh, mamma's so tiresome ! As if I couldn't take careo;
myself. She bothered me before about Mr. Hatfield ; and I
told her she might trust me : I never should forget my rank and
station for the most delightful man that ever breathed. I wish
he would go down on his knees to-morrow, and implore me to
be his wife, that I might just show her how mistaken she is in
supposing that I could ever Oh, it provokes me so ! To
think that I could be such a fool as to fall in lovj ! It is qui;
beneath the dignity of a woman to do such a thing. Love'
detest the word ! as applied to one of our sex, I think it a perfc
insult. A preference I might acknowledge ; but never for oncj
like poor Mr. Hatfield, who has not seven hundred a year to'-
bless himself with. I like to talk to him, because he's so clev
and amusing — I wish Sir Thomas Ashby were half as ni.
besides, I must have somebody to flirt with, and no one else ba;
the sense to come here ; and when we go out, mamma won't letl.
me flirt with anybody but Sir Thomas — if he's there ; and if he's;
7zo/f there, I'm bound hand and foot, for fear somebody should:
go and make up some exaggerated story, and put it into his head;
that I'm engaged, or likely to be engaged, to somebody else ■
or, what is more probable, for fear his nasty old mother shoulc :
see or hear of my ongoings, and conclude that I'm not a fit wife ■
for her excellent son : as if the said son were not the greates! j
scamp in Christendom ; and as if any woman of commoi \
decency were not a world too good for him. "
" Is it really so, Miss Murray ? and does your mamma knoi i
it, and yet wish you to marry him ? "
" To be sure she does ! She knows more against him th " "'
I do, I believe: she keeps it from me lest I should be i
couraged ; not knowing how little I care about such thiiia •
For it's no great matter, really : he'll be all right when he's r
married, as mamma says ; and reformed rakes make the best :
husbands, everybody knows. I only wish he were not so ugly—
thafs all / think about : but then there's no choice here in tbec
country ; and papa will not let us go to London "
" But I should think Mr. Hatfield would be far better. "
1
AGNES GREY. 39$
" And so he would, if he were lord of Ashby Park— there's
not a doubt of it : but the fact is, I must have Ashby Park,
whoever shares it with me. "
" But Mr. Hatfield thinks you like him all this time; you
don't consider how bitterly he will be disappointed when he
finds himself mistaken. "
b^ " iVt?, indeed! It will be a proper punishment for his pre-
sumption—for ever daringXo think I could like him. I should
enjoy nothing so much as lifting the veil from his eyes. "
" The sooner you do it the better then. "
" No ; I tell you, I like to amuse myself with him. Besides,
he doesn't really think I like him. I take good care of that :
you don't know how cleverly I manage. He may presume to
think he can ifiduce me to like him ; for which I shall punish
him as he deserves. "
" Well, mind you don't give too much reason for such pre-
sumption — that's all, " replied I.
But all my exhortations were in vain : they only made her
somewhat more solicitous to disguise her wishes and her thoughts
from me. She talked no more to me about the Rector ; but I
could see that her mind, if not her heart, was fixed upon him
still, and that she was intent upon obtaining another interview :
for though, in compliance with her mother's request, I was now
constituted the companion of her rambles for a time, she still
persisted in wandering in the fields and lanes that lay in the
nearest proximity to the road ; and, whether she talked to me
or read the book she carried in her hand, she kept continually
pausing to look round her, or gaze up the road to see if any one
was coming ; and if a horseman trotted by, I could tell by her
unqualified abuse of the poor equestrian, whoever he might be,
that she hated him because he was not Mr. Hatfield.
" Surely, " thought I. " she is not so indifferent to him as she
believes herself to be, or would have others to believe her ; and
her mother's anxiety is not so wholly causeless as she affirms. "'-
Three days passed away, and he did not make his appearance.
On the afternoon of the fourth, as we were walking beside the
park palings in the memorable field, each furnished with a book
{for I always took care to provide myself with something to be
doing when she did not require me to talk), she suddenly inter-
rupted my studies by exclaiming —
" Oh, Miss Grey ! do be so kind as to go and see ]Mark Wood,
39*5 AGNES GREY.
^nd take his wife half-a-crown from me — I should have given or
sent it a week ago, but quite forgot. There ! " said she, throwing
me her purse, and speaking very fast — " Never mind getting it
out now, but take the purse and give them what you hke ; I would
go with you, but I want to finish this volume. I'll come and
meet you when I've done it. Be quick, will you — and — oh,
\\ait ; hadn't you better read to him a bit? Run to the house
and get some sort of a good book. Anything will do. "
I did as I was desired ; but, suspecting something from hci
hurried manner and the suddenness of the request, I just glanced
back before I quitt(;d the field, and there was Mr. Hatfield about
to enter at the gate below. By sending me to the house for r.
book, she had just prevented my meeting him on the road.
" Never mind ! " thought I, " there'll be no great harm done.
Poor Mark will be glad of the half-crown, and perhaps of the I
good book too ; and if the Rector does steal Miss Rosalie's heart,
it will only humble her pride a little ; and if they do get married
at last, it will only save her from a worse fate ; and she will be
quite a good enough partner for him, and he for her. "
Mark Wood was the consumptive labourer whom I mentioned
before. He was now rapidly wearing away. Miss Murray, by
her liberality, obtained literally the blessing of him that was ready
to perish ; for though the half-crown could be of very little service
to him, he was glad of it for the sake of his wife and children,
so soon to be widowed and fatherless. After I had sat a few-
minutes, and read a little for the comfort and edification of him-
self and his afflicted wife, I left them ; but I had not proceeded
fifty yards before I encountered Mr. Weston, apparently on his
way to the same abode. He greeted me in his usual quiet, un-
affected way, stopped to inquire about the condition of the sick
man and his family, and with a sort of unconscious, brotherly
disregard to ceremony, took from my hand the book out of which
I had been reading, turned over its pages, made a few brief but
very sensible remarks, and restored it ; then told me about some
poor sufferer he had just been visiting, talked a little about
Nancy Brown, made a few observations upon my little rough
friend the terrier, that was frisking at his feet, and finally upon
the beauty of the weather, and departed.
I have omitted to give a detail of his words, from a notion that
they would not interest the reader as they did me, and not be-
cause I have forgotten them. No ; I remember them well ; for
AGNES GREY. 597
I thought them over and over again in the course of that day and
many succeeding ones, I know not how often ; and recalled every
intonation of his deep, clear voice, every flash of his quick, brown
eye, and every gleam of his pleasant, but too transient smile.
Such a confession will look very absurd, I fear ; but no matter : I
have written it : and they that read it will not knew the
writer.
While I was walking along, happy within, and pleased with
all around, Miss Murray came hastening to meet me ; her
buoyant step, flushed cheek, and radiant smiles showing that
she, too, was happy, in her own way. Running up to me, she
put her arm through mine, and without waiting to recover
breath, began —
" Now, Miss Grey, think yourself highly honoured, for I'm
come to tell you my news before I've breathed a word of it to
any one else, "
" Well, what is it? "
" Oh, such news ! In the first place, you must know that Mr.
Hatfield came upon me just after you were gone. I was in such
a way for fear papa or mamma should see him ; but you know I
couldn't call you back again, and so I — oh, dear ! I can't tell
you all about it now, for there's Matilda, I see, in the park, and
I must go and open my budget to her. But, however, Hatfield
was most uncommonly a.udacious, unspeakably complimentary,
and unprecedentedly tender — tried to be so, at least — he didn't
succeed very well in that, because it's not his vein. I'll tell you
all he said another time. "
" But what 6\diyoii say — I'm more interested in that ? "
" I'll tell you that, too, at some future period. I happened to
be in a very good humour just then ; but, though I was com-
plaisant and gracious enough, I took care not to compromise
myself in any possible way. But, however, the conceited wretch
chose to interpret my amiability of temper his own way, and at
length presumed upon my indulgence so far — what do you think?
— he actually — made me an offer ! "
" And you "
" I proudly drew myself up, and with the greatest coolness ex-
pressed my astonishment at such an occurrence, and hoped he had
seen nothing in my conduct to justify his expectations. You should
have seen how his countenance fell ! He went perfectly white in
the face. I assured him that I esteemed him and all that, but
398 AGNES GREY.
could not possibly accede to his proposals ; and if I did, papa
and mamma could never be brought to give their consent. "
"'But if they could,'said he,'would yours be wanting?'
"'Certainly, Mr. Hatfield,'I repHed, with a cool decision
which quelled all hope at once. Oh, if you had seen how dread-
fully mortified he was — how crushed to the earth by his dis-
appointment ! really, I almost pitied him myself.
" One more desperate attempt, however, he made. After a
silence of considerable duration, during which he struggled to be
calm, and I to be grave — for I felt a strong propensity to laugh—
which would have ruined all — he said, with the ghost of a smile—
'''But tell me plainly. Miss Murray, if I had the wealth of Sir
Hugh Meltham, or the prospects of his eldest son, would you
still refuse me? answer me truly, upon your honour.'
"'Certainly,'said I.'That would make no difference
whatever.'
" It was a great lie, but he looked so confident in his own
attractions still, that I determined not to leave him one stone
upon another. He looked me full in the face ; but I kept my
countenance so well that he could not imagine I was saying any-
thing more than the actual truth.
"'Then it's all over, I suppose,'he said, looking as if he could
have died on the spot with vexation and the intensity of his despain
But he was angry as well as disappointed. There was he, suffer-
ing so unspeakably, and there was I, the pitiless cause of it all,
so utterly impenetrable to all the artillery of his looks and words,
so calmly cold and proud, he could not but feel some resentment ;
and with singular bitterness he began —
"'I certainly did not expect this, Miss IMurray. I might say
something about your past conduct, and the hopes you have led
me to foster, but I forbear, on condition'
"'No conditions, Mr. Hatfield !'said I, now truly indignant
at his insolence.
"'Then let me beg it as a favour,'he replied, lowering his voice
at once, and taking a humbler tone :'let me entreat that you will
not mention this affair to any one whatever. If you will keep
silence about it, there need be no unpleasantness on either side
— nothing, I mean, beyond what is quite unavoidable : for my
own feelings I will endeavour to keep to myself, if I cannot anni-
hilate them — I will try to forgive, if I cannot forget the cause of
my sufferings. I will not suppose, Miss Murray, that you know
AGNES GREY. 399
how deeply you have injured me. I would not have you aware
of it ; but if, in addition to the injury you have already done me
—pardon me, but whether innocently or not, you have done it —
and if you add to it by giving publicity to this unfortunate affair,
or naming it at all, you will find that I too can speak, and though
you scorned my love, you will hardly scorn my'
" He stopped, but he bit his bloodless lip, and looked so
terribly fierce that I was quite frightened. However, my pride
upheld me still, and I answered disdainfully —
"'I do not know what motive you suppose I could have for
naming it to any one, Mr. Hatfield ; but if I were disposed to
do so, you would not deter me by threats ; and it is scarcely the
part of a gentleman to attempt it.'
"'Pardon me, Miss Murray,'said he,'I have loved you so
intensely — I do still adore you so deeply, that I w'ould not
willingly offend you ; but though I never have loved, and never
ca7i love any woman as I have loved you, it is equally certain
that I never was so ill-treated by any. On the contrary, I have
always found your sex the kindest and most tender and obliging
of God's creation, till now.'(Think of the conceited fellow
saying that !)'And the novelty and harshness of the lesson you
have taught me to-day, and the bitterness of being disappo " ited
in the only quarter on which the happiness of my life depended,
must excuse any appearance of asperity. If my presence is dis-
agreeable to you. Miss Murray,'he said (for I was looking about
me to show how little I cared for him, so he thought I was tired
of him, I suppose), —'if my presence is disagreeable to you.
Miss Muaray, you have only to promise me the favour I named,
and I wall relieve you at once. There are many ladies — some
even in this parish — who would be delighted to accept what you
have so scornfully trampled under your feet. They would be
naturally inclined to hate one whose surpassing loveliness has so
completely estranged my heart from them and blinded me to
their attractions ; and a single hint of the truth from me to one
of these, would be sufficient to raise such a talk against you as
would seriously injure your prospects, and diminish your chance
of success with any other gentleman you or your mamma might
design to entangle.'
'" What do you mean, sir?'said I, ready to stamp with
passion.
"'I mean that this affair from beginning to end appears to me
40O AGNES GREY.
like a case of arrant flirtation, to say the least of it— such a case
as you would find it rather inconvenient to have blazoned through
the vi'orld : especially with the additions and exaggerations of your
female rivals, who would be too glad to publish the matter, if I
only gave them a handle to it. But I promise you, on the faith
of a gentleman, that no word or syllable that could tend to your
prejudice shall ever escape my hps, provided you will'
"'Well, well, I won't mention it,'said I.'You may rely
upon my silence, if that can afford you any consolation. "
"'You promise it? "
"'Yes,'I answered, for I wanted to get rid of him now.
"'Farewell, then !'said he, in a most doleful heart-sick tone
and with a look where pride vainly struggled against despair, he
turned and went away : longing, no doubt, to get home, that h
might shut himself up in his study and cry — if he doesn't burst
into tears before he gets there. "
" But you have broken your promise already,'said I, truly
horrified at her perfidy.
" Oh ! it's only to you ; I know you won't repeat it. "
" Certainly, I shall not : but you say you are going to tell your
sister ; and she will tell your brothers when they come home, and
Brown immediately, if you do not tell her yourself; and Brown
will blazon it, or be the means of blazoning it throughout the
country. "
'■No, indeed, she won't. We shall not tell her at all, unless
it be under the promise of the strictest secrecy. "
''But how can you expect her to keep her promises better than
her more enlightened mistress? "
" Well, well, she shan't hear it then, " said Miss Murray, some-
what snappishly.
" But you will tell your mamma, of course, " pursued I ; " and
she will tell your papa. "
''Of course, I shall tell mamma, that is the very thing that
pleases me so much. I shall now be able to convince her how
mistaken she was in her fears about me. "
" Oh, ikafs it, is it? I was wondering what it was that
dehghted you so much. "
" Yes ; and another thing is, that I've humbled Mr. Hatfield
so charmingly ; and another— why, you must allow me some
share of female vanity : I don't pretend to be without that most
essential attribute of our sex — and if you had seen poor Hatfield's
AGNES GREY. 40I
intense eagerness in making his ardent declaration, and his
flattering proposal, and his agony of mind, that no effort of
pride could conceal, on being refused, you would have allowed
I had some cause to be gratified. "
" The greater his agony, I should think, the less your cause
for gratification. "
" Oh, nonsense ! " cried the young lady, shaking herself with
vexation. " You either can't understand me or you won't. If
I had not confidence in your magnanimity, I should think you
envied me. But you will, perhaps, comprehend this cause of
pleasure— which is as great as any — namely, tliat I am delighted
with myself for my prudence, my self-command, my heartless-
ness, if you please. I was not a bit taken by surprise, not a bit
confused, or awkward, or foolish ; I just acted and spoke as I
ought to have done, and was completely my own mistress
throughout. And here was a man, decidedly good-looking —
Jane and Susan Green call him bewitchingly handsome — I
suppose they're two of the ladies he pretends would be so glad
to have him ; but, however, he was certainly a very clever, witty,
agreeable companion — not \\ha.t yoi < call clever, but just enough
to make him entertaining ; and a man one needn't be ashamed
of anywhere,'and would not soon grow tired of; and to confess
ihe truth, I rather liked him — better even, of late, than Harry
Meltham — and he evidently idolised me ; and yet, though he
came upon me all alone and unprepared, I had the wisdom and
tlie pride, and the strength to refuse him — and so scornfully and
coolly as I did : I have good reason to be proud of that ! "
" And are you equally proud of having told him that his having
the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham would make no difference to
you when that was not the case ; and of having promised to tell
no one of his misadventure, apparently without the slightest
intention of keeping your promise ? "
" Of course ! what else could I do? You would not have had
me — but I see, Miss Grey, you're not in a good temper. Here's
Matilda ; I'll see what she and mamma have to say about it. "
She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, and thinking,
no doubt, that I envied her. I did not — at least, I firmly believed
I did not. I was sorry for her ; I was amazed, disgusted at her
heartless vanity ; I wondered why so much beauty should be given
to those who made so bad a use of it, and denied to some who
would make it a benefit to both themselves and others.
402 AGNES GREY.
But, God knows best, I concluded. There are, I suppose, some-
men as vain, as selfish, and as heartless as she is, and, perhaps,
such women may be useful to punish them.
CHAPTER XV.
THE WALK.
" O DEAR ! I wish Hatfield had not been so precipitate ! " said
Rosalie next day at four p.m., as, with a portentous yawn, she
laid down her worsted-work and looked listlessly towards the
window. " There's no inducement to go out now ; and nothing
to look forward to. The days will be so long and dull when there
are no parties to enliven them ; and there are none this week, or
next either, that I know of. "
" Pity you were so cross to him, " observed Matilda, to whom
this lamentation was addressed.''He'll never come again : and
I suspect you liked him after all. I hoped you would have taken
him for your beau, and left dear Harry to me, "
" Humph ! my beau must be an Adonis indeed, Matilda, the
admired of all beholders, if I am to be contented with him alone.
I'm sorry to lose Hatfield, I confess ; but the first decent man,
or number of men, that come to supply his place, will be more
than welcome. It's Sunday to-morrow — I do wonder how he'll
look, and whether he'll be able to go through the service. Most
likely he'll pretend he's got a cold and make Mr. Weston do
it all "
" Not he! " exclaimed Matilda, somewhat contemptuously.
" Fool as he is, he's not so soft as that comes to. "
Her sister was slightly offended ; but the event proved Matilda
was right : the disappointed lover performed his pastoral duties
as usual. Rosalie, indeed, affirmed he looked very pale and de-
jected ; he might be a little paler ; but the difference, if any, was
scarcely perceptible. As for his dejection, I certainly did not
hear his laugh ringing from the vestry as usual, nor his voice
loud in hilarious discourse ; though I did hear it uplifted in rating
the sexton in a manner that made the congregation stare ; and,
in his transits to and from the pulpit and the communion-table
there was more of solemn pomp, and less of that irreverent, self-
AGNES GREY.
403
confident, or rather self-delighted imperiousness with which he
usually swept along — that air that seemed to say, " You all
reverence and adore me, I know ; but if any one does not, I defy
him to the teeth ! " But the most remarkable change was, that
he never once suffered his eyes to wander in the direction of
Mr. Murray's pew, and did not leave the church till we were
gone.
Mr. Hatfield had doubtless received a very severe blow ; but
his pride impelled him to use every effort to conceal the effects
of it. He had been disappointed in his certain hope of obtaining
not only a beautiful, and, to him, highly attractive wife, but one
whose rank and fortune might give brilliance to far inferior
charms : he was likewise, no doubt, intensely mortified by his
repulse, and deeply offended at the conduct of Miss IMurray
throughout. It would have given him no little consolation to
have known how disappointed she was to find him apparently
so httle moved, and to see that he was able to refrain from
casting a single glance at her throughout both services ; though,
she declared, it showed he was thinking of her all the time, or
his eyes would have fallen upon her, if it were only by chance :
but if they had so chanced to fall, she would have affirmed it
was because they could not resist the attraction. It might have
pleased him too, in some degree, to have seen how dull and
dissatisfied she was throughout that week (the greater part of it,
at least), for lack of her usual source of excitement ; and how
often she regretted having " used him up so soon, " like a child
that, having devoured its plum-cake too hastily, sits sucking its
fingers, and vainly lamenting its greediness.
At length I was called upon, one fine morning, to accompany
her in a walk to the village. Ostensibly she went to get some
shades of Berlin wool, at a tolerably respectable shop that was
chiefly supported by the ladies of the vicinity : really — I trust
there is no breach of charity in supposing that she went with the
idea of meeting either with the Rector himself, or some other
admirer by the way ; for as we went along, she kept wondering
" what Hatfield would do or say, if we met him, " & c. & c. ; as
we passed Mr. Green's park-gates, she " wondered whether he
was at home — great stupid blockhead ; " as Lady Meltham's
carriage passed us, she " wondered what Mr, Harry was doing
this fine day ; " and then began to abuse his elder brother for
being " such a fool as to get married and go and live in London. "
404 AGNES GREY.
" Why, " said I, " I thought you wanted to live in London
yourself. "
" Yes, because it's so dull here: but then he makes it still
duller by taking himself off; and if he were not married I might
have him instead of that odious Sir Thomas. "
Then, observing the prints of a horse's feet on the somewhat
miry road, she " wondered whether it was a gentleman's horse, "
and finally concluded it was, for the impressions were too small
to have been made by a " great, clumsy cart-horse ; " and then
she " wondered who the rider could be, " and whether we should
meet him coming back, for she was sure he had only passed that
morning ; and lastly, when we entered the village and saw only
a few of its humble inhabitants moving about, she " wondered
why the stupid people couldn't keep in their houses ; she was
sure she didn't want to see their ugly faces, and dirty, vulgar
clothes — it wasn't for that she came to Horton ! "
Amid all this, I confess, I wondered, too, in secret, whether
we should meet, or catch a glimpse of somebody else ; and as
we passed his lodgings, I even went so far as to wonder whether
he was at the window. On entering the shop. Miss Murray de-
sired me to stand in the doorway while she transacted her busi-
ness, and tell her if any one passed. But alas ! there was no one
visible besides the villagers, except Jane and Susan Green coming
down the single street, apparently returning from a walk.
" Stupid things ! " muttered she, as she came out after having
concluded her bargain. " Why couldn't they have their dolt of
a brother with them? even he would be better than nothing. "
She greeted them, however, with a cheerful smile, and pro-
testations of pleasure at the happy meeting equal to their own.
They placed themselves one on each side of her, and all three
walked away chatting and laughing as young ladies do when
they get together, if they be but on tolerably intimate terms.
But I, feeling myself to be one too many, left them to their
merriment and lagged behind, as usual on such occasions : I had
no relish for walking beside Miss Green or Miss Susan like one
deaf and dumb, who could neither speak nor be spoken to.
But this time I was not long alone. It struck me, at first,
as very odd, that just as I was thinking about Mr. Weston he
should come up and accost me ; but afterwards, on due reflec-
tion, I thought there was nothing odd about it, unless it were
the fact of his speaking to me ; for on such a morning and so
AGNES GREY. 40$
near his own abode, it was natural enough that he should be
about ; and as for my thinking of him, I had been doing that,
with little intermission, ever since we set out on our journey ;
so there was nothing remarkable in that.
" You are alone again, Miss Grey ! " said he.
" Yes. "
" What kind of people are those ladies — the Misses Green? "
" I really don't know. "
''That's strange — when you live so near and see them so often ! "
" Well, I suppose they are lively, good-tempered girls; but
I imagine you must know them better than I do, yourself, for I
never exchanged a word with either of them. "
" Indeed! They don't strike me as being particularly re-
served. "
''Very likely they are not so to people of their own class ;
but they consider themselves as moving in quite a different
sphere from me ! "
He made no reply to this ; but after a short pause, he said —
" I suppose it's these things, Miss Grey, that make you think
you could not hve without a home? "
" Not exactly. The fact is I am too socially disposed to be
able to live contentedly without a friend ; and as the only friends
1 have, or am hlcely to have, are at home, if it — or rather, if they
were gone — I will not say I could not live — but I would rather
not live in such a desolate world. "
" But why do you say the only friends you are hkely to have?
Are you so unsociable that you cannot make friends? "
" No, but I never made one yet ; and in my present position
there is no possibility of doing so, or even of forming a common
acquaintance. Tlie fault may be partly in myself, but I hope
not altogether. "
" The fault is partly in society, and partly, I should think, in
your immediate neighbours: and partly, too, in yourself; for
many ladies, in your position, would make themselves be noticed
and accounted of. But your pupils should be companions for
you in some degree ; they cannot be many years younger than
yourself. "
" Oh, yes, they are good company sometimes ; but I cannot
call them friends, nor would they think of bestowing such a
name on me — they have other companions better suited to their
tastes. "
406 AGNES GREY.
" Perhaps you are too wise for them. How do you amuse
yourself when alone — do you read much? "
" Reading is my favourite occupation, when I have leisure for
it and books to read. "
From speaking of books in general, he passed to different
books in particular, and proceeded by rapid transitions from
topic to topic, till several matters, both of taste and opinion, had
been discussed considerably within the space of half-an-hour,
but without the embellishment of many observations from him-
self ; he being evidently less bent upon communicating his own
thoughts and predilections, than on discovering mine. He had
not the tact, or the art, to effect such a purpose by skilfully
drawing out my sentiments or ideas through the real or apparent
statement of his own, or leading the conversation by impercep-
tible gradations to such topics as he wished to advert to : but
such gentle abruptness, and such single-minded straightforward-
ness could not possibly offend me.
" And why should he interest himself at all in my moral and
intellectual capacities : what is it to him what I think or feel? "
I asked myself. And my heart throbbed in answer to the
question.
But Jane and Susan Green soon reached their home. As they
stood parleying at the park-gates, attempting to persuade Miss
Murray to come in, I wished Mr. Weston would go, that she
might not see him with me when she turned round ; but, un-
fortunately, his business, which was to pay one more visit to poor
Mark Wood, led him to pursue the same path as we did, till
nearly the close of our journey. When, however, he saw that
Rosalie had taken leave of her friends and I was about to join
her, he would have left me and passed on at a quicker pace ;
but, as he civilly hfted his hat in passing her, to my surprise,
instead of returning the salute with a stiff, ungracious bow, she
accosted him with one of her sweetest smiles, and, walking by
his side, began to talk to him with all imaginable cheerfulness
and affability ; and so we proceeded all three together.
After a short pause in the conversation, Air. Weston made
some remark addressed particularly to me, as referring to some-
thing we had been talking of before ; but, before I could answer,
Miss Murray replied to the observation and enlarged upon it:
he rejoined ; and, from thence to the close of the interview, she
■engrossed him entirely to herself. It might be partly owing to
AGNES GREY. 407
my own stupidity, my want of tact and assurance : but I felt my-
self wronged : I trembled with apprehension ; and I listened with
envy to her easy, rapid flow of utterance, and saw with anxiety
the bright smile with which she looked into his face from time
to time : for she was walking a little in advance, for the purpose
(as I judged) of being seen as well as heard. If her conversation
was light and trivial, it was amusing, and she was never at a loss
for something to say, or for suitable words to express it in.
There was nothing pert or flippant in her manner now, as when
she walked with Mr. Hatfield ; there was only a gentle, playful
kind of vivacity, which I thought must be peculiarly pleasing to
a man of Mr. Weston's disposition and temperament.
When he was gone she began to laugh, and muttered to her-
self — " I thought I could do it ! "
" Do what? " I asked.
" Fix that man. "
" What in the world do you mean ? "
" I mean that he will go home and dream of me. I have
shot him through the heart ! "
''How do you know ? "
''By many infallible proofs : more especially the look he gave
me when he went away. It was not an impudent look — I
exonerate him from that — it was a look of reverential, tender
adoration. Ha, ha ! he's not quite such a stupid blockhead
as I thought him ! "
I made no answer, for my heart was in my throat, or some-
thing like it, and I could not trust myself to speak. " O God,
avert it ! " I cried internally — " for his sake, not for mine ! "
Miss ^Murray made several trivial observations as we passed
up the park, to which (in spite of my reluctance to let one
glimpse of my feelings appear) I could only answer by mono-
syllables. Whether she intended to torment me, or merely to
amuse herself, I could not tell — and did not much care ; but I
thought of the poor man and his one lamb, and the rich man
with his thousand flocks ; and I dreaded I knew not what for
Mr. Weston, independently of my own blighted hopes.
Right glad was 1 to get into the house, and find myself alone
once more in my own room. My first impulse wa^s to sink into
the chair beside the bed ; and laying my head on the pillow, to
seek relief in a passionate burst of tears : there was an im-
perative craving for such an indulgence ; but alas ! I must
408 AGNES GREY.
restrain and swallow back my feelings still : there was the bell
— the odious bell for the schoolroom dinner ; and I must go
down with a calm face, and smile, and laugh, and talk nonsense
— yes, and eat, too, if possible, as if all was right, and I was
just returned from a pleasant walk.
CHAPTER XVI.
THE SUBSTITUTION.
Next Sunday was one of the gloomiest of April days — a day of
thick, dark clouds, and heavy showers. None of the Murrays
were disposed to attend church in the afternoon, excepting
Rosalie : she was bent upon going as usual ; so she ordered the
carriage, and I went with her : nothing loth, of course, for at
church I might look without fear of scorn or censure upon a form
and face more pleasing to me than the most beautiful of God's
creations ; I might listen without disturbance to a voice more
charming than the sweetest music to my ears ; I might seem to
hold communion with that soul in which I felt so deeply in-
terested, and imbibe its purest thoughts and holiest aspirations,
with no alloy to such felicity except the secret reproaches of my
conscience, which would too often whisper that I was deceiving
my own self, and mocking God with the service of a heart more
bent upon the creature than the Creator.
Sometimes such thoughts would give me trouble enough ; but
sometimes I could quiet them with thinking — it is not the man,
it is his goodness that I love. " Whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are honest and
of good report, think on these things. " We do well to worship
God in His works ; and I know none of them in which so many
of His attributes — so much of His own spirit shines, as in this
His faithful servant ; whom to know and not to appreciate,
were obtuse insensibility in me, who have so little else to occupy
my heart.
Almost immediately after the conclusion of the service. Miss
Murray left the church. We had to stand in the porch, for it
was raining, and the carriage was not yet come. I wondered
at her coming forth so hastily, for neither young Meltham nor
AGNES GREY. 4^9
Squire Green was there ; but I soon found it was to secure an
nterview with Mr. Weston as he came out, which he presently
lid Having saluted us both, he would have passed on, but
she detained him ; first with observations upon the disagreeable
.veather, and then with asking if he would be so kmd as to come
some time to-morrow to see the granddaughter of the old woman
.vho kept the porter's lodge, for the girl was ill of a fever, and
wished to see him. He promised to do so.
" And at what time will you be most likely to come, Mr.
Weston > The old woman will like to know when to expect
vou-you know such people think more about having their
cottages in order when decent people come to see them than
we are apt to suppose. " . . r .,
Here was a wonderful instance of consideration from the
thou-htless Miss Murray. Mr. Weston named an hour in the
morning at which he would endeavour to be there. By this
time the carriage was ready, and the footman was waiting, with
an open umbrella, to escort Miss Murray through the church-
yard I was about to follow ; but Mr. Weston had an umbrella
too, and offered me the benefit of its shelter, for it was raining
heavily.
" No, thank you, I don't mind the rain, I said. 1 always
lacked common sense when taken by surprise.
" But you don't like it, I suppose ?-an umbrella will do you
no harm at any rate, " he replied, with a smile that showed he
was not offended ; as a man of worse temper or less penetration
would have been at such a refusal of his aid. I could not deny
the truth of his assertion, and so went with him to the carriage ;
he even offered me his hand on getting in : an unnecessary piece
of civility, but I accepted that too, for fear of giving offence.
One -lance he gave, one little smile at parting-it was but for a
moment ; but therein I read, or thought I read, a meaning that
kindled in my heart a brighter flame of hope than had ever yet
arisen. , r- ,^ -r
" I would have sent the footman back for you, Miss Grey, if
you'd waited a moment-you needn't have taken Mr. Weston s
umbrella, " observed Rosalie, with a very unamiable cloud upon
her pretty face. ^„\xt .
" I would have come without an umbrella, but Mr. Weston
offered me the benefit of his, and I could not have refused it
more than I did without offending him, " replied I, smiling
4IO AGNES GREY.
placidly ; for my inward happiness made that amusing, which
would have wounded me at another time.
The carriage was now in motion. Miss Murray bent for-
wards, and looked out of the window as we were passing Mr.
Weston. He was pacing homewards along the causeway, and
did not turn his head.
" Stupid ass ! " cried she, throwing herself back again in the
seat. " You don't know tohat you've lost by not looking this
way ! "
" What has he lost? "
" A bow from me, that would have raised him to the seventh
heaven ! "
I made no answer. I saw she was out of humour, and I
derived a secret gratification from the fact, not that she was
vexed, but that she thought she had reason to be so. It made
me think my hopes were not entirely the offspring of my wishes
and imagination.
" I mean to take up Mr. Weston instead of Mr. Hatfield, "
said my companion after a short pause, resuming something
of her usual cheerfulness.''The ball at Ashby Park takes place
on Tuesday, you know ; and mamma thinks it very likely that
Sir Thomas will propose to me then : such things are often done
in the privacy of the ball-room, when gentlemen are most easily
ensnared, and ladies most enchanting. But if I am to be married
so soon, I must make the best of the present time : I am deter-
mined Hatfield shall not be the only man who shall by his heart
at my feet, and implore me to accept the worthless gift in vain. "
" If you mean Mr. Weston to be one of your victims, " said
I, with affected indifference, " you will have to make such over-
tures yourself that you will find it difficult to draw back when he
asks you to fulfil the expectations you have raised. "
" I don't suppose he will ask me to maryy him — nor should I
desire it : that would be rather too much presumption ! but I
intend him to feel my power. He has felt it already, indeed :
but he shall acknowledge it too ; and what visionary hopes he
may have, he must keep to himself, and only amuse me with the
result of them — for a time. "
" Oh ! that some kind spirit would whisper those words in his
ear ! " I inwardly exclaimed. I was far too indignant to hazard
a reply to her observation, aloud ; and nothing more was said
about Mr. \\'eston that day, by me or in my hearing. But next
AGNES GREY. 4U
morning, soon after breakfast, IMiss Murray came into the
schoolroom where her sister was employed at her studies, or
rather her lessons, for studies they were not, and said,''Matilda,
I want you to take a walk with me about eleven o'clock. "
" Oh, I can't, Rosalie ! I have to give orders about my new
bridle and saddle-cloth, and speak to the rat-catcher about his
dogs : Miss Grey must go with you. "
" No, I wantyoM, " said Rosalie ; and calhng her sister to the
window, she whispered an explanation in her ear ; upon which
the latter consented to go.
I remembered that eleven was the hour at which Mr, Weston
proposed to come to the porter's lodge ; and remembering that
I beheld the whole contrivance. Accordingly, at dinner, I was
entertained with a long account of how Mr. Weston had over-
taken them as they were walking along the road ; and how they
had had a long walk and talk with him, and really found him
quite an agreeable companion ; and how he must have been,
and evidently was, delighted with them and their amazing con-
descension, & c. & c.
CHAPTER XVII.
CONFESSIONS.
As I am in the way of confessions, I may as well acknowledge
that, about this time, I paid more attention to dress than ever I
had done before. This is not saying much ; for hitherto I had
been a little neglectful in that particular : but now, also, it was
no uncommon thing to spend as much as two minutes in the con-
templation of my own image in the glass ; though I never could
derive any consolation from such a study, I could discover no
beauty in those marked features, that pale hollow cheek, and
ordinary dark brown hair ; there might be intellect in the fore-
head, there might be expression in the dark grey eyes : but what
of that? — a low Grecian brow, and large black eyes devoid of
sentiment would be esteemed far preferable. It is foolish to wish
for beauty. Sensible people never either desire it for themselves,
or care about it in others. If the mind be but well cultivated,
and the heart well disposed, no one ever cares for the exterior.
412 AGNES GREY.
So said the teachers of our childhood ; and so say we to the
children of the present day. All very judicious and proper,
no doubt ; but, are such assertions supported by actual ex-
perience ?
We are naturally disposed to love what gives us pleasure, and
what more pleasing than a beautiful face— when we know no harm
of the possessor at least? A little girl loves her bird — Why?
Because it lives and feels ; because it is helpless and harmless?
A toad, likewise, lives and feels, and is equally helpless and harm-
less ; but though she would not hurt a toad, she cannot love it
like the bird, with its graceful form, soft feathers, and bright,
speaking eyes. If a woman is fair and amiable, she is praised
for both qualities, but especially the former, by the bulk of man-
kind : if, on the other hand, she is disagreeable in person and
character, her plainness is commonly inveighed against as her
greatest crime, because, to common observers, it gives the greatest
offence ; while, if she is plain and good, provided she is a person
of retired manners and secluded life, no one ever knows of her
goodness, except her immediate connections. Others, on the
contrary, are disposed to form unfavourable opinions of her mind
and disposition, if it be but to excuse themselves for their instinc-
tive dislike of one so unfavoured by nature ; and vice versa with
her whose angel form conceals a vicious heart, or sheds a false,
deceitful charm over defects and " foibles that would not be
tolerated in another. They that have beauty, let them be
thankful for it, and make a good use of it, like any other talent ;
they that have it not, let them console themselves, and do the
best they can without it : certainly, though liable to be over-
estimated, it is a gift of God, and not to be despised. Many
will feel this who have felt that they could love, and whose hearts
tell them that they are worthy to be loved again ; while yet they
are debarred by the lack of this or some such seeming trifle, from
giving and receiving that happiness they seem almost made to
feel and to impart. As well might the humble glow-worm
despise that power of giving light without which the roving fly
might pass her and repass her a thousand times, and never rest
beside her : she might hear her winged darling buzzing over and
around her ; he vainly seeking her, she longing to be found, but
with no power to make her presence known, no voice to call
him, no wings to follow his flight;— the fly must seek another
mate, the worm must live and die alone.
AGNES GREY. 413
Such were some of my reflections about this period. I might
go on prosing more and more, I might dive much deeper, and
disclose other thoughts, propose questions the reader might be
puzzled to answer, and deduce arguments that might startle his
prejudices, or, perhaps, provoke his ridicule, because he could
not comprehend them ; but I forbear.
Now, therefore, let us return to Miss Murray. She accom-
panied her mamma to the ball on Tuesday ; of course splendidly
attired, and delighted with her prospects and her charms. As
Ashby Park was nearly ten miles distant from Horton Lodge,
they had to set out pretty early, and I intended to have spent
the evening with Nancy Brown, whom I had not seen for a long
time; but my kind pupil took care I should spend it neither
there nor anywhere else beyond the limits of the schoolroom, by
giving me a piece of music to copy, which kept me closely occu-
pied till bed-time. About eleven next morning, as soon as she
had left her room, she came to tell me her news. Sir Thomas
had indeed proposed to her at the ball : an event which reflected
great credit on her mamma's sagacity, if not upon her skill in
contrivance. I rather incline to the belief that she had first laid
her plans, and then predicted their success. The offer had been
accepted, of course, and the bridegroom-elect w'as coming that
day to settle matters with Mr. Murray.
Rosalie was pleased with tlie thoughts of becoming mistress of
Ashby Park ; she was elated with the prospect of the bridal
ceremony and its attendant splendour and dclat, the honeymoon
spent abroad, and the subsequent gaieties she expected to enjoy
in London and elsewhere ; she appeared pretty well pleased too,
for the time being, with Sir Thomas himself, because she had so
lately seen him, danced with him, and been flattered by him ; but,
after all, she seemed to shrink from the idea of being so soon
united : she wished the ceremony to be delayed some months, at
least ; and I wished it too. It seemed a horrible thing to hurry
on the inauspicious match, and not to give the poor creature time
to think and reason on the irrevocable step she was about to take.
I made no pretension to " a mother's watchful, anxious care, "
but I was amazed and horrified at Mrs. Murray's heartlessness,
or want of thought for the real good of her child ; and, by my
unheeded warnings and exhortations, I vainly strove to remedy the
evil. Miss Murray only laughed at what I said ; and I soon
found that her reluctance to an immediate union arose chiefly
414 AGNES GREY.
from a desire to do what execution she could among the young
gentlemen of her acquaintance, before she was incapacitated from
further mischief of the kind. It was for this cause that, before
confiding to me the secret of her engagement, she had extracted
a promise that I would not mention a word on the subject to any
one. And when I saw this, and when I beheld her plunge more
recklessly than ever into the depths of heartless coquetry, I had
no more pity for her. " Come what will, " I thought, " she
deserves it. Sir Thomas cannot be too bad for her ; and the
sooner she is incapacitated from deceiving and injuring others
the better. "
The wedding was fixed for the ist of June. Between that
and the critical ball was little more than six weeks ; but, with
Rosalie's accomplished skill and resolute exertion, much might
be done, even within that period : especially as Sir Thomas spent
most of the interim in London ; whither he went up, it was said,
to settle affairs with his lawyer, and make other preparations for
the approaching nuptials. He endeavoured to supply the want
of his presence by a pretty constant fire of billets-doux ; but these
did not attract the neighbours'attention, and open their eyes, as
personal visits would have done ; and old Lady Ashby's haughty,
sour spirit of reserve withheld her from spreading the news, while
her indifferent health prevented her coming to visit her future
daughter-in-law ; so that, altogether, this affair was kept far
closer than such things usually are.
Rosalie would sometimes show her lover's epistles to me, to
convince me what a kind, devoted husband he would make.
She showed me the letters of another individual, too, the un-
fortunate Mr. Green, who had not the courage, or, as she ex-
pressed it, the " spunk " to plead his cause in person, but whom
one denial would not satisfy : he must write again and again.
He would not have done so if he could have seen the grimaces
his fair idol made over his moving appeals to her feelings, and
heard her scornful laughter, and the opprobrious epithets she
heaped upon him for his perseverance.
" Why don't you tell him, at once, that you are engaged? "
I asked.
" Oh, I don't want him to know that, " replied she. " If he
knew it, his sisters and everybody would know it, and then there
would be an end of my — ahem ! And, besides, if I told him that,
he would think my engagement was the only obstacle, and that
AGNES GREY. 4^5
T would have him if I ^vere free ; which I could not bear that any
man should think, and he, of all others, at least. Besides, I don t
c^re for his letters, " she added contemptuously ; " he may write
^s often as he pleases, and look as great a calf as he hkes when
I meet him ; it only amuses me. " .,...,
Meantime, voung Meltham was pretty frequent in his visits to
the house or t'ransits past it : and, judging by Matilda's execra-
tions and reproaches, her sister paid more attention to him than
civility required : in other words, she carried on as animated a
flirtation as the presence of her parents would admit. She made
some attempts to bring Mr. Hatfield once more to her feet ; but
findin- them unsuccessful, she repaid his haughty indifference
with still loftier scorn, and spoke of him with as much disdain
and detestation as she had formerly done of his curate But.
amid all this, she never for a moment lost sight of Mr. Weston.
She embraced every opportunity of meeting him, tried every art
to fascinate him, and pursued him with as much perseverance as
if she reallv loved him and no other, and the happmess of her
life depended upon eliciting a return of affection. Such conduct
was completely beyond my comprehension. Had 1 seen it
depicted in a novel, I should have thought it unnatural; had I
heard it described by others, I should have deemed it a mistake
or an exaggeration ; but when I saw it with my own eyes, and
suffered from it too, I could only conclude that excessive vanlt^^
like drunkenness, hardens the heart, enslaves the faculties, and
perverts the feehngs ; and that dogs are not the only creatures
which, when gorged to the throat, will yet gloat over what they
cannot devour, and grudge the smallest morsel to a starving
'she'now became extremely beneficent to the poor cottagers.
Her acquaintance among them was more widely extended, her
visits to their humble dwellings were more frequent and excursive
than they had ever been before. Hereby, she earned aniong them
the reputation of a condescending and very charitable young
lady ; and their encomiums were sure to be repeated to Mr.
Weston : whom also she had thus a daily chance of meeting in
one or other of their abodes, or in her transits to and fro ; and
often, likewise, she could gather, through their gossip to what
places he was likely to go at such and such a tune, whether to
baptize a child, or to visit the aged, the sick, the sad, or the
dyin- • and most skilfully she laid her plans accordingly, in
4l6 AGNES GREY.
these excursions she would sometimes go with her sister — whom,
by some means, she had persuaded or bribed to enter into her
schemes— sometimes alone, never, now, with me ; so that I was
debarred the pleasure of seeing Mr. Weston, or hearing his voice
even in conversation with another : which would certainly have
been a very great pleasure, however hurtful or however fraught
with pain. I could not even see him at church : for Miss Murray,
under some trivial pretext, chose to take possession of that corner
in the family pew which had been mine ever since I came ; and,
unless I had the presumption to station myself between Mr. and
Mrs. Murray, I must sit with my back to the pulpit, which I ac-
cordingly did.
Now, also, I never walked home with my pupils : they said
their mamma thought it did not look well to see three people out
of the family walking, and only two going in the carriage ; and,
as they greatly preferred walking in fine weather, I should be
honoured by going with the seniors. " And, besides, " said they,
" you can't walk as fast as we do ; you know you're always lag-
ging behind. " I knew these were false excuses, but I made no
objections, and never contradicted such assertions, well knowing
the motives which dictated them. And in the afternoons, during
those six memorable weeks, I never went to church at all. If I
had a cold, or any slight indisposition, they took advantage of
that to make me stay at home ; and often they would tell me they
were not going again that day, themselves, and then pretend to
change their minds, and set off without telling me : so managing
their departure that I never discovered the change of purpose til^
too late. Upon their return home, on one of these occasions, -;
they entertained me with an animated account of a conversatioii
they had had with Mr. Weston as they came along. " And he
asked if you were ill, Miss Grey, " said Matilda; " but we told
him you were quite well, only you didn't want to come to church
— so he'll think you're turned wicked. "
All chance meetings on week-days were likewise carefully pre-
vented ; for, lest I should go to see poor Nancy Brown or any
other person. Miss Murray took good care to provide sufficient
employment for all my leisure hours. There was always some
drawing to finish, some music to copy, or some work to do,
sufficient to incapacitate me from indulging in anything beyond
a short walk about the grounds, however she or her sister might
be occupied.
AGNES GREY.
417
One morning, having sought and waylaid Mr, Weston, they
returned in high glee to give rae an account of their interview.
" And he asked after you again, " said Matilda, in spite of her
sister's silent but imperative intimation that she should hold her
tongue. " He wondered why you were never with us, and
thought you must have delicate health, as you came out so
seldom. "
" He didn't, Matilda — what nonsense you're talking ! "
" Oh, Rosalie, what a lie ! He did, you know; and you said
—Don't Rosalie — hang it !— I won't be pinched so ! And, Miss
Grey, Rosalie told him you were quite well, but you were always
so buried in your books that you had no pleasure in anything
else. "
" What an idea he must have of me ! " I thought.
" And, " I asked, " does old Nancy ever inquire about me? "
" Yes ; and we tell her you are so fond of reading and draw-
ing that you can do nothing else. "
" That is not the case though ; if you had told her I was so
busy I could not come to see her, it would have been nearer the
truth. "
" I don't think it would, " replied Miss Murray, suddenly kind-
ling up; " I'm sure you have plenty of time to yourself now,
when you have so little teaching to do. "
It was no use beginning to dispute with such indulged, un-
reasoning creatures : so I held my peace. I was accustomed,
now, to keeping silence when things distasteful to my ear were
•^ered ; and now, too, I was used to wearing a placid smiling
-ountenance when my heart was bitter within me. Only those
wiio have felt the like can imagine my feehngs, as I sat with an
assumption of smihng indifference, hstening to the accounts of
those meetings and interviews with Mr. Weston, which they
seemed to find such pleasure in describing to me ; and hearing
things asserted of him which, from the character of the man, I
knew to be exaggerations and perversions of the truth, if not en-
tirely false— things derogatory to him, and flattering to them —
especially to Miss Murray — which I burned to contradict, or, at
least, to show my doubts about, but dared not ; lest, in express-
ing my disbelief, I should display my interest too. Other things
I heard, which I felt or feared were indeed too true : but I must
still conceal my anxiety respecting him, my indignation against
them, beneath a careless aspect; others, again, mere hints of
41 8 AGNES GREY.
something said or done, which I longed to hear more of, but
could not venture to inquire. So passed the weary time. I
could not even comfort myself with saying,''She will soon be
married ; and then there may be hope. "
. Soon after her marriage the holidays would come ; and when
I returned from home, most likely, Mr. Weston would be gone,
for I was told that he and the Rector could not agree (the
Rector's fault, of course), and he was about to remove to an-
other place.
No — besides my hope in God, my only consolation was in
thinking that, though he knew it not, I was more worthy of his
love than Rosalie Murray, charming and engaging as she was;
for I could appreciate his excellence, which she could not: I
would devote my life to the promotion of his happiness ; she
would destroy his happiness for the momentary gratification of
her own vanity. " Oh, if he could but know the difference ! "
I would earnestly exclaim, " But no ! I would not have him
see my heart : yet, if he could but know her hoUowness, her ]
worthless, heartless frivolity, he would then be safe, and I should
be — almost happy, though I might never see him more ! "
I fear, by this time, the reader is well nigh disgusted with the j
folly and weakness I have so freely laid before him. I never |
disclosed it then, and would not have done so had my own sister'
or my mother been with me in the house. I was a close and
resolute dissembler— in this one case at least. My prayers, my
tears, my wishes, fears, and lamentations, were witnessed by
myself and Heaven alone.
When we are harassed by sorrows or anxieties, or long op-
pressed by any powerful feelings which we must keep to ourselves,
for which we can obtain and seek no sympathy from any living
creature, and which yet we cannot, or will not wholly crush, we
often naturally seek relief in poetry— and often find it, too—
whether in the effusions of others.Avhich seem to harmonise with
our existing case, or in our own attempts to give utterance to
those thoughts and feelings in strains less musical, perchance,
but more appropriate, and therefore more penetrating and sym-
pathetic, and, for the time, more soothing, or more powerful to
rouse and to unburden the oppressed and swollen heart. Before
this time, at Wellwood House and here, when suffering from
home-sick melancholy, I had sought relief twice or thrice at this
secret source of consolation ; and now I flew to it again, with
AGNES GREY.
419
greater avidity than ever, because I seemed to need it more. I
still preserve those relics of past sufferings and experience, like
pillars of witness set up in travelling through the vale of life, to
mark particular occurrences. The footsteps are obliterated now ;
the face of the country may be changed ; but the pillar is still
there, to remind me how all things were when it was reared.
Lest the reader should be curious to see any of these effusions, I
will favour him with one short specimen : cold and languid as
the lines may seem, it was almost a passion of grief to which
they owed their being.
" Oh, they have robbed me of the hope
My spirit held so dear ;
They will not let me hear that voice
My soul delights to hear.
They will not let me see that face
I so delight to see ;
And they have taken all thy smiles.
And all thy love from me.
Well, let them seize on all they can ; —
One treasure still is mine, —
A heart that loves to think on thee,
And feels the worth of thine. "
Yes, at least, they could not deprive me of that : I could think
of him day and night ; and I could feel that he was worthy to be
thought of. Nobody knew him as I did ; nobody could appre-
ciate him as I did ; nobody could love him as I — could, if I
might : but there was the evil. What business had I to think
so much of one that never thought of me? Was it not foolish?
was it not wrong? Yet, if I found such deep delight in thinking
of him, and if I kept those thoughts to myself, and troubled no
one else with them, where was the harm of it? I would ask
myself. And such reasoning prevented me from making any
sufficient effort to shake off my fetters.
But, if those thoughts brought delight, it was a painfuUtroubled
pleasure, too near akin to anguish ; and one that did me more
injury than I was aware of. It was an indulgence that a person
of more wisdom or more experience would doubtless have denied
herself. And yet, how dreary to turn my eyes from the con-
420 AGNES GREY.
templation of that bright object and force them to dwell on the
dull, grey, desolate prospect around : the joyless, hopeless,
solitary path that lay before me. It was wrong to be so joyless,
so desponding ; I should have made God my friend, and to do
His will the pleasure and the business of my life ; but faith was
weak, and passion was too strong.
In this time of trouble I had two other causes of affliction.
The first may seem a trifle, but it cost me many a tear : Snap,
my little dumb, rough- visaged, but bright-eyed, warm-hearted
companion, the only thing I had to love me, was taken away,
and delivered over to the tender mercies of the village rat-catcher,
a man notorious for his brutal treatment of his canine slaves.
The other was serious enough : my letters from home gave in-
timation that my father's health was worse. No boding fears
were expressed, but I was grown timid and despondent, and
could not help fearing that some dreadful calamity awaited us
there. I seemed to see the black clouds gathering round m}
native hills, and to hear the angry muttering of a storm that was
about to burst, and desolate our hearth.
CHAPTER XVIII.
MIRTH AND MOURNING.
The ist of June arrived at last : and Rosalie Murray was trans-
muted into Lady Ashby. Most splendidly beautiful she looked
in her bridal costume. Upon her return from church, after the
ceremony, she came flying into the schoolroom, flushed with
excitement, and laughing, half in mirth, and half in reckless
desperation, as it seemed to me.
" Now, Miss Grey, I'm Lady Ashby ! " she exclaimed. " It's
done, my fate is sealed : there's no drawing back now. I'm
come to receive your congratulations and bid you good-bye ; and
then I'm off for Paris, Rome, Naples, Switzerland, London —
oh, dear ! what a deal I shall see and hear before I come back
again. But don't forget me : I shan't forget you, though I've
been a naughty girl. Come, why don't you congratulate
me? "
AGNES GREY. 421
" I cannot congratulate you, " I replied, " till I know whether
;his change is really for the better : but I sincerely hope it is ;
and I wish you true happiness and the best of blessings. "
'Well, good-bye, the carriage is waiting, and they're calling
me. "
She gave me a hasty kiss, and was hurrying away : but, sud-
denly returning, embraced me with more affection than I thought
her capable of evincing, and departed with tears in her eyes.
Poor girl ! I really loved her then ; and forgave her from my heart
all the injury she had done me — and others also : she had not
half known it, I was sure ; and I prayed God to pardon her
too.
During the remainder of that day of festal sadness, I w^as left
to my own devices. Being too much unhinged for any steady
occupation, I wandered about with a book in my hand for several
hours, more thinking than reading, for I had many things to
think about. In the evening, I made use of my liberty to go
and see my old friend Nancy once again ; to apologise for my
long absence (which must have seemed so neglectful and unkind)
by telling her how busy I had been ; and to talk, or read, or
work for her, whichever might be most acceptable, and also, of
course, to tell her the news of this important day : and perhaps
to obtain a little information from her in return, respecting Mr.
Weston's expected departure. But of this she seemed to know
nothing, and I hoped, as she did, that it was all a false report.
She was very glad to see me ; but, happily, her eyes were
now so nearly well that she was almost independent of my ser-
vices. She was deeply interested in the wedding ; but while I
amused her with the details of the festive day, the splendours
of the bridal party and of the bride herself, she often sighed and
shook her head, and wished good might come of it ; she seemed,
like me, to regard it rather as a theme for sorrow than rejoicing.
I sat a long time talking to her about that and other things— but
no one came.
Shall I confess that I sometimes looked towards the door
with a half-expectant wish to see it open and give entrance to
Mr. Weston, as had happened once before? and that, returning
through the lanes and fields, I often paused to look round me,
and walked more slowly than was at all necessary— for, though
a fine evening, it was not a hot one— and, finally, felt a sense
of emptiness and disappointment at having reached the house
422 AGNES GREY.
without meeting or even catching a distant glimpse of any one,
except a few labourers returning from their work?
Sunday, however, was approaching : I should see him then ;
for now that Miss Murray was gone, I could have my old corner
again. I should see him, and by look, speech, and manner, I
might judge whether the circumstance of her marriage had verv
much afflicted him. Happily, I could perceive no shadow of a
difference : he wore the same aspect as he had worn two months
ago — voice, look, manner, all alike unchanged : there was the
same keen-sighted, unclouded truthfulness in his discourse, the
same forcible clearness in his style, the same earnest simplicity
in all he said and did, that made itself not marked by the eye
and ear, but felt upon the hearts of his audience.
I walked home with Miss Matilda ; but he did 7iot joi?i -us.
Matilda was now sadly at a loss for amusement, and woefully in
want of a companion : her brothers at school, her sister married
and gone, she too young to be admitted into society ; for which,
from Rosalie's example, she was in some degree beginning to
acquire a taste — a taste at least for the company of certain classes
of gentlemen ; at this dull time of year — no hunting going on,
no shooting even — for, though she might not join in that, it was
soinethi7ig to see her father or the gamekeeper go out with the
dogs, and to talk with them on their return, about the different
birds they had bagged. Now, also, she was denied the solace
which the companionship of the coachman, grooms, horses,
greyhounds, and pointers might have afforded ; for her mother
having, notwithstanding the disadvantages of a country life, so
satisfactorily disposed of her elder daughter, the pride of her
heart, had begun seriously to turn her attention to the younger ;
and, being truly alarmed at the roughness of her manners, and
thinking it high time to work a reform, had been roused at length
to exert her authority, and prohibited entirely the yards, stables,
kennels, and coach-house. Of course, she was not implicitly
obeyed ; but, indulgent as she had hitherto been, when once her
spirit was roused, her temper was not so gentle as she required
that of her governesses to be, and her will was not to be thwarted
with impunity. After many a scene of contention between mother
and daughter, many a violent outbreak which I was ashamed to
witness, in which the father's authority was often called in to
confirm with oaths and threats the mother's slighted prohibitions
^for even he could see that " Tilly, though she would have made
AGNES GREY. 423
i fine lad, was not quite what a young lady ought to be " — •
Matilda at length found that her easiest plan was to keep clear
of the forbidden regions ; unless she could now and then steal a
visit without her watchful mother's knowledge.
Amid all this, let it not be imagined that I escaped without
many a reprimand, and many an implied reproach, that lost
none of its sting from not being openly worded ; but rather
wounded the more deeply, because, from that very reason, it
seemed to preclude self-defence. Frequently, I was told tO'
amuse Miss Matilda with other things, and to remind her of her
mother's precepts and prohibitions. I did so to the best of my
power ; but she would not be amused against her will, and
could not against her taste ; and though I went beyond mere
reminding, such gentle remonstrances as I could use were utterly
ineffectual.
" Dear !Miss Grey ! it is the strangest thing. I suppose you
can't help it, if it's not in your nature — but I tuonder you can't
win the confidence of that girl, and make your society at least
as agreeable to her as that of Robert or Joseph ! "
''They can talk the best about the things in which she is most
interested, " I replied.
" Well ! that is a strange confession, however, to come from
hex governess / Who is to form a young lady's tastes, I wonder,
if the governess doesn't do it? I have known governesses who
have so completely identified themselves with the reputation
of their young ladies for elegance and propriety in mind and
manners, that they would Mush to speak a word against them ;
and to hear the slightest blame imputed to their pupils was
worse than to be censured in their own persons— and I really
think it very natural, for my part. "
" Do you, ma'am? "
" Yes, of course: the young lady's proficiency and elegance
is of more consequence to the governess than her own, as well
as to the world. If she wishes to prosper in her vocation she
must devote all her energies to her business : all her ideas and
all her ambition will tend to the accomplishment of that one
object. When we wish to decide upon the merits of a governess,
we naturally look at the young ladies she professes to^iiave edu-
cated, and judge accordingly. The judicious governess knows
this : she knows that, while she lives in obscurity herself, her
pupil's virtues and defects will be open to every eye ; and that,
424 AGNES GREY.
unless she loses sight of herself in their cultivation, she need
not hope for success. You see. Miss Grey, it is just the same
as any other trade or profession: they that wish to prosper
must devote themselves body and soul to their calling- and if
they begin to yield to indolence or self-indulgence they are
speedily distanced by wiser competitors : there is little to choose
between a person that ruins her pupils by neglect, and one that
corrupts them by her example. You will excuse my dropping
these little hints ; you know it is all for your own good. Many
ladies would speak to you much more strongly ; and many would
not trouble themselves to speak at all. but quietly look out for a
substitute. That, of course, would be the easiest plan: but I
know the advantages of a place like this to a person in your
situation ; and I have no desire to part with you, as I am sure
you would do very well if you will only think of these things
and try to exert yourself a little more: then, I am convinced
you would soon acquire that delicate tact which alone is want-
ing to give you a proper influence over the mind of your
pupa. ^
I was about to give the lady some idea of the fallacy of her
expectations ; but she sailed away as soon as she had concluded
her speech. Having said what she wished, it was no part of
her plan to await my answer: it was my business to hear, and
not to speak.
However, as I have said. Matilda at length yielded in some
degree to her mother's authority (pity it had not been exerted
before) ; and being thus deprived of almost every source of
amusement, there was nothing for it but to take long rides with
the groom and long walks with the governess, and to visit the
cottages and farm-houses on her father's estate, to kill time in
chatting with the old men and women that inhabited them In
one of these walks, it was our chance to meet Mr Weston
I his was what I had long desired; but now, for a moment^
I wished either he or I were away: I felt my heart throb so
violently that I dreaded lest some outward signs of emotion
should appear ; but I think he hardly glanced at me. and I
'''f i?. "''''^ "'^ "''" ^^- ^^^^^ ^ ^'■'^^ salutation to both, he
asked Matilda if she had lately heard from her sister.
Yes " replied she.'• She was at Paris when she wrote, and
very well, and very happy. "
She spoke the last word emphatically, and with a glance
AGNES GREY. 425
impertinently sly. He did not seem to notice it, but replied,
with equal emphasis, and very seriously —
" I hope she will continue to be so. "
" Do you think it hkely? " I ventured to inquire : for Matilda
bad started off in pursuit of her dog, that was chasing a leveret.
" I cannot tell, " replied he. " Sir Thomas may be a better
man than I suppose ; but, from all I have heard and seen, it
seems a pity that one so young, and gay, and — and interesting,
to express many things by one word — whose greatest, if not
her only fault, appears to be thoughtlessness — no trifling fault
to be sure, since it renders the possessor liable to almost every
other, and exposes him to so many temptations : but it seems
a pity that she should be thrown away on such a man. It was
her mother's wish, I suppose? "
''Yes ; and her own too, I think, for she always laughed at
my attempts to dissuade her from the step. "
" You did attempt it? Then, at least, you will have the
satisfaction of knowing that it is no fault of yours, if any harm
should come of it. As for Mrs. Murray, I don't know how she
can justify her conduct : if I had sufficient acquaintance with
her, I'd ask her. "
" It seems unnatural : but some people think rank and wealth
the chief good ; and, if they can secure that for their children,
they think they have done their duty. "
" True: but is it not strange that persons of experience, who
have been married themselves, should judge so falsely? "
Matilda now came panting back, with the lacerated body of
the young hare in her hand.
''Was it your intention to kill that hare, or to save it, Miss
Murray? " asked Mr. Weston, apparently puzzled at her gleeful
countenance.
" I pretended to want to save it, " she answered, honestly
enough, " as it was so glaringly out of season ; but I was better
pleased to see it killed. However, you can both witness that
I couldn't help it : Prince was determined to have her ; and he
clutched her by the back, and killed her in a minute ! Wasn't
it a noble chase? "
" Very ! for a young lady after a leveret. "
There was a quiet sarcasm in the tone of his reply which
was not lost upon her ; she shrugged her shoulders, and,
turning away with a significant " Humph! " asked me how
o 2
426 AGNES GREY.
I had enjoyed the fun. I replied that I saw no fun in the
matter ; but admitted that I had not observed the transaction
very narrowly.
" Didn't you see how it doubled — ^just like an old hare ? and
didn't you hear it scream ? "
" I'm happy to say I did not. "
" It cried out just like a child. "
" Poor little thing ! What will you do with it? "
" Come along — I shall leave it in the first house we come to.
I don't want to take it home, for fear papa should scold me for
letting the dog kill it. "
Mr. Weston was now gone, and we too went on our way ;
but as we returned, after having deposited the hare in a farm-
house, and demolished some spice-cake and currant wine in
exchange, we met him returning also from the execution of
his mission, whatever it might be. He carried in his hand
a cluster of beautiful bluebells which he offered to me ; observ-
ing, with a smile, that though he had seen so little of me for
the last two months, he had not forgotten that bluebells were
numbered among my favourite flowers. It was done as a
simple act of goodwill, without compliment or remarkable
courtes)r, or any look that could be construed into " reveren-
tial, tender adoration " {vide Rosalie Murray) ; but still, it
was something to find my unimportant saying so well remem-
bered : it was something that he bad noticed so accurately the
time I had ceased to be visible.
" I was told, " said he, " that you were a perfect bookworm,
Miss Grey : so completely absorbed in your studies that you
were lost to every other pleasure. "
" Yes, and it's quite true ! " cried Matilda.
" No, Mr. Weston ; don't believe it : it's a scandalous libel.
These young ladies are too fond of making random assertions
at the expense of their friends ; and you ought to be careful how
you listen to them. "
" I hope fhis assertion is groundless, at any rate; "
" Why? Do you particularly object to ladies studying? "
" No; but I object to any one so devoting himself or her-
self to study, as to lose sight of everything else. Except under
peculiar circumstances, I consider very close and constant
study as a waste of time, and an injury to the mind as well
as the body. "
AGNES grey:. 427
" Well, I have neither the time nor the inclination for si!
transgressions. "
We parted again.
Well ! what is there remarkable in all this ? Why have I
recorded it ? Because, reader, it was important enough to give
me a cheerful evening, a night of pleasing dreams, and a morn-
ing of felicitous hopes. Shallow-brained cheerfulness, foolish
dreams, unfounded hopes, you would say ; and I will not
venture to deny it : suspicions to that effect arose too frequently
in my own mind. But our wishes are like tinder : the flint and
steel of circumstances are continually striking out sparks, which
vanish immediately, unless they chance to fall upon the tinder
of our wishes ; then, they instantly ignite, and the flame of hope
is kindled in a moment.
But alas ! that very morning, my flickering flame of hope was
dismally quenched by a letter from my mother, which spoke so
seriously of my father's increasing illness, that I feared there
was little or no chance of his recovery ; and, close at hand as
the holidays were, I almost trembled lest they should come too
late for me to meet him in this world. Two days after, a letter
from Mary told me his life was despaired of, and his end seemed
fast approaching. Then, immediately, I sought permission to
anticipate the vacation, and go without delay. Mrs. Murray
stared, and wondered at the unwonted energy and boldness with
which I urged the request, and thought there was no occasion
to hurry; but finally gave me leave: stating, however, that
there was " no need to be in such agitation about the matter —
it might prove a false alarm after all ; and if not — why, it was
only in the common course of nature : we must all die some
time ; and I was not to suppose myself the only afflicted person
in the world ; " and concluding with saying 1 might have the
phaeton to take me to O . " And instead of repiiiing, Miss
Grey, be thankful for the privileges you enjoy. There's many
a poor clergyman whose family would be plunged into ruin by
the event of his death ; but yo7i, you see, have influential friends
ready to continue their patronage, and to show you every con-
sideration. "
I thanked her for her " consideration, " and flew to'my room
to make some hurried preparations for my departure. My bonnet
and shawl being on, and a few things hastily crammed into my
largest trunk, I descended. But I might have done the work
428 AGNES GREY.
more leisurely, for no one else was in a hurry ; and I had still
a considerable time to wait for the phaeton. At length it came
to the door, and I was off: but, oh, what a dreary journey was
that ! how utterly different from my former passages homewards !
Being too late for the last coach to , I had to hire a cab for
ten miles, and then a car to take me over the rugged hills. It
was half-past ten before I reached home. They were not in
bed.
My mother and sister both met me in the passage — sad —
silent — pale ! I was so much shocked and terror-stricken that
I could not speak, to ask the information I so much longed yet
dreaded to obtain.
" Agnes ! " said my mother, strugghng to repress some strong
emotion.
" Oh, Agnes ! " cried Mary, and burst into tears.
" How is he? " I asked, gasping for the answer.
" Dead! "
It was the reply I had anticipated: but the shock seemed
none the less tremendous.
CHAPTER XIX.
THE LETTER.
My father's mortal remains had been consigned to the tomb ;
and we, with sad faces and sombre garments, sat lingering over
the frugal breakfast-table, revolving plans for our future life.
My mother's strong mind had not given way beneath even this
affliction : her spirit, though crushed, was not broken. Mary's
wish was that I should go back to Horton Lodge, and that our
mother should come and live with her and Mr. Richardson at
the vicarage : she affirmed that he wished it no less than her-
self, and that such an arrangement could not fail to benefit all
parties ; for my mother's society and experience would be of
inestimable value to them, and they would do all they could
to make her happy. But no arguments or entreaties could
prevail ; my mother was determined not to go. Not that she
questioned, for a moment, the kind wishes and intentions of
AGNES GREY. 429
her daughter ; but she affirmed that so long as God spared her
health and strength, she would make use of them to earn her
own livelihood, and be chargeable to no one ; whether her
dependence would be felt as a burden or not. If she could
afford to reside as a lodger in vicarage, she would choose
that house before all others as the place of her abode ; but not
being so circumstanced, she would never come under its roof,
except as an occasional visitor : unless sickness or calamity
should render her assistance really needful, or until age or
infirmity made her incapable of maintaining herself.
" No, Mary, " said she, " if Richardson and you have any-
thing to spare, you must lay it aside for your family ; and Agnes
and I must gather honey for ourselves. Thanks to my having
had daughters to educate, I have not forgotten my accomplish-
ments. God willing, I will check this vain repining, " — she said,
while the tears coursed one another down her cheeks in spite
of her efforts ; but she wiped them away, and resolutely shaking
back her head, continued, " I will exert myself, and look out
for a small house, commodiously situated in some populous but
healthy district, where we will take a few young ladies to board
and educate — if we can get them— and as many day-pupils as
will come, or as we can manage to instruct. Your father's
relations and old friends will be able to send us some pupils,
or to assist us with their recommendations, no doubt : I shall
not apply to my own. What say you to it, Agnes? will you
be willing to leave your present situation and try ? "
" Quite willing, mamma: and the money I have saved will
do to furnish the house. It shall be taken from the bank
directly. "
''When it is wanted : we must get the house, and settle on
preliminaries first. "
Mary offered to lend the little she possessed ; but my mother
dechned it, saying, that we must begin on an economical plan ;
and she hoped that the whole or part of mine, added to what
we could get by the sale of the furniture, and what little our
dear papa had contrived to lay aside for her since the debts
were paid, would be sufficient to last us till Christmas ; when,
it was hoped, something would accrue from our united labours.
It was finally settled that this should be our plan ; and that
inquiries and preparations should immediately be set on foot ;
and while my mother busied herself with these, I should return
430 AGNES GREY.
to Horton Lodge at the close of my four weeks'vacation, and
give notice for my final departure when things were in train for
the speedy commencement of our school.
We were discussing these affairs on the morning I have men-
tioned, about a fortnight after my father's death, when a letter
was brought in for my mother, on beholding which the colour
mounted to her face — lately pale enough with anxious watchings
and excessive sorrow. " From my father ! " murmured she, as
she hastily tore off the cover. It was many years since she had
heard from any of her own relations before. Naturally wonder-
ing what the letter might contain, I watched her countenance
while she read it, and was somewhat surprised to see her bite
her lip and knit her brows as if in anger. When she had done,
she somewhat irreverently cast it on the table, saying with a
scornful smile —
" Your grandpapa has been so kind as to write to me. He
says he has no doubt I have long repented of my'unfortunate
marriage,'and if I will only acknowledge this, and confess I was
wrong in neglecting his advice, and that I have justly suffered
for it, he will make a lady of me once again — if that be possible
after my long degradation— and remember my girls in his will.
Get my desk, Agnes, and send these things away : I will answer
the letter directly. But first, as I may be depriving you both
of a legacy, it is just that I should tell you what I mean to say.
I shall say that he is mistaken in supposing that I can regret
the birth of my daughters (who have been the pride of my life, and
are likely to be the comfort of my old age), or the thirty years I
have passed in the company of my best and dearest friend ; —
that, had our misfortunes been three times as great as they were
{unless they had been of my bringing on), I should still the more
rejoice to have shared them with your father, and administered
what consolation I was able ; and, had his sufferings in illness
been ten times what they were, I could not regret having watched
over and laboured to relieve them ; that, if he had married a
richer wife, misfortunes and trials would no doubt have come
upon him still ; while I am egotist enough to imagine that no
other woman could have cheered him through them so well :
not that I am superior to the rest, but I was made for him,
and he for me ; and I can no more repent the hours, days,
years of happiness we have spent together, and which neither
could have had without tlie otiier, than I can the privilege of
AGNES GREY. 43 1
having been his nurse in sickness, and his comfort in afflic-
tion.
" Will this do, children? — or shall I say we are all very sorry
for what has happened during the last thirty years, and my
daughters wish they had never been born ; but since they have
had that misfortune, they will be thankful for any trifle tlieir
grandpapa will be kind enough to bestow? "
Of course, we both applauded our mother's resolution ; Mary
cleared away the breakfast things ; I brought the desk ; the
letter was quickly written and despatched ; and, from that day,
we heard no more of our grandfather, till we saw his death
announced in the newspaper a considerable time after — all his
worldly possessions, of course, being left to our wealthy, un»
known cousins.
CHAPTER XX.
THE FAREWELL.
A HOUSE in A , the fashionable watering-place, was hired
for our seminary ; and a promise of two or three pupils was
obtained to commence with. I returned to Horton Lodge
about the middle of July, leaving my mother to conclude the
bargain for the house, to obtain more pupils, to sell off the
furniture of our old abode, and to fit out the new one.
We often pity the poor, because they have no leisure to
mourn their departed relatives, and necessity obliges them to
labour through their severest afflictions : but is not active
employment the best remedy for overwhelming sorrow — the
surest antidote for despair ? It may be a rough comforter : it
may seem hard to be harassed with the cares of life when we
have no relish for its enjoyments ; to be goaded to labour when
the heart is ready to break, and the vexed spirit implores for
rest only to weep in silence : but is not labour better than the
rest we covet ? and are not those petty, tormenting^ cares less
hurtful than a continual brooding over the great affliction that
oppresses us? Besides, we cannot have cares, and anxieties,
and toil, without hope— if it be but the hope of fulfilling our
432 AGNES GREY.
joyless task, accomplishing some needful project, or escaping
some further annoyance. At any rate, I was glad my mother
had so much employment for every faculty of her action-loving
frame. Our kind neighbours lamented that she, once so exalted
in wealth and station, should be reduced to such extremity in
her time of sorrow ; but I am persuaded that she would have
suffered thrice as much had she been left in affluence, with
liberty to remain in that house, the scene of her early happiness
and late affliction, and no stern necessity to prevent her from
incessantly brooding over and lamenting her bereavement.
I will not dilate upon the feelings with which I left the old
house, the well-known garden, the little village church — then
doubly dear to me, because my father, who, for thirty years, had
taught and prayed within its walls, lay slumbering now beneath
its flags — and the old bare hills, delightful in their very desola-
tion, with the narrow vales between, smiling in green wood and
sparkling water — the house where I was born, the scene of ail
my early associations, the place where throughout life my earthly
affections had been centred ; — and left them to return no more !
True, I was going back to Horton Lodge, where, amid many
evils, one source of pleasure yet remained : but it was pleasure
mingled with excessive pain ; and my stay, alas ! was limited
to six weeks. And even of that precious time, day after day
slipped by and I did not see him : except at church, I never
saw him for a fortnight after my return. It seemed a long time
to me : and, as I was often out with my rambling pupil, of
course hopes would keep rising, and disappointments would
ensue ; and, then, I would say to my own heart, " Here is a
convincing proof— if you would but have the sense to see it, or
the candour to acknowledge it — that he does not care for you.
If he only thought half as much about you as you do about
him, he would have contrived to meet you many times ere this :
you must know that, by consulting your own feelings. There-
fore, have done with this nonsense : you have no ground for
hope : dismiss, at once, these hurtful thoughts and foolish
wishes from your mind, and turn to your own duty, and the
dull blank life that lies before you. You might have known
such happiness was not for you. "
But I saw him at last. He came suddenly upon me as I was
crossing a field in returning from a visit to Nancy Brown, which
I had taken the opportunity of paying while Matilda Murray
AGNES GREY. 435
was riding her matchless mare. He must have heard of the
heavy loss I had sustained : he expressed no sympathy, offered
no condolence : but almost the first words he uttered were —
" How is your mother? " And this was no matter-of-course
question, for I never told him that I had a mother : he must
have learned the fact from others, if he knew it at all ; and,
besides, there was sincere good-will, and even deep, touching,
unobtrusive sympathy in the tone and manner of the inquiry.
I thanked him with due civility, and told him she was as well
as could be expected. " What will she do? " was the next
question. Many would have deemed it an impertinent one,
and given an evasive reply ; but such an idea never entered my
head, and I gave a brief but plain statement of mother's plans
and prospects.
" Then you will leave this place shortly? " said he.
" Yes, in a month. "
He paused a minute, as if in thought. When he spoke again,
I hoped it would be to express his concern at my departure ;
but it was only to say — " I should think you will be willing
enough to go? "
" Yes — for some things, " I replied.
" For some things only — I wonder what should make you
regret it ! "
I was annoyed at this in some degree ; because it embarrassed
me : I had only one reason for regretting it ; and that was a
profound secret, which he had no business to trouble me
about.
" Why, " said I — " why should you suppose that I dislike the
place? "
" You told me so yourself, " was the decisive reply, " You
said, at least, that you could not live contentedly, without a
friend ; and that you had no friend here, and no possibility of
making one — and besides, I know you must dislike it. "
" But if you remember rightly, I said, or meant to say, I
could not live contentedly without a friend in the world: I was
not so unreasonable as to require one always near me. I think
I could be happy in a house full of enemies, if " but no;
that sentence must not be continued — I paused, aftd hastily
added— " And besides, we cannot well leave a place where
we have lived for two or three years, without some feeling of
re.srret. "
434 AGNES GREY.
" Will you regret to part with Miss Murray, your sole remain-
ing pupil and companion ? "
" I dare say I shall in some degree : it was not without sorrow
I parted with her sister. "
" 1 can imagine that. "
" Well, Miss Matilda is quite as good— better, in one respect. "
" What is that? "
" She's honest. "
" And the other is not? "
''I should not call her dishonest ; but it must be confessed,
she's a httle artful. "
" Artful is she? — I saw she was giddy and vain — and now, "
he added, after a pause, " I can well believe she was artful too ;
but so excessively so as to assume an aspect of extreme sim-
plicity and unguarded openness. Yes, " continued he musingly,
" that accounts for some little things that puzzled me a trifle
before. "
After that, he turned the conversation to more general sub-
jects. He did not leave me till we had nearly reached the
park gates : he had certainly stepped a little out of his way to
accompany me so far, for he now went back and disappeared
down Moss Lane, the entrance of which we had passed some
time before. Assuredly I did not regret this circumstance : if
sorrow had any place in my heart, it was that he was gone at
last — that he was no longer walking by my side, and that that
short interval of delightful intercourse was at an end. He had
not breathed a word of love, or dropped one hint of tenderness
or affection, and yet I had been supremely happy. To be near
him, to hear him talk as he did talk ; and to feel that he thought
me worthy to be so spoken to— capable of understanding and
duly appreciating such discourse — was enough.
" Yes, Edward Weston, I could indeed be happy in a house
full of enemies, if I had but one friend, who truly, deeply, and
faithfully loved me ; and if that friend were you — though we
might be far apart — seldom to hear from each other, still more
seldom to meet — though toil, and trouble, and vexation might
surround me, still — it would be too much happiness for me to
dream of! Yet who can tell, " said I within myself, as I pro-
ceeded up the park —''who can tell what this one month may
bring forth? I have lived nearly three-and-twenty years, and
I have suffered much, and tasted little pleasure yet : is it likely
AGNES GREY. 435
my life all through will be so clouded ? Is it not possible that
God may hear my prayers, disperse these gloomy shadow?, and
grant me some beams of heaven's sunshine yet ! \\'ill Ho en-
tirely deny to me those blessings which are so freely given to
others, who neither ask them nor acknowledge them when
received? May I not still hope and trust? " I did hope and
trust for a while : but, alas, alas ! the time ebbed away : one
week followed another, and, excepting one distant glimpse and
two transient meetings — during which scarcely anything was
said — while I was walking with Aliss Matilda, I saw nothing
of him • except, of course, at church.
Ana now, the last Sunday was come, and the last service.
I was often on the point of melting into tears during the sermon
— the last I was to hear from him : the best I should hear from
any one, I was well assured. It was over— the congregation
were departing ; and I must follow. I had then seen him, and
heard his voice, too, probably for the last time. In the church-
yard, Matilda was pounced upon by the two Misses Green.
They had many inquiries to make about her sister, and I know
not what besides. I only wished they would have done, that
we might hasten back to Horton Lodge : I longed to seek the
retirement of my own room, or some sequestered nook in the
grounds, that I might deliver myself up to my feelings— to weep
my last farewell, and lament my false hopes and vain delusions.
Only this once, and then adieu to fruitless dreaming — thence-
forth, only sober, solid, sad reahty should occupy my mind.
But while I thus resolved, a low voice close beside me said —
" I suppose you are going this week. Miss Grey? " " Yes, " I
replied. I was very much startled ; and had I been at all
hysterically inclined, I certainly should have committed myself
in some way then. Thank God, I was not.
" Well, " said Mr. Weston, " I want to bid you good-bye — it
is not likely I shall see you again before you go. "
" Good-bye, Mr. Weston, " I said. Oh, how I struggled to
say it calmly ! I gave him my hand. He retained it a few
seconds in his.
" It is possible we may meet again, " said he ; " will it be of
any consequence to you whether we do or not ? "
" Yes, I should be very glad to see you again. "
I coiild say no less. He kindly pressed my hand, and went.
Now, I was happy again — though more inclined to burst into
436 AGNES GREY.
tears than ever. If I had been forced to speak at that moment,
a succession of sobs would have inevitably ensued ; and as it
was, I could not keep the water out of my eyes. I walked
along with Miss Murray, turning aside my face, and neglecting
to notice several successive remarks, till she bawled out that
I was either deaf or stupid ; and then (having recovered my
self-possession), as one awakened from a fit of abstraction,
I suddenly looked up and asked what she had been saying.
CHAPTER XXI.
THE SCHOOL.
I LEFT Horton Lodge, and went to join my mother in our
new abode at A . I found her well in health, resigned in
spirit, and even cheerful, though subdued and sober, in her
general demeanour. We had only three boarders and half a
dozen day-pupils to commence with ; but by due care and
diligence we hoped ere long to increase the number of both.
I set myself with befitting energy to discharge the duties of
this new mode of life. I call it new, for there was, indeed,
a considerable difference between working with my mother
in a school of our own, and working as a hireling among
strangers, despised and trampled upon by old and young ; and
for the first few weeks I was by no means unhappy. " It is
possible we may meet again, " and " will it be of any con-
sequence to you whether we do or not? " — Those words still
rang in my ear and rested on my heart : they were my secret
solace and support. " I shall see him again. — He will come ;
or he will write. " No promise, in fact, was too bright or too
extravagant for Hope to whisper in my ear. I did not beheve
half of what she told me : I pretended to laugh at it all ; but
I was far more credulous than I myself supposed ; otherwise,
why did my heart leap up when a knock was heard at the front
door, and the maid, who opened it, came to tell my mother a
gentleman wished to see her? and why was I out of humour for
the rest of the day, because it proved to be a music-master
come to offer his services to our school ? and what stopped my
AGNES GREY. 437
breath for a moment, when the postman having brought a
couple of letters, my mother said, " Here, Agnes, this is for
you, " and threw one of them to me? and what made the
hot blood rush into my face when I saw it was directed in
a gentleman's hand ? and why ? — oh ! why did that cold,
sickening sense of disappointment fall upon me, when I had
torn open the cover and found it was only a letter from Mary,
which, for some reason or other, her husband had directed
for her.
Was it then come to this — that I should be disappointed to
receive a letter from my only sister : and because it was not
written by a comparative stranger ? Dear Mary ! and she had
written it so kindly — and thinking I should be so pleased ta
have it ! — I was not worthy to read it ! And I believe, in my
indignation against myself, I should have put it aside till I had
schooled myself into a better frame of mind, and was become
more deserving of the honour and privilege of its perusal : but
there was my mother looking on, and wishful to know what
news it contained ; so I read it and delivered it to her, and
then went into the schoolroom to attend to the pupils : but
amidst the cares of copies and sums — in the intervals of correct-
ing errors here, and reproving derelictions of duty there, I
was inwardly taking myself to task with far sterner severity.
" What a fool you must be, " said my head to my heart, or my
sterner to my softer self;— " how could you ever dream that he
would write to you ? What grounds have you for such a hope
— or that he will see you, or give himself any trouble about you
— or even think of you again ? " " What grounds ? " — and then
Hope set before me that last, short interview, and repeated the
words I had so faithfully treasured in my memory. " Well,
and what was there in that?— Who ever hung his hopes upon
so frail a twig? What was there in those words that any
common acquaintance might not say to another? Of course,
it was possible you might meet again : he might have said so if
you had been going to New Zealand ; but that did not imply
any intention of seeing you — and then, as to the question that
followed, any one might ask that: and how did you answer?
— Merely with a stupid, commonplace reply, such as you would
have given to Master Murray, or any one else you had been
on tolerably civil terms with. " " But, then, " persisted Hope,
" the tone and manner in which he spoke. " " Oh, that is
43S AGNES GREY.
nonsense ! he always speaks impressively ; and at that moment
there were the Greens and Miss Matilda Murray just before,
and other people passing by, and he was obliged to stand close
beside you, and to speak very low, unless he wished everybody
to hear what he said ; which — though it was nothing at all
particular — of course, he would rather not. " But then, above
all, that emphatic, yet gentle pressure of the hand, which
seemed to say, " Trust me ; " and many other things besides —
too delightful, almost too flattering, to be repeated, even to
one's self,''Egregious folly — too absurd to require contra-
diction — mere inventions of the imagination, which you ought
to be ashamed of. If you would but consider your own un-
attractive exterior, your unamiable reserve, your foolish diffi-
dence—which must make you appear cold, dull, awkward, and
perhaps ill-tempered too ; — if you had but rightly considered
these from the beginning, you would never have harboured
such presumptuous thoughts : and now that you have been
so foolish, pray repent and amend, and let us have no more
of it ! "
I cannot say that I implicitly obeyed my own injunctions : but
such reasoning as this became more and more effective as time
wore on, and nothing was seen or heard of Mr. Weston : until
at last, I gave up hoping, for even my heart acknowledged it
was all in vain. But still, I would think of him : I would
cherish his image in my mind ; and treasure every word, look,
and gesture that my memory could retain ; and brood over his
excellences and his peculiarities, and, in fact, all I had seen,
heard, or imagined respecting him.
" Agnes, this sea air and change of scene do you no good, I
think : I never saw you look so wretched. It must be that you
sit too much, and allow the cares of the schoolroom to worry
you. You must learn to take things easy, and to be more
active and cheerful ; you must take exercise whenever you can
get it, and leave the most tiresome duties to me : they will only
serve to exercise my patience, and, perhaps, try my temper a
little. "
So said my mother, as we sat at work one morning during the
Easter holidays. I assured her that my employments were not
at all oppressive ; that I was well ; or, if there was anything
amiss, it would be gone as soon as the trying months of spring
were over : when summer came I should be as strong and hearty
AGNES GREY. 439
as she could wish to see me : but imvavdlj'her observation
nartled me. I knew my strength was dedining, my appetite
had failed, and I was grown hstless and desponding ;— and if,
indeed, he could never care for me, and I could never see him
jyiore— if I was forbidden to minister to his happiness— forbidden,
for ever, to taste the joys of love, to bless and to be blessed —
then, life must be a burden, and if my Heavenly Father would
call me away, I should be glad to rest. But it would not do to
die and leave my mother. Selfish, unworthy daughter, to forget
her for a moment ! Was not her happiness committed in a
great measure to my charge?— and the welfare of our young
pupils too ? Should I shrink from the work that God had set
before me, because it was not fitted to my taste? Did not He
know best what I should do, and where I ought to labour? and
should I long to quit His service before I had finished my task,
and expect to enter into His rest without having laboured to earn
it ? " No ; by His help I will arise and address myself diligently
to my appointed duty. If happiness in this world is not for me,
I will endeavour to promote the welfare of those around me, and
my reward shall be hereafter. " So said I in my heart ; and
from that hour I only permitted my thoughts to wander to
Edward Weston— or at least to dwell upon him now and then—
as a treat for rare occasions : and, whether it was really the
approach of summer, or the effect of these good resolutions,
or the lapse of time, or all together, tranquillity of mind was
soon restored ; and bodily health and vigour began likewise,
slowly, but surely, to return.
Early in June, I received a letter from Lady Ashby, late
IVIiss Murray. She had written to me twice or thrice before,
from the different stages of her bridal tour, always in good
spirits, and professing to be very happy. I wondered every
time that she had not forgotten me, in the midst of so much
gaiety and variety of scene. At length, however, there was a
pause ; and it seemed she had forgotten me, for upwards of
seven months passed away and no letter. Of course, I did
not break my heart about that, though I often wondered how
she was getting on ; and when this last epistle so unexpectedly
arrived, I was glad enough to receive it. It was dated from
Ashby Park, where she was come to settle down at last,
having previously divided her time between the Continent and
the metropolis. She made many apologies for having neglected
440 AGNES GREY.
me so long, assured me she had not forgotten me, and had
often intended to write, & c. & c., but had always been prevented
by something. She acknowledged that she had been leading
a very dissipated life, and I should think her very wicked and
very thoughtless ; but, notwithstanding that, she thought a
great deal, and, among other things, that she should vastly
like to see me. " We have been several days here already, "
wrote she. " We have not a single friend with us, and are
likely to be very dull. You know I never had a fancy for living
with my husband like two turtles in a nest, were he the most
delightful creature that ever wore a coat ; so do take pity upon
me and come. I suppose your Midsummer holidays commence
in June, the same as other people's, therefore you cannot plead
want of time ; and you must and shall come — in fact, I shall
die if you don't. I want you to visit me as a frie7id, and stay a
long time. There is nobody with me, as I told you before, but
Sir Thomas and old Lady Ashby : but you needn't mind them
— they'll trouble us but little with their company. And you
shall have a room to yourself, whenever you like to retire to it,
and plenty of books to read when my company is not sufficiently-
amusing. I forget whether you like babies ; if you do, you may
have the pleasure of seeing mine — the most charming child in
the world, no doubt ; and all the more so, that I am not
troubled with nursing it — I was determined I wouldn't be
bothered with that. Unfortunately, it is a girl, and Sir Thomas
has never forgiven me : but, however, if you will only come, I
promise you shall be its governess as soon as it can speak : and
you shall bring it up in the way it should go, and make a better
woman of it than its mamma. And you shall see my poodle,
too : a splendid little charmer imported from Paris : and two
fine Italian paintings of great value — I forget the artist. Doubt-
less you will be able to discover prodigious beauties in them,
which you must point out to me, as I only admire by hearsay ;
and many elegant curiosities besides, which I purchased at
Rome and elsewhere ; and, finally, you shall see my new home
— the splendid house and grounds I used to covet so greatly.
Alas ! how far the promise of anticipation exceeds the pleasure
of possession ! There's a fine sentiment ! I assure you I am
become quite a grave old matron : pray come, if it be only to
witness the wonderful change. Write by return of post, and
tell me when your vacation commences, and say that you will
AGNES GREY. 44I
:ome the day after, and stay till the day before it closes — in
.-nercy to " Yours affectionately,
" Rosalie Ashby. "
I showed this strange epistle to ray mother, and consulted
ber on what I ought to do. She advised me to go ; and I
went — willing enough to see Lady Ashby, and her baby too, and
to do anything I could to benefit her, by consolation or advice ;
for I imagined she must be unhappy, or she would not have
applied to me thus — but feeling, as may readily be conceived,
that, in accepting the invitation, I made a great sacrifice for
her, and did violence to my feelings in many ways, instead of
being delighted with the honourable distinction of being en-
treated by the baronet's lady to visit her as a friend. However,
I determined my visit should be only for a few days at most ;
and I will not deny that I derived some consolation from the
idea that, as Ashby Park was not very far from Horton, I
might possibly see Mr, Weston, or, at least, hear something
about him.
CHAPTER XXn.
THE VISIT.
Ashby Park was certainly a very delightful residence. The
mansion was stately without, commodious and elegant within ;
the park was spacious and beautiful, chiefly on account of its
magnificent old trees, its stately herds of deer, its broad sheet
of water, and the ancient woods that stretched beyond it : for
there was no broken ground to give variety to the landscape,
and but very little of that undulating swell which adds so
greatly to the charm of park scenery. And so, this was the
place Rosalie Murray had so longed to call her own, that she
must have a share of it, on whatever terms it might be offered
— whatever price was to be paid for the title of mistress, and
whoever was to be her partner in the honour and bliss of such a
possession ! Well ! I am not disposed to censure her now.
She received me very kindly ; and, though I was a poor
clergyman's daughter, a governess, and a schoolmistress, she
442 AGNES GREY.
welcomed me with unaffected pleasure to her home ; and—
what surprised me rather — took some pains to make my visit
agreeable. I could see, it is true, that she expected me to be
greatly struck with the magnificence that surrounded her ; and,
I confess, I was rather annoyed at her evident efforts to re-
assure me, and prevent me from being overwhelmed by so
much grandeur — too much awed at the idea of encountering
her husband and mother-in-law, or too much ashamed of my
own humble appearance. I was not ashamed of it at all ; for,
though plain, I had taken good care not to be shabby or
mean, and should have been pretty considerably at my ease,
if my condescending hostess had not taken such manifest pains
to make me so ; and, as for the magnificence that surrounded
her, nothing that met my eyes struck me or affected me half so
much as her own altered appearance. Whether from the in-
fluence of fashionable dissipation, or some other evil, a space
of little more than twelve months had had the effect that might
be expected from as many years, in reducing the plumpness of
her form, the freshness of her complexion, the vivacity of her
movements, and the exuberance of her spirits.
I wished to know if she was unhappy ; but I felt it was not
my province to inquire : I rhight endeavour to win her confi-
dence ; but, if she chose to conceal her matrimonial cares from
me, I would trouble her with no obtrusive questions. I there-
fore, at first, confined myself to a few general inquiries about her
health and welfare, and a few commendations on the beauty of
the park, and of the little girl that should have been a boy : a
small delicate infant of seven or eight weeks old, whom its
mother seemed to regard with no remarkable degree of in-
terest or affection, though full as much as I expected her to
show.
Shortly after my arrival, she commissioned her maid to con-
duct me to my room and see that I had everything I wanted :
it was a small, unpretending, but sufficiently comfortable apart-
ment. When I descended thence— having divested myself of
all travelling encumbrances, and arranged my toilet with due
consideration for the feelings of my lady hostess — she conducted
me herself to the room I was to occupy when I chose to be
alone, or when she was engaged with visitors, or obliged to
be with her mother-in-law, or otherwise prevented, as she said,
from enjoying the pleasure of my society. It was a quiet, tidy
AGNES GREY. 445
little sitting-room ; and I \vas not sorry to be provided with
such a harbour of refuge.
" And some time, " said she, " I will show you the library:
I never examined its shelves, but, I dare say, it is full of wise
books ; and you may go and burrow among them whenever you
please. And now you shall have some tea — it will soon be
dinner-time, but I thought, as you were accustomed to dine at
one, you would perhaps like better to have a cup of tea about
this time, and to dine when we lunch ; and then, you know, you
can have your tea in this room, and that will save you from
having to dine with Lady Ashby and Sir Thomas : which would
be rather awkward — at least, not awkward, but rather — a — you
know what I mean. I thought you mightn't like it so well —
especially as we may have other ladies and gentlemen to dine
with us occasionally. "
" Certainly, " said I, " I would much rather have it as you
say ; and, if you have no objection, I should prefer having all
my meals in this room. "
" Why so? "
" Because, I imagine, it would be more agreeable to Lady
Ashby and Sir Thomas. "
" Nothing of the kind. "
" At any rate, it would be more agreeable to me. "
She made some faint objections, but soon conceded ; and I
could see that the proposal was a considerable relief to her.
" Now, come into the drawing-room, " said she. " There's
the dressing bell ; but I won't go yet : it's no use dressing when
there's no one to see you ; and I want to have a little discourse. "
The drawing-room was certainly an imposing apartment, and
very elegantly furnished ; but I saw its young mistress glance
towards me as we entered, as if to notice how I was impressed
by the spectacle, and accordingly I determined to preserve an
aspect of stony indifference, as if I saw nothing at all remarkable.
But this was only for a moment : immediately conscience
whispered, " Why should I disappoint her to save my pride?
No — rather let me sacrifice my pride to give her a little innocent
gratification. " And I honestly looked round, and told her it
was a noble room, and very tastefully furnished. She'said little,
but I saw she was pleased.
She showed me her fat French poodle, that lay curled up on
a silk cushion, and the two fine Italian paintings: which, how-
444 AGNES GREY.
ever, she would not give me time to examine, but, saying I must
look at them some other day, insisted upon my admiring the
little jewelled watch she had purchased in Geneva ; and then she
took me round the room to point out sundry articles of vc7-tu
she had brought from Italy : an elegant little timepiece, and
several busts, small graceful figures, and vases, all beautifully
carved in white marble. She spoke of these with animation,
and heard my admiring comments with a smile of pleasure :
that soon, however, vanished, and was followed by a melancholy
sigh ; as if in consideration of the insufficiency of all such
baubles to the happiness of the human heart, and their woeful
inabihty to supply its insatiate demands.
Then, stretching herself upon a couch, she motioned me to a
capacious easy-chair that stood opposite — not before the fire,
but before a wide open window ; for it was summer, be it re-
membered ; a sweet, warm evening in the latter half of June.
I sat for a moment in silence, enjoying the still, pure air, and the
delightful prospect of the park that lay before me, rich in verdure
and foliage, and basking in yellow sunshine, relieved by the
long shadows of declining day. But I must take advantage of
this pause : I had inquiries to make, and, like the substance of
a lady's postscript, the most important must come last. So I
began with asking after Mr. and Mrs. Murray, and Miss Matilda
and the young gentlemen.
I was told that papa had the gout, which made him very
ferocious ; and that he would not give up his choice wines, and
his substantial dinners and suppers, and had quarrelled with his
physician, because the latter had dared to say that no medicine
could cure him while he lived so freely ; that mamma and the
rest were well. Matilda was still wild and reckless, but she had
got a fashionable governess, and was considerably improved
in her manners, and soon to be introduced to the world ; and
John and Charles (now at home for the holidays) were, by all
accounts, " fine, bold, unruly, mischievous boys. "
" And how are the other people getting on? " said I — " the
Greens, for instance ? "
" Ah! Mr. Green is heart-broken, you know, " replied she,
with a languid smile: " he hasn't got over his disappointment
yet, and never will, I suppose. He's doomed to be an old
bachelor ; and his sisters are doing their best to get mar-
ried. "
AGNES GREY. 44 >
'And the Melthams ? "
'Oh, they're jogging on as usual, I suppose : but I know
very Httle about any of them — except Harry, " said she, blushing
shghtly, and smiling again. " I saw a great deal of him while
we were in London ; for, as soon as he heard we were there,
he came up under pretence of visiting his brother, and either
followed me, like a shadow, wherever I went, or met me, like a
reflection, at every turn. You needn't look so shocked, Miss
Grey ; I was very discreet, I assure you : but, you know, one
can't help being admired. Poor fellow ! He was not my only
worshipper ; though he was certainly the most conspicuous, and,
I think, the most devoted among them all. And that detestable
—ahem— and Sir Thomas chose to take offence at him— or my
profuse expenditure, or something— I don't exactly know what
— and hurried me down to the country at a moment's notice ;
where I'm to play the hermit, I suppose, for life. "
And she bit her lip, and frowned vindictively upon the fair
domain she had once so coveted to call her own.
" And Mr. Hatfield, " said I, " what is become of him? "
Again she brightened up, and answered gaily—
" Oh ! he made up to an elderly spinster, and married her,
not long since ; weighing her heavy purse against her faded
charms, and expecting to find that solace in gold which was
denied him in love, ha, ha ! "
" Well, and I think that's all— except Mr. Weston : what is he
doing? "
" I don't know, I'm sure. He's gone from Horton. "
" How long since? and where is he gone to? "
" I know nothing about him, " replied she, yawning— " except
that he went about a month ago— I never asked where " (I
would have asked whether it was to a living or merely another
curacy, but thought it better not), " and the people made a great
rout about his leaving, " continued she, " much to Mr. Hatfield's
displeasure ; for Hatfield didn't like him, because he had too
much influence with the common people, and because he was
not sufficiently tractable and submissive to him— and for some
other unpardonable sins, I don't know what. But now I
positively must go and dress : the second bell will ring directly,
and if I come to dinner in this guise, I shall never hear the end
of it from Lady Ashby. It's a strange thing one can't be
mistress in one's own house ! Just ring the bell, and I'll send
446 AGNES GREY.
for my maid, and tell them to get you some tea. Only think of
that intolerable woman "
" Who— your maid ? "
" No ; my mother-in-law — and my unfortunate mistake ! In-
stead of letting her take herself off to some other house, as she
offered to do when I married, I was fool enough to ask her to
live here still, and direct the affairs of the house for me ; because,
in the first place, I hoped we should spend the greater part of
the year in town, and in the second place, being so young and
inexperienced, I was frightened at the idea of having a houseful
of servants to manage, and dinners to order, and parties to
entertain, and all the rest of it, and I thought she might assist
me with her experience ; never dreaming she would prove a
usurper, a tyrant, an incubus, a spy, and everything else that's
detestable. I wish she was dead ! "
She then turned to give her orders to the footman, who had
been standing bolt upright within the door for the last half
minute, and had heard the latter part of her animadversions ;
and, of course, made his own reflections upon them, notwith-
standing the inflexible, wooden countenance he thought proper
to preserve in the drawing-room. On my remarking afterwards
that he must have heard her, she replied —
" Oh, no matter ! I never care about the footmen ; they're
mere automatons : it's nothing to them what their superiors say
or do ; they won't dare to repeat it ; and as to what they think
— if they presume to think at all — of course, nobody cares for
that. Jt would be a pretty thing indeed, if we were to be
tongue-tied by our servants ! "
So saying, she ran off to make her hasty toilet, leaving me to
pilot my way back to my sitting-room, where, in due time, I
was served with a cup of tea. After that, I sat musing on
Lady Ashby's past and present condition ; and on what little
information I had obtained respecting Mr. Weston, and the
small chance there was of ever seeing or hearing anything more
of him throughout my quiet, drab-colour life : which, hence-
forth, seemed to offer no alternative between positive rainy
days, and days of dull grey clouds without downfall. At
length, however, I began to weary of my thoughts, and to
wish I knew where to find the library my hostess had spoken
of; and to wonder whether I was to remain there doing nothing
till bedtime.
AGNES GREY. 447
''As I was not rich enough to possess a watch, I could not
tell how time was passing, except by observing the slowly-
lengthening shadows from the window ; which presented a side
view, including a corner of the park, a clump of trees, whose
topmost branches had been colonised by an innumerable com-
pany of noisy rooks, and a high wall with a massive wooden
gate : no doubt communicating with the stable-yard, as a broad
carriage-road swept up to it from the park. The shadow of this
wall soon took possession of the whole of the ground as far as I
could see, forcing the golden sunlight to retreat inch by inch,
and at last take refuge in the very tops of the trees. Ere long,
even they were left in shadow — the shadow of the distant hills,
or of the earth itself; and, in sympathy for the busy citizens of
the rookery, I regretted to see their habitation, so lately bathed
in glorious light, reduced to the sombre, work-a-day hue of the
lower world, or of my own world within. For a moment, such
birds as soared above the rest might still receive the lustre on
their wings, which imparted to their sable plumage the hue and
brilliance of deep red gold ; at last, that too departed. Twilight
came stealing on ; the rooks became more quiet ; I became
more weary, and wished I were going home to-morrow. At
length it grew dark ; and I was thinking of ringing for a candle,
and betaking myself to bed, when my hostess appeared, with
many apologies for having neglected me so long, and laying all
the blame upon that " nasty old woman, " as she called her
mother-in-law.
" If I didn't sit with her in the drawing-room while Sir
Thomas is taking his wine, " said she, " she would never forgive
me ; and, then, if I leave the room the instant he comes — as I
have done once or twice— it is an unpardonable offence against
her dear Thomas. She never showed such disrespect to her
husband ; and as for affection, wives never think of that now-a-
days, she supposes : but things were different in her time — as if
there was any good to be done by staying in the room, when he
does nothing but grumble and scold when he's in a bad humour,
talk disgusting nonsense when he's in a good one, and go to
sleep on the sofa when he's too stupid for either ; which is most
frequently the case now, when he has nothing to do -but to sot
over his wine. "
" But could you not try to occupy Jiis mind with some-
thing better; and engage him to give up such habits? I'm
448 AGNES GREY.
sure you have powers of persuasion, and qualifications for
amusing a gentleman, which many ladies would be glad to
possess.'■'
" And so you think I would lay myself out for his amuse-
ment ! No ; that's not my idea of a wife. It's the husband's
part to please the wife, not hers to please him ; and if he isn't
satisfied with her as she is— and thankful to possess her too— he
isn't worthy of her, that's all. And as for persuasion, I assure
you I shan't trouble myself with that : I've enough to do to bear
with him as he is, without attempting to work a reform. But
I'm sorry I left you so long alone. Miss Grey. How have you
passed the time? "
" Chiefly in watching the rooks. "
" Mercy, how dull you must have been ! I really must show
you the library ; and you must ring for everything you want,
just as you would in an inn, and make yourself comfortable.
I have selfish reasons for wishing to make you happy, because
I want you to stay with me, and not fulfil your horrid threat
of running away in a day or two. "
" Well, don't let me keep you out of the drawing-room any
longer to-night, for at present I am tired, and wish to go to
bed. "
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE PARK.
I CAME down a little before eight, next morning, as I knew
by the striking of a distant clock. There was no appearance
of breakfast. I waited above an hour before it came, still vainly
longing for access to the library ; and, after that lonely repast
was concluded, I waited again about an hour and a half in
great suspense and discomfort, uncertain what to do. At length,
Lady Ashby came to bid me good-morning. She informed me
she had only just breakfasted, and now wanted me to take an
early walk with her in the park. She asked how long I had
been up, and on receiving my answer, expressed the deepest
regret, and again promised to show me the library. I suggested
AGNES GREY. 449
she had better do so at once, and then there would be no
further trouble either with remembering or forgetting. She
complied, on condition that I would not think of reading, or
bothering with the books now ; for she wanted to show me the
gardens, and take a walk in the park with me, before it be-
came too hot for enjoyment : which, indeed, was nearly the
case already. Of course, I readily assented ; and we took our
walk accordingly.
As we were strolling in the park, talking of what my com-
panion had seen and heard during her travelling experience,
a gentleman on horseback rode up and passed us. As he
turned, in passing, and stared me full in the face, I had a
good opportunity of seeing what he was like. He was tall,
thin, and wasted, with a slight stoop in the shoulders, a pale
face, but somewhat blotchy, and disagreeably red about the
eyelids, plain features, and a general appearance of languor
and flatness, relieved by a sinister expression m the mouth and
the dull, soulless eyes.
" I detest that man! " whispered Lady Ashby, with bitter
emphasis, as he slowly trotted by.
" Who is it? " I asked, unwilling to suppose that she should
so speak of her husband.
" Sir Thomas Ashby, " she replied, with dreary composure.
" And do you detest him. Miss Murray? " said I, for I was
too much shocked to remember her name at the moment.
" Yes, I do. Miss Grey, and despise him too; and if you
knew him you would not blame me.
" But you knew what he was before you married him. "
" No; I only thought so: I did not half know him really,
I know you warned me against it, and I wish I had listened
to you : but it's too late to regret that now. And besides,
mamma ought to have known better than either of us, and
she never said anything against it — quite the contrary. And
then I thought he adored me, and would let me have my own
way : he did pretend to do so at first, but now he does not
care a bit about me. Yet I should not care for that : he might
do as he pleased, if I might only be free to amuse myself and
to stay in London, or have a few friends down here^: but he
■will do as he pleases, and I must be a prisoner and a slave.
The moment he saw I could enjoy myself without him, and that
others knew my value better than himself, the selfish wretch
P
450 AGNES GREY.
began to accuse me of coquetry and extravagance ; and to
abuse Harry Meltham, whose shoes he was not worthy to
clean. And then, he must needs have me down in the country,
to lead the life of a nun, lest I should dishonour him or
bring him to ruin ; as if he had not been ten times worse
•every way, with his betting-book, and his gaming-table, and
his opera-girls, and his Lady This and Mrs. That — yes,
and his bottles of wine, and glasses of brandy and water too !
Oh, I would give ten thousand worlds to be Miss Murray
again ! It is too bad to feel life, health, and beauty wasting
-away, unfelt and unenjoyed, for such a brute as that ! " ex-
claimed she, fairly bursting into tears in the bitterness of her
-vexation.
Of course, I pitied her exceedingly ; as well for her false idea
of happiness and disregard of duty, as for the wretched partner
ivith whom her fate was linked. I said what I could to comfort
her, and offered such counsels as I thought she most required :
advising her, first, by gentle reasoning, by kindness, example,
and persuasion, to try to ameliorate her husband ; and then,
when she had done all she could, if she still found him in-
corrigible, to endeavour to abstract herself from him — to wrap
herself up in her own integrity, and trouble herself as little
about him as possible. I exhorted her to seek consolation in
doing her duty to God and man, to put her trust in Heaven,
and solace herself with the care and nurture of her little
daughter ; assuring her she would be amply rewarded by wit-
nessing its progress in strength and wisdom, and receiving its
genuine affection.
" But I can't devote myself entirely to a child, " said she : " it
may die — which is not at all improbable. "
" But, with care, many a delicate infant has become a strong
man or woman. "
*'But it may grow so intolerably like its father that I shall
hate it. "
" That is not likely ; it is a little girl, and strongly resembles
its mother. "
''No matter ; I should like it better if it were a boy — only
that its father will leave it no inheritance that he can possibly
squander away. What pleasure can I have in seeing a girl
grow up to eclipse me, and enjoy those pleasures that I am for
■ever debarred from ? But supposing I could be so generous
AGNES GREY. 4 5 1
as to take delight in this, still it is 07ily a child ; and I can't
centre all my hopes in a child : that is only one degree better
than devoting oneself to a dog. And as for all the wisdom and
goodness you have been trying to instil into me — that is all very
right and proper I dare say, and if I were some twenty years
older, I might fructify by it : but people must enjoy themselves
when they are young ; and if others won't let them — why, they
must hate them for it ! "
" The best way to enjoy yourself is to do what is right and
hate nobody. The end of Religion is not to teach us how to
die, but how to live ; and the earlier you become wise and good,
the more of happiness you secure. And now, Lady Ashby, I
have one more piece of advice to offer you, which is, that you
will not make an enemy of your mother-in-law. Don't get into
the way of holding her at arm's length, and regarding her with
jealous distrust. I never saw her, but I have heard good as
well as evil respecting her ; and I imagine that, though cold
and haughty in her general demeanour, and even exacting in
her requirements, she has strong affections for those who can
reach them ; and, though so blindly attached to her son, she is
not without good principles, or incapable of hearing reason.
If you would but concihate her a little, and adopt a friendly,
open manner — and even confide your grievances to her — real
grievances, such as you have a right to complain of — it is my
firm belief that she would, in time, become your faithful friend,
and a comfort and support to you, instead of the incubus you
describe her. "
But I fear my advice had little effect upon the unfortunate
young lady ; and, finding I could render myself so little service-
able, my residence at Ashby Park became doubly painful. But
still, I must stay out that day and the following one, as I had
promised to do so ; though, resisting all entreaties and induce-
ments to prolong my visit further, I insisted upon departing
the next morning ; affirming that my mother would be lonely
without me, and that she impatiently expected my return.
Nevertheless, it was with a heavy heart that I bade adieu to
poor Lady Ashby, and left her in her princely home. It was
no slight additional proof of her unhappiness, that she should
so cling to the consolation of my presence, and earnestly desire
the company of one whose general tastes and ideas were so
little congenial to her own — whom she had completely forgotten
4$2 AGNES GREY.
in her hours of prosperity, and whose presence would be rather
a nuisance than a pleasure, if she could but have half her heart's
desire.
CHAPTER XXIV.
THE SANDS.
Our school was not situated in the heart of the town : on
entering A from the north-west there is a row of respect-
able-looking houses, on each side of the broad, white road, with
narrow slips of garden-ground before them, Venetian blinds to
the windows, and a flight of steps leading to each trim, brass-
handled door. In one of the largest of these habitations dwelt
my mother and I, with such young ladies as our friends and
the public chose to commit to our charge. Consequently, we
were a considerable distance from the sea, and divided from
it by a labyrinth of streets and houses. But the sea was my
delight ; and I would often gladly pierce the town to obtain
the pleasure of a walk beside it, whether with the pupils, or
alone with my mother during the vacations. It was delightful to
me at all times and seasons, but especially in the wild commotion
of a rough sea-breeze, and in the brilliant freshness of a summer
morning.
I awoke early on the third morning after my return from
Ashby Park — the sun was shining through the blind, and I
thought how pleasant it would be to pass through the quiet
town and take a solitary ramble on the sands while half the
world was in bed. I was not long in forming the resolution,
nor slow to act upon it. Of course I would not disturb my
mother, so I stole noiselessly downstairs, and quietly unfastened
the door. I was dressed and out, when the church clock struck
a quarter to six. There was a feeling of freshness and vigour
in the very streets, and when I got free of the town, when my
foot was on the sands and my face towards the broad, bright
bay, no language can describe the effect of the deep, clear
azure of the sky and ocean, the bright morning sunshine on
the semicircular barrier of craggy cliffs surmounted by green
swelling hills, and on the smooth, wide sands, and the low
AGNES GREY. 453
rocks out at sea — looking, with their clothing of weeds and
moss, like little grass-grown islands — and above all, on the
brilliant, sparkling waves. And then, the unspeakable purity
and freshness of the air ! there was just enough heat to enhance
the value of the breeze, and just enough wind to keep the
whole sea in motion, to make the waves come bounding to
the shore, foaming and sparkling, as if wild with glee. Nothing
else was stirring — no living creature was visible besides
myself. My footsteps were the first to press the firm, un-
broken sands ;— nothing before had trampled them since last
night's flowing tide had obliterated the deepest marks of
yesterday, and left it fair and even, except where the subsiding
water had left behind it the traces of dimpled pools, and little
running streams.
Refreshed, delighted, invigorated, I walked along, forgetting
all my cares, feeling as if I had wings to my feet, and could go
at least forty miles without fatigue, and experiencing a sense of
exhilaration to which I had been an entire stranger since the
days of early youth. About half-past six, however, the grooms
began to come down to air their masters'horses — first one, and
then another, till there were some dozen horses and five or six
riders : but that need not trouble me, for they would not come
as far as the low rocks which I was now approaching. When
I had reached these, and walked over the moist, shppery sea-
weed (at the risk of floundering into one of the numerous pools
of clear, salt water that lay between them), to a little mossy
promontory with the sea splashing round it, I looked back
again to see who next was stirring. Still, there were only the
early grooms with their horses, and one gentleman with a little
dark speck of a dog running before him, and one water-cart
coming out of the town to get water for the baths. In another
minute or two, the distant bathing-machines would begin to
move, and then the elderly gentlemen of regular habits, and
sober Quaker ladies would be coming to take their salutary
morning walks. But however interesting such a scene might
be, I could not wait to witness it, for the sun and the sea so
dazzled my eyes in that direction, that I could but afford one
glance ; and then I turned again to delight myself " with the
sight and the sound of the sea dashing against my promontory
— with no prodigious force, for the swell was broken by the
tangled sea-weed and the unseen rocks beneath; otherwise I
454 AGNES GREY.
should soon have been deluged with spray. But the tide was
coming in ; the water was rising ; the gulfs and lakes were
filling ; the straits were widening, it was time to seek some
safer footing ; so I walked, skipped, and stumbled back to the
smooth, wide sands, and resolved to proceed to a certain bold
projection in the chffs, and then return.
Presently, I heard a snuffling sound behind me, and then a
dog came frisking and wriggling to my feet. It was my own
Snap — the httle, dark, wire-haired terrier ! When I spoke his
name, he leapt up in my face and yelled for joy. Almost as
much delighted as himself, I caught the little creature in my
arms, and kissed him repeatedly. But how came he to be
there? He could not have dropped from the sky, or come all
that way alone : it must be either his master, the rat-catcher,
or somebody else that had brought him ; so, repressing my
extravagant caresses, and endeavouring to repress his likewise,
I looked round, and beheld — Mr. Weston !
" Your dog remembers you well, Miss Grey, " said he, warmly
grasping the hand I offered him without clearly knowing what
I was about. " You rise early. "
" Not often so early as this, " I replied, with amazing com-
posure, considering all the circumstances of the case.
" How far do you purpose to extend your walk? "
" I was thinking of returning — it must be almost time, I
think. "
He consulted his watch — a gold one now — and told me it was
only five minutes past seven.
" But, doubtless, you have had a long enough walk, " said he,
turning towards the town, to which I now proceeded leisurely to
retrace my steps ; and he walked beside me.
" In what part of the town do you live? " asked he. " I
never could discover. "
Never could discover ? Had he endeavoured to do so then ?
I told him the place of our abode. He asked how we pros-
pered in our affairs. I told him we were doing very well —
that we had had a considerable addition to our pupils after
the Christmas vacation, and expected a still further increase at
the close of this.
" You must be an accomplished instructor, " he observed.
" No, it is my mother, " I replied ; " she manages things so
well, and is so active, and clever, and kind. "
AGNES GREY. 455,
" I should like to know your mother. Will you introduce me:
to her some time, if I call ? "
" Yes, willingly, "
" And will you allow me the privilege of an old friend; of
looking in upon you now and then? "
" Yes, if — I suppose so. "
This was a very foolish answer, but the truth was, I con-
sidered that I had no right to invite any one to my mother's
house without her knowledge ; and if I had said, " yes, if my
mother does not object, " it would appear as if by his question
I understood more than was expected ; so supposiiig she would
not, I added, " I suppose so : " but of course I should have
said something more sensible and more polite, if I had had
my wits about me. We continued our walk for a minute in
silence : which, however, was shortly relieved (no small relief
to me), by Mr. Weston commenting upon the brightness of the
morning and the beauty of the bay, and then upon the advan-
tages A possessed over many other fashionable places of
resort.
" You don't ask what brings me to A , " said he. " You
can't suppose I'm rich enough to come for my own pleasure. "
" I heard you had left Horton. "
" You didn't hear, then, that I had got the Hving of
F ? "
F was a village about two miles distant from A .
" No, " said I; " we live so completely out of the world,
even here, that news seldom reaches me through any quarter ;
except through the medium of the Gazette. But, I hope
you like your new parish ; and that I may congratulate you on
the acquisition? "
''I expect to like my parish better a year or two hence,
when I have worked certain reforms I have set my heart upon
— or, at least, progressed some steps towards such an achieve-
ment. But you may congratulate me now ; for I find it very
agreeable to have a parish all to myself, with nobody to inter-
fere with me — to thwart my plans or cripple my exertions :
and besides, I have a respectable house in a rather pleasant
neighbourhood, and three hundred pounds a year ; and, in fact,
I have nothing but solitude to complain of, and nothing but a
companion to wish for. "
He looked at me as he concluded ; and the flash of his dark
4)6 AGNES GREY.
eyes seemed to set my face on fire : greatly to my own discom-
fiture, for to evince confusion at such a juncture was intolerable.
I made an effort, therefore, to remedy the evil, and disclaim
all personal application of the remark by a hasty, ill-expressed
reply, to the effect that, if he waited till he was well known
in the neighbourhood, he might have numerous opportunities
for supplying his want among the residents of F and its
vicinity, or the visitors of A , if he required so ample a
choice : not considering the compliment implied by such an
assertion, till his answer made me aware of it.
" I am not so presumptuous as to believe that, " said he,
" though you tell it me ; but if it were so, I am rather particu-
lar in my notions of a companion for life, and perhaps I might
not find one to suit me among the ladies you mention. "
" If you require perfection, you never will. "
" I do not — I have no right to require it, as being so far
from perfect myself. "
Here the conversation was interrupted by a water-cart lum-
bering past us, for we were now come to the busy part of the
sands ; and, for the next eight or ten minutes, between carts
and horses, and asses, and men, there was little room for social
intercourse, till we had turned our backs upon the sea, and
began to ascend the precipitous road leading into the town.
Here my companion offered me his arm, which I accepted,
though not with the intention of using it as a support.
" You don't often come on to the sands, I think, " said he,
" for I have walked there many times, both morning and even-
ing, since I came, and never seen you till now ; and several
times, in passing through the town, too, I have looked about
for your school — but I did not think of the Road : and
once or twice I made inquiries, but without obtaining the
requisite information. "
When we had surmounted the acclivity, I was about to with-
draw my arm from his, but by a slight tightening of the elbow
was tacitly informed that such was not his will, and accordingly
desisted. ^Discoursing on different subjects, we entered the
town, and passed through several streets. I saw that he was
going out of his way to accompany me, notwithstanding the
long walk that was yet before him ; and, fearing that he might
be inconveniencing himself from motives of politeness, I ob-
served—
AGNES GREY. 457
*'I fear I am taking you out of your way, Mr. Weston — I
believe the road to F lies quite in another direction. "
" I'll leave you at the end of the next street, " said he.
" And when will you come to see mamma? "
" To-morrow — God willing. "
The end of the next street was nearly the conclusion of my
journey. He stopped there, however, bid me good-morning,
and called Snap, who seemed a little doubtful whether to follow
his old mistress or his new master, but trotted away upon being
summoned by the latter.
" I won't offer to restore him to you. Miss Grey, " said Mr.
Weston, smiling, " because I like him. "
" Oh, I don't want him, " replied I, " now that he has a good
master ; I'm quite satisfied. "
" You take it for granted that I am a good one, then? "
The man and the dog departed, and I returned home, full of
gratitude to Heaven for so much bliss, and praying that my
hopes might not again be crushed.
CHAPTER XXV.
CONCLUSION,
" Well, Agnes, you must not take such long walks again before
breakfast, said my mother, observing that I drank an extra cup
of coffee and ate nothing — pleading the heat of the weather, and
the fatigue of my long walk as an excuse. I certainly did feel
feverish and tired too.
''You always do things by extremes : now, if you had taken
a short walk every morning, and would continue to do so, it
would do you good. "
" Well, mamma, I will. "
" But this is worse than lying in bed or bending over your
books : you have quite put yourself into a fever. "
" I won't do it again, " said I.
I was racking my brains with thinking how to tell her about
Mr. Weston, for she must know he was coming to-morrow.
However, I waited till the breakfast things were removed, and
458 AGNES GREY.
I was more calm and cool ; and then, having sat down to my
drawing, I began—
" I met an old friend on the sands to-day, mamma. "
''An old friend ! Who could it be ? "
" Two old friends, indeed. One was a dog; " and then I
reminded her of Snap, whose history I had recounted before,
and related the incident of his sudden appearance and remark-
able recognition; " and the other, " continued I, " was Mr.
Weston, the curate of Horton. "
" Mr. Weston ! I never heard of him before. "
" Yes, you have : I've mentioned him several times, I beheve :
but you don't remember. "
" I've heard you speak of Mr. Hatfield. "
" Mr. Hatfield was the rector, and Mr. Weston the curate:
I used to mention him sometimes in contradistinction to Mr.
Hatfield, as being a more efficient clergyman. However, he
was on the sands this morning with the dog — he had bought
it, I suppose, from the rat-catcher ; and he knew me as well
as it did — probably through its means : and I had a little con-
versation with him, in the course of which, as he asked about
our school, I was led to say something about you and your
good management ; and he said he should like to know you,
and asked if I would introduce him to you, if he should take
the liberty of calling to-morrow ; so I said I would. Was I
right? "
" Of course. What kind of a man is he? "
" A \Qvy respectable man, I think: but you will see him to-
morrow. He is the new vicar of F , and as he has only
been there a few weeks, I suppose he has made no friends yet,
and wants a little society. "
The morrow came. What a fever of anxiety and expectation
I was in from breakfast till noon — at which time he made his
appearance ! Having introduced him to my mother, I took my
work to the window, and sat down to await the result of the
interview. They got on extremely well together : greatly to
my satisfaction, for I had felt very anxious about what my
mother would think of him. He did not stay long that
time : but when he rose to take leave, she said she should be
happy to see him, whenever he might find it convenient to
call again ; and when he was gone, I was gratified by hearing
her sav —
AGNES GREY. 459
" Well ! I think he's a very sensible man. But why did you
sit back there, Agnes, " she added, " and talk so little. "
" Because you talked so well, mamma, I thought you required
no assistance from me : and, besides, he was your visitor, not
mine. "
After that, he often called upon us — several times in the
course of a week. He generally addressed most of his con-
versation to my mother : and no wonder, for she could con-
verse. I almost envied the unfettered, vigorous fluency of her
discourse, and the strong sense evinced by everything she said
— and yet, I did not ; for, though I occasionally regretted my
own deficiencies for his sake, it gave me very great pleasure to
sit and hear the two beings I loved and honoured above every
one else in the world, discoursing together so amicably, so
wisely, and so well. I was not always silent, however: nor
was I at all neglected. I was quite as much noticed as I would
wish to be : there was no lack of kind words and kinder looks,
no end of delicate attentions, too fine and subtle to be grasped
by words, and therefore indescribable — but deeply felt at heart.
Ceremony was quickly dropped between us : Mr. Weston
came as an expected guest, welcome at all times, and never
deranging the economy of our household affairs. He even
called me " Agnes: " the name had been timidly spoken at
first, but, finding it gave no offence in any quarter, he seemed
greatly to prefer that appellation to " Miss Grey ; " and so did
I. How tedious and gloomy were those days in which he did
not come ! And yet not miserable ; for I had still the remem-
brance of the last visit and the hope of the next to cheer me.
But when two or three days passed without my seeing him, I
certainly felt very anxious — absurdly, unreasonably so ; for,
of course, he had his own business and the affairs of his
parish to attend to. And I dreaded the close of the holidays,
when 77iy business also would begin, and I should be some-
times unable to see him, and sometimes — when my mother
was in the schoolroom — obliged to be with him alone : a
position I did not at all desire, in the house ; though to meet
him out of doors, and walk beside him, had proved by no
means disagreeable.
One evening, however, in the last week of the vacation, he
arrived — unexpectedly : for a heavy and protracted thunder-
shower during the afternoon had almost destroyed my hopes
460 AGNES GREY.
of seeing him that day ; but now the storm was over, and the
sun was shining brightly.
" A beautiful evening, Mrs. Grey! " said he, as he entered.
" Agnes, I want you to take a walk with me to " (he named
a certain part of the coast — a bold hill on the land side, and
towards the sea a steep precipice, from the summit of which a
glorious view is to be had). " The rain has laid the dust, and
cooled and cleared the air, and the prospect will be magnifi-
cent. Will you come ? "
" Can I go, mamma? "
''Yes ; to be sure. "
I went to get ready, and was down again in a few minutes ;
though, of course, I took a little more pains with my attire than
if I had merely been going out on some shopping expedition
alone. The thunder-shower had certainly had a most beneficial
effect upon the weather, and the evening was most dehghtful.
Mr. Weston would have me to take his arm : he said little
during our passage through the crowded streets, but walked
very fast, and appeared grave and abstracted. I wondered
what was the matter, and felt an indefinite dread that some-
thing unpleasant was on his mind ; and vague surmises, con-
cerning what it might be, troubled me not a little, and made
me grave and silent enough. But these fantasies vanished
upon reaching the quiet outskirts of the town : for as soon as
we came within sight of the venerable old church, and the
hill, with the deep blue sea beyond it, I found my com-
panion was cheerful enough.
" I'm afraid I've been walking too fast for you, Agnes, "
said he: " in my impatience to be rid of the town, I forgot
to consult your convenience ; but now, we'll walk as slowly as
you please. I see, by those light clouds in the west, there will
be a brilliant sunset, and we shall be in time to witness its effect
upon the sea, at the most moderate rate of progression. "
When we had got about half-way up the hill, we fell into
silence again ; which, as usual, he was the first to break.
" My house is desolate yet, Miss Grey, " he smihngly observed,
" and I am acquainted now with all the ladies in my parish,
and several in this town too ; and many others I know by sight
and by report ; but not one of them will suit me for a com-
panion : in fact, there is only one person in the world that will :
and that is yourself ; and I want to know your decision ? "
AGNES GREY. 461
" Are you in earnest, Mr. Weston? "
''In earnest ! How could you think I should jest on such a
subject ? "
He laid his hand on mine that rested on his arm : he must
have felt it tremble— but it was no great matter now.
" I hope I have not been too precipitate, " he said, in a serious
tone.''You must have known that it was not my way to flatter
and talk soft nonsense, or even to speak the admiration that I
felt ; and that a single word or glance of mine meant more than
the honied phrases and fervent protestations of most other men. "
I said something about not liking to leave my mother, and
doing nothing without her consent.
" I settled everything with Mrs. Grey, while you were putting
on your bonnet, " replied he. " She said I might have her con-
sent, if I could obtain yours ; and I asked her, in case I should
be so happy, to come and live with us — for I was sure you would
like it better. But she refused, saying she could now afford to
employ an assistant, and would continue the school till she could
purchase an annuity sufficient to maintain her in comfortable
lodgings ; and, meantime, she would spend her vacations alter-
nately with us and your sister, and should be quite contented if
you were happy. And so now I have overruled your objections
on her account. Have you any other? "
" No — none. "
" You love me then? " said he, fervently pressing my hand.
" Yes. "
Here I pause. My diary, from which I have compiled these
pages, goes but little further. I could go on for years ; but I
will content myself with adding, that I shall never forget that
glorious summer evening, and always remember with delight
that steep hill, and the edge of the precipice where we stood to-
gether, watching the splendid sunset mirrored in the restless
world of waters at our feet — with hearts filled with gratitude to
Heaven, and happiness, and love — almost too full for speech.
A few weeks after that, when my mother had supplied herself
with an assistant, I became the wife of Edward Weston ; and
never have found cause to repent it, and am certain that I never
shall. We have had trials, and we know that we must have
462 AGNES GREY.
them again ; but we bear them well together, and endeavour
to fortify ourselves and each other against the final separation
— that greatest of all afflictions to the survivor. But, if we keep
in mind the glorious heaven beyond, where both may meet
again, and sin and sorrow are unknown, surely that too may
be borne ; and, meantime, we endeavour to live to the glory of
Him who has scattered so many blessings in our path.
Edward, by his strenuous exertions, has worked surprising
reforms in his parish, and is esteemed and loved by its inhabi-
tants — as he deserves ; for whatever his faults may be as a man
(and no one is entirely without), I defy anybody to blame him
as a pastor, a husband, or a father.
Our children, Edward, Agnes, and little Mary, promise well ;
their education, for the time being, is chiefly committed to me ;
and they shall want no good thing that a mother's care can
give. Our modest income is amply sufficient for our requirements ;
and by practising the economy we learnt in harder times, and
never attempting to imitate our richer neighbours, we manage
not only to enjoy comfort and contentment ourselves, but to
have every year something to lay by for our children, and
something to give to those who need it.
And now I think I have said sufficient.
THE END.
Prtnicd by Ballantyne, Hanson £: CO.
Edinburgh attd London.
W. M. THACKERAY'S WORKS.
THE STANDARD EDITION. In Twenty-six Volumes,
large 8vo, los. 6d. each. This Edition contains some of Mr.
Thackeray's writings not previously collected, with many addi-
tional Illustrations. It has been printed from new type, on fine
paper ; and, with the exception of the Edition de Luxe, it is the
largest and handsomest edition that has been published.
THE EDITION DE LUXE. Twenty-six Volumes, imperial
8vo. Containing 248 Steel Engravings, 1620 Wood Engravings,
and 88 Coloured Illustrations. The Steel and Wood Engrav-
ings are all printed on real China paper. The NUMBER
of COPIES PRINTED is LIMITED to ONE THOUSAND,
each copy being numbered. The Work can only be obtained
through Booksellers, who will furnish information regarding
terms, & c.
THE LIBRARY EDITION. With Illustrations by the
Author, Richard Doyle, and Frederick Walker. Twenty-
four Volumes, large crown 8vo, handsomely bound in cloth,
price £g ; or half-russia, marbled edges, £t.2, 13s.
%* The Voi nines are sold separately, in cloth, price 7s. 6d. each.
THE POPULAR EDITION. Thirteen Volumes, crown 8vo,
with Frontispiece to each Volume, scarlet cloth, gilt top, price
^3, 5s. ; or half-morocco, gilt, price _^5, los.
*:jr The Volumes are sold separately, in ^reen cloth, price 55. ecu:h.
CHEAPER ILLUSTRATED EDITION. Twenty-six
Volumes, crown 8vo, bound in cloth, price £:^, lis. ; or hand-
somely bound in half-morocco, price ^8, 8s. Containing nearly
all the small Woodcut Illustrations of the former Editions, and
many New Illustrations by Eminent Artists. This Edition con-
tains altogether 1773 Illustrations.
"'V* The Volumes are sold separately, in cloth, price 35. 6d. each.
THE POCKET EDITION. In -Twenty-seven Volumes.
Price IS. 6d. each in half-cloth, cut or uncut edges ; or is. in
paper cover.
*#* The set 0/27 Volumes can also le had in a Hafidsome Ebonizcd Case,
Price ^2, I2S. 6d.
London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.
MISS THACKERAY'S WORKS.
Uniform Edition, each Volume Illustrated with a Vi < Tnette
Title-page. Large crown 8vo, 6s. each. * "
1. OLD KENSINGTON.
2. THE VILLAGE ON THE CLIFF
3. FIVE OLD FRIENDS AND A YOUNG PRINCE
4. TO ESTHER ; and other Sketches.
5. BLUEBEARD'S KEYS ; and other Stories
6. THE STORY OF ELIZABETH : TWO HOURS •
FROM AN ISLAND. -nwuiv.-^ .
7. TOILERS AND SPINSTERS; and other Essays
8. MISS ANGEL: FULHAM LAWN.
9. MISS WILLIAMSON'S DIVAGATIONS
10. MRS. DYMOND.
UNIFORM EDITION OF
Mrs. GASKELL'S NOVELS and TALES
In Seven Volumes, bound in cloth, each containing
Four Illustrations, price 3s. 6d. each.
CONTENTS OF THE VOLUMES:
Vol. I. WIVES AND DAUGHTERS.
Vol. II. NORTH AND SOUTH
Vol. III. SYLVIA'S LOVERS.
Vol. IV. CRANFORD.
Company Manners-The Well of Pen-Morpha-The Heart of John Mid. -
^ " -Traits and Stories of the Huguenots-Six Weeks at Heppenheim
The Squ.re s Story-L.bbie Marsh's Three Eras-Curious if True-The
Moorland Cottage-The Sexton's Hero-Disappearances-Right at last-
The Manchester Marriage-Lois the Witch-The Crooked Branch
Vol. V. MARY BARTON.
Cousin PhilHs- My French Master-The Old Nurse's Story- Bessy's
Troubles at Home— Christmas Storms and Sunshine. ^
Vol. VI. RUTH.
The^Grey Woman— Morton Hall— Mr. Harrison's Confessions— Hand and
Vol. Vn. LIZZIE LEIGH.
A Dark Night's Work-Round the Sofa-My Lady Ludlow-An Accursed
?k " w T/'o ^1° " " " " ^ ^^^ Griffiths-Haifa Lifetime Ago-The Poor Clare-
Ine Half-Brothers.
*»* ^^^ VohtMtes are also to he had infca^. Zvo, litup cloth,
price 2S. 6d. each.
London: SMITH, ELDER, cS: CO., 15 Waterloo Place.
h
DATE
DUE
i*t ,.'.
m 2 4
2000
Kin\f
NUv
i e 2002
■'
GAYLORD
PRINTED IN USA
PR4172,W7
CLAPP
3 5002 00087 9739
Bronte, Emily
Wuthering Heights /
205345
HI
W7
J
