



►
^ < ;t > ^ i'}xi > o

XT(^ ^-'7^^^
¥UTHERING HEIGHTS.
C2l NotJd-
THE AUTHOR OF " JANE EYRE. "
NEW YORK:
HARPER ifc BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,
82 CLIFF STREET.
1848.

WUTHEEMG HEiaSTS.
CHAPTER I.
. 1801. — I HAYE just returned from a visit to my landlord — ^tfae
solitary neighbor that I shall be troubled with. This is cer-
tainly a beautiful country 1 In all England I do not believe
that I could have fixed on a situation so completely removed
from the stir of society. A perfect misanthropist's Heaven —
and Mr. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable pair to divide the
desolation between us. A capital fellow 1 He little imagined
how my heart wurmed toward hipi when I beheld his black
eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows as I rode up,
and when his fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous reso-
lution, BtiU further in his waistcoat, as I announced my name.
" Mr. Heathcliff 1 " I said.
A nod was the answer.
" Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir — ^I do myself the
honor of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to express
the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my perse-
verance in soliciting the occupation of Thnishcross Grange : I
heard yesterday you had had some thoughts — "
" Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir, " he interruptfsd wincing,
** I should not allow any one to inconvenience me, if I could
hinder it — ^walk in ! "
The ** walk in " was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed
the sentiment, " Go to the Deuce ! " Even the gate over which
he leaned manifested no sympathizing movement to the words ;
and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the
invitation: I felt interested in a man who seemed more ex-
aggeratiedly reserved than my8el£
WUT.HERING HEIGHTS.
When he saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the hairier, he
did pull out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded
me up the causeway, calling as we entered the court :
" Joseph, take Mr. Lockwood's horse ; and biing up some
wine. "
" Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I
suppose, " was the reflectiou suggested by this compound
order. " No wonder the grass grows up between the flags,
and cattle are the only hedge-cutters. "
Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps,
though hale and sinewy.
" The Lord help us ! " he soliloquized in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of ray horse : looking,
meantime, in my face so sourly, that I charitably conjectured
he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner, and his
pious ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected advent.
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling.
" Wuthering " being a significant provincial adjective, descrip-
tive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in
stormy weather. Pure, bracing ventilation they must have up
there at all times, indeed : one may guess the power of the
zioith wind blowing over the hedge, by the excessive slant of a
few stunted firs at the end of the house ; send by a raxige of
gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving
alms of the sun. Happily, the architect had foresig^nt to build
it strong : the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and
the comers defended with large jutting stones.
Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a quantity
of grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially
about the principal door, above which, among a wilderness of
crumbling griffins and shameless little boys, I detected the
date, " 1500, " and the name, " Hareton Eamshaw; " I would
have made a few comments, and requested a short history
of the place firom the surly owner, but his attitude at the door
appeared to demand my speedy entrance or complete de-
parture, and 1 had no desire to aggravate his impatience pre-
vious to inspecting the penetralium.
One step brought us into the family sitting-room without any
introductory lobby or passage : they call it here " the house "
pre-eminently. It includes kitchen and parlor generally; but I
believe at Wuthering Heights, the kitchen is forced to retreat
altogether into another quarter ; at least I distinguished a chat-
WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ter of tongues and a clatter of culinary utensils deep within ;
and I observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking about
the huge fire-place, nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin
" ^cullendei-s on the walls. One end, indeed, reflected splendidly
both light and heat from ranks of immense pewter dishes,
inters^rsed with silver jugs and tankards, towering row after
row m a vast oak dresser, to the very roof. The latter had
never been underdrawn, its entire anatomy lay bare to an in-
quiring eye, except where a fi-ame of wood laden with oatcakes,
and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
Above the chinmey were sundry viUainous old guns, and a
couple of horse-pistols, and, by way of ornament, three gaudily
painted canistera disposed along its ledge. The floor was
of smooth, white stone ; the chairfi, high-backed, primitive
Structures, painted green ; one or two heivy black ones lurking
in the shade. In an arch, under the dresser, reposed a huge,
liver-colored bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of squeal-
ing puppies ; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing ex-
trordinary as belonging to a homely northern farmer, with a
stubborn countenance, and stalwart limbs, set out to advantage
in knee-breeches and gaiters. Such an individual, seated in his
arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the round table before
him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles among
these Mils, if you go at the right time after dinner. But Mr.
Heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of
living. He is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and
manners a gentleman ; that is, as much a gentleman as many a
country. squire; rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss
with his negligence, because he has an erect and handsome
figure ; and rather morose, possibly some people might suspect
him of a degree of under-bred pride. I have a sympathetic
chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort ; I know,* by
instinct, his reserve springs from an avei-sion to showy displays
of feeling,'to manifestations of mutual kindliness. He'fl love
and hatej equally under cover, and esteem it a species of im-
pertinence to be loved or hated again. — No, I'm running on too
fast. I bestow my own attributes over liberally on him. Mr,
Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his
Band out of the way, when he meets a would-be acquaintance,
to those which actuate me. Let me hope my constitution is
almost peculiar; my dear mother used to say I should never
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
have a comfortable^ home, and only last summer I proved my
self perfectly unworthy of one.
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I
was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature, a*
real goddess, in my eyes, as long as she took no notice of me.
I " never told my love " vocally ; still, if looks have language,
the merest idiot might have guessed I was over head and ears ;
she understood me, at last, and looked a retttm*--the sweetest
of all imaginable looks— *and what did I do ? I confess it with
shame — shrunk icily into myself, like a snail, at every glance
retired colder and farther ; till, finally, the poor innocent was
led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion
at her supposed nnstake, pei'suaded her mamma to decamp.
By this curious turn of disposition, I have gained the repu- >
tation of deliberate heartlessness, how undeserved, I alone can
appreciate.
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone'opposite that
toward which my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval
of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother, who had
left her nursery, anu was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my
legs, her lip curled up, and her white teeth watering for a
snatch.
My caress provoked a long, guttural marl.
" You'd better let the dog alone, " growled Mr. Heathcliff,
in unison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of
his foot, ** She's not accustomed to be spoiled — ^not kepC^ for a
pet. "
Then, striding to a side-door, he shouted again,
" Joseph. "
Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar ; but
gave no intimation of ascending ; so his master dived down to
him, leaving me vis-a-vis with the ruffianly bitch and a pair of
grim, shaggy sheep-dogs, who shared with her a jealous guard-
ianship over all my movements.
Not anxious to come in contact with their fangs, I sat still-
but, imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, I
unfortunately indulged in winking and making faces at the trio,
and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam, that
she suddenly broke into a fury, and leapt on my knees. I flung
her back, and hastened to interpose the table between us.
This proceeding roused the whole hive. Half-a-dozen four-
footed fiends, of various sizes, and ages, issued from hidden
WITT HS & IN6 HXIOHT$«
deiia to the common center. I felt my heeb and coat laps
peculiar subjects of asscUilt ; and, parrying off the larger com-
batants, as effectually as I could, with the poker, I was con-
strained to demand aloud assistance fixmi some of the house*
hold, in re-establishing peace.
Mr. Heathdiff and Ins man climbed the cellar steps with
vexatious phlegm. I don't think they moved one second faster
tbxu usual, tEKHigh the hearth was an absolute tempest ol
wonying and yelping.
Happily, an inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch *
a lusty dame, with tucked up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed
cheeks, rushed into the midst of us, flourishing a frying-pan,
and used that weapon, and her tongue, to such purpose, that
the storm subsided magically, and she only remained, heaving
like a sea after a high wind, when her master entered on the
scene.
'* What the devil is the matter V* he asked, eyeing me in
a manner that I could ill endure after this inhospital^ treat-
ment.
" What the devil, indeed ! " I muttered. " The herd of pos-
sessed swine could have had no worse spirits in them Uian
those animals of yours, sir. Yon might as well leave a stranger
with a brood of tigers 1 "
" They won't i»Bddle with persons who touch nothing, " he
remarked putting the bottle before me, and restoring the dis-
placed table. ** The dogs 4o right to be^vigilant. Take a glass
of wine 1 "
" No, thank you. "
" Not bitten, are you 1 "
** If I had been, I would h & re set my signet on the biter. "
Heathcliff's countenance relaxed into a grin.
" Come, come, " he said, " you are flurried, Mr. Lockwood.
Here, take a little wine. Guests are so exceedingly rare in
this house that I and my dogs, I am willing to own, hardly
know how to receive them. Your health, sir I "
I bowed and returned the pledge ; beginning to perceive
that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehavior
of a pack of curs; besides, I felt loth to yield the fellow
further amusement at my expense, since his humor took that
turn.
He — probably swayed by prudential considerations of the
foUy of offending a good tenant — ^relaxed a little in the laconic
8 WUTH BRING H E I G B T B.
Style of chipping of his pronouns and auxiliary verbs ; and in-
troduced, what he supposed would be a subject of interest to
me, a discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my
present place of retirement.
I found him very intelligent on the topics we touched ; and,
before I went home, I was encouraged so fat as to volunteer
another visit to-morrow.
He evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. I shall
go notwithstanding. It is astonishing how sociable I feel my-
self compared " with him.
CHAPTER II.
Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I had half a
mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through
heath and mud to Wuthering Heights.
On coming up from dinner, however, (N.B., I dine between
twelve and one o'clock ; the housekeeper, a matronly lady taken
as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would not,
comprehend my request that I might be served at five.) On
mounting the stairs with this lazy intention, and stepping into
the room, I saw a servant-girl on her knees, surrounded by
brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as she
extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders. This spectacle
drove me back immediately ;^ I took my hat, and, after a four
miles'walk, arrived at Heathcliff's garden gate, just in time to
escape the first feathery flakes of a snow shower.
On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black frost,
and the air made me shiver through every limb. Being unable
to remove the chain, I jumped over, and, running up the flag-
ged causeway bordered with straggling gooseberry bushes,
knocked vainly for admittance till my knuckles tingled and the
dogs howled.
" Wretched inmates ! " I ejaculated, mentally, " you deserve
perpetual isolation from your species for your churlish inhospi-
tality. At least, I would not keep my doors barred in the day-
time ; I don't care — I will get in ! "
So resolved, I grasped the latch tind shook it vehemently. Vine-
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS.
gar*faced Joseph projected his head from a round window of
the bam.
" Whet are ye for] " he shouted. " T'maitter's dahn i'
t'fowld. Gfoa rahnd by th'end ut'laith, if yah went tuh spake
tuU him. "
" Is there nobody inside to open the dobri " I hallooed,
responsively.
" They's nobbut t'missis, and shoo'll 9ut oppen't an ye mak
yer flaysome dins till neeght. "
" WTiy, can not you tell her who I am, eh, Joseph V*
** Nor-ne me ! Aw'Il hae noa hend wi't, " muttered the head,
vanishing.
The snow began to drive thickly. I seized the handle to
essay another trial, when a young man, without coat, and shoul-
dering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind. He hailed me
to follow him, and,, after marching trough a wash-house, and a
paved area containing a coal-shed, pump, and pigeon-cote, we
ut length arrived in the large, warm, cheerBil apartment, where
I was. formerly received.
It glowed delightfully in the radiance of an immense fire,
compounded of coal, peat, and wood ; and near the table, laid
for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased to observe the
•* missis, " an individual whose existence I had never previously
suspected.
I bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
She looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained mo-
tionless and mute.
" Rough weather ! " I remarked. " I'm afraid, Mrs. Heath-
cliff, the door must bear the consequence of your servants'
leisure attendance ; I had hard work to make them hear me. "
She never opened her mouth. I stared — she stared also.
At any rate, she Jcept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless man-
ner, exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable.
" Sit down, " said the young man, gruffly. " He'll be in
soon. "
I obeyed, and hemmed, and called the villain Juno, who
deigned, at this second interview, to move the extreme tip of
her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance.
" A beautiful animal 1 " I commenced again. " Do you in
tend parting with the little ones, madam V*
" They are not mine, " said the amiable hostess, more repel
lingly than HeathcM himself could have replied.
A*
10 WUTHBRING HEIGHT 8.
" Ah, your favoiites are among tbese !** I contiaued, torning
to an obscure cushion full of something like cats.
" A strange choice of favorites/'she observed, scornfully.
Unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits. I hemmed once
more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on
the vvildness of the evening.
" You should not have come out, " she said, lising and reach-
iqg from the chinmey piece two of the painted canisters.
Her position before was sheltered fironn the light : now, I had
a distinct view of her whole figure and countenance. She was
slender, and apparently scaiicely jpast girlhood : an admirable
form, and the most exquisite little face that I have ever had the
pleasure of beholding: small featuiBS, very fair; flaxen ring-
lets, or rather golden, hanging loose on her delicate neck ; and
eyes — ^had diey been agreeable in expressian, they would have
been irre8istible-*fortunately for my susceptible heart, the only
sentiment they evinced hovered between scorn and a kind of
desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected there.
The canisters were almost out of her rea^ ; I made a motion
to aid her; she turned upon me as a miser might turn, if any
one attempted to assist him in counting his gold.
^ I doo*t want your help/'she snapped, ^ I can get diem £ot
myseE "
" I beg your pardon, " I hastened to i-eply.
^ Were you asked to tea t " she demanded, tying an apron
over her neat black frock, and standing with a spo^oEfiil oi the
leaf poised over the pot.
** i shall be glad to have a cup, " I answered.
** Were you asked V* she repeated. -
** No ; " I said, half smiling. ** You are the proper person to
adk me. "
She flung the tea back, spoon and all; and resumed her
chair in a pet, her fordiead corrugated, aiid her red under-lip
pushed out like a child's ready to cry.
Meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person a
decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting himself before
tlie blaze, looked down on mre from the comer of his eyes, for
all the world as if there were sonoe mortal feud unavenged
between us. I beean to doubt whether he were a serVant or
not; his dress and speech w«:e both rude, entirely devoid
of die superiority observable in Mr. and Mra. Heathcliff; his
thick, brown curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers
WUTHERJ[N.0, HEIGHTS* 11
eiicrofi^bed be^rishly. over bis cheeks, and his bands were
embrowned like those of a common laborer ; still bis bearing
was & ee,, almost haughty; and he ^owed none of a domestic's
assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
In ,the absence of clear proofs of his condition, I deemed it
best to abstain from noticmg.his curious conduct, and, five
nuQtttes afterward, the entrance of HQathcliff'relieved me, in
some measure, from my uncomfbrtable state.
'* You see, sii','I am cpme, according to promise !*'I ex-
claimed, assuming the cheerful,'* and I fear I shall be weather-
bound for half an hour, if you can afford me shelter during that
space. "
** Half an hour V he said^ shaking the white flakes from his
clothes;'* I wonder you should select the thick of a snow*
storm to ramble about in. . Do you know that you run a risk
of being lost in the marshes ? People familiar with these
moors often miss their road on such evenings, and, I can tell
you, there is no chance of a change at present "
** Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, add he might
stay at the Grange till moming-^coiiTd you spare me one V*
" No, I could not. " . ,
** Oh, indeed ! Well then, I must trust to my own sagacity. "
" Umph. "
" Are you going to mak th'teal " demanded he of the
shabby coat, shifting his. ferocious gaze & om me to the young
lady.
''Is Ae to have any V* she asked, appealing to Heathcliff.
" Get it ready, will you 1 " was the answer, uttered so
savagely that I started. The tone in which the words :Were
said revealed a genuine bad nature. I no longer felt inclined
to call Heathcliff a capital fellow.
., When the prepai*atiofis were finished, he invited me ^i'^-^
" Now, sir, bring forward your chair- " And we all, in-
cluding the rustic youths drew round the table, an austere
silence^ prevailing while we discussed our toeal.
I thought, if I had.cairaed tii^ cloud, it was my duty to make
an effort to dispel it. They could not every day sit so grim and
taciturn, and it was impossible, however ill-tempered they might
be, that the universal scowl they wore was their every-day
countenance.
" It is strange, " I began, in the interval of swallowing erne
cup of tea, and receiving another, " it is strange how custom
12 , WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
can mold our tastes and ideas; many could not imagine the
existence of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the
world as you spend, Mr. Heathcliff ; yet, I'll venture to say,
that, surrounded by your family, and with your amiable lady as
the presiding genius over your home and heart— "
" My amiable lady! " he intelrupted, with an almost dia-
bolical sneer on his face. " Where is she— my amiable lady ] "
" Mrs. Heathcliff, your wife, I mean. "
" Well, yes — Oh ! you would intimate that her spirit has
taken the post of ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of
Wuthering Heights, even when her body is gone. Is that it V*
Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct it.
I might have seen there was too great a disparity between the
ages of the parties to make it likely that they were man and
vrife. One was about forty ; a period of mental vigor at which
men seldom cherish the delusion of being married for love, by
girls : that dream is reserved for the solace of our declining
years. The other did not look seventeen.
Then it flashed upon me ; " the clown at my elbow,, who is
drinking his tea out of a basin, and eating his bread vrith
unwashed hands^ may be her husband. Heathcliff junior,
of course. Her^ is the consequence of being buried alive :
she has thrown heraelf away upon that boor, from sheer
ignorance that better individuals existed ! A sad pity— I must
beware how I cause her to regret her choice. "
The last reflection may seem conceited; it was not. My
neighbor struck me as bordering on repulsive. I knew, through
experience, that I was tolerably attractive.
" Mrs. Heathcliff is my daughter-in-law, " said Heathcliff, cor-
roborating my surmise. He turned, as he spoke, a peculiar look
in her direction, a look of hatred, unless he has a most perverse
set of facial muscles that will not, like those of other people, in-
terpret the language'of hid soul.
" Ah, certainly — I see now ; you are the favored possessor of
the beneficent fairy, " I remarked, turning to my neighbor.
This was worse than before ; the youth grew crimson, and
clenched his fist with every appearance of meditated assault.
But he seemed to recollect himself, presently ; and smothered
the storm in a brutal curse, muttered on my behalf, which, how-
ever, I took care not to notice. "
" Unhappy in your conjectures, sir! " observed my host;
" we neither of us have the privilege of owning your good fairy;
WUTHBRlNtt H«I0HT8. 13
herniate is* dead. I said she was my daughter-in-law,^ therefore
she .must have manied my son. "
" And this young man is — "
" Not my son, assuredly ! "
HeathctiiT smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him^
''My name is Hareton Eamshaw, " growled the other;''and
I'd counsel you to respect it !'*
" I've shown no disrespect, " was my reply, laughing inter*
nally at the dignity with which he announced himself.
He fixed his eye on me longer -than I cared to return the
stare, for fear I might be tempted either to box his ears, or ren-
der my hilarity audible. I began to feel imniistakably out of
place in that pleasant family circle. The dismal spiritual atmo-
sphere overcame, ai^ more than neutralized, the glovdng phys-
ical comforts round me; and I resolved to be cautious how I
ventured under those rafters a third time.
The business of eating being concluded, and no one uttering
a word of sociable conversation, I approached a window to ex-
amine the weather.
A sorrowftil sight I saw; dark night coming down prema-
turely, and 43ky and hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wmd and
suffocating snow.
'^I don't think it possible for me to get home now without a
guide, " I could not help exclaiming. " The roads will be bur-
ied already ; and if they were bare I could scarcely distinguish
a foot in advance. "
" Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the bam porch.
They'll be covered if left in the fold all night ; and put a plank
before them, " said Heathcliff.
" How must I do 1 " I continued, with rising irritation.
There was no reply to my question; and on looking round 1
saw only Joseph, bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and
Mrs. Heathcliff, leaning over the fire, diverting herself with burn-
ing a bundle of matches which had iallen from the chimney-piece
as she restored the tea-canister to its place.
The former, when he had deposited his burden, took a critical
survey of the room ; and in cracked tones grated out :
** Aw woonder hagh yah can faishion tub stand thear i* idle-
ness un war, when all on'em's goan aght ! Bud yab're a nowt,
and it's noa use talking — yah^l niver mend uh yer ill ways; bud
goa raight tuh't'divil, like yer mother afore ye ! "
14 WUTKERINO HEIGHTS.
I imagined, for a momenti that this piece of eloquence waa
addressed to me ; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped toward the
aged rascal with an intention of kicking him out of the door.
Mrs. Heathcliff, however, checked me by her answer.
'* You scandalous old hypocrite ! " she-repiied; " are you not
afraid of being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the
devil's name? I warn you to re & ain from provoking me, or
I'll ask your abduction as a special fevor. Stop, look here Jo-
soph/'she continued; taking a long, dark book from a shelf.
" I'll show you how far I've progressed in the Black Art — I
shall spoii be competent to make a clear house of it. The red
cow didn't die by chance ; and your rheumatism can hardly be
reckoned among providential visitations! "
''Ohj wicked, wicked!''gasped the elder, " may the Lord
deliver us from evil ! "
" No, reprobate! you are a castaway — ^be off, or I'll hurt you
seriously! I'll have you all modeled in wax and clay; tod
the first who passes the limits I fix, ahall — I'll not say what
he shall be done to-^but, you'll see! Go, I'm looking at
you! "
The little witch put a mock malignity into hej beautiful eyes,
and JosQph^ trembling with sincere horror^ hurried out praying
and ejaculating''wicked " as ho went.
I thought her conduct must be prompted by a species of dreary
fiin ; and, now that we were alone, I endeavored to interest'her
in my distress.
" Mrs. Heathcliff, " I said, earnestly, " you must excuse me
for troubling you-— I presume, because, with tha.tr face, I'm sure
you can not help being good-hearted. Do point out some land-
marks by which I may know my way home— I have no more
idea . how to get there diau you would have how to get to
London! "
" Take the road you came, " she answered, ensconcing her-
self in a chair, with a candle, and the long book open before
her. " It is'brief advice ; but as sound as I can give. "
" Then, if you hear o£zae being discovered dead in a bog, or
a pit full of snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is
paitly your fault 1 " v
" How so ? I can not escort you. They would'nt let me go to
the end of the garden- wall. " .,
" You / 1 should be Borrj to ask you to cross the threshold
for my convenience on such a night, " I cried. " I want you to
WUTBITBING HEI.GPT0. 15
tdl me my way, not to show it ; or else to persuade Mr. Heath-
cliff to give me a guide/'
** Who 1 There is himself; Eamshaw* Zillalif Joseph, and L
Which would you have 1 "
" Are there no hoys at the & rm V*
••No, those are alL "
" Then it follows that I am compeDed to stay.'?
*'That you may settle witii your host. I have nothing to do
with it. "
" I hope it vrill be a lesson to you, to roaka no more rash
ioumeys on these hills/'cried Heathcliff's stem voice from the
kitchen .entrance.''As to staying here, I don't keep accom-
modations for visitors; you must share a. bed with Harelon or
Joseph, if you do. "
''1 can sleep on a chair in this room, " I replied.
" No, no ! A stranger is a stranger, be ^he rich or poor— it
will not suit me to permit any one the range of the place while
Z am oflT^ard ! " said the unmannerly wretdi.
Widi Mb insult my patience waa at an end* I uttered an
expressiim of disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, run*
ning against Eamshaw in. my haste. It was ao dark that I
coidd not see the means of exit, and as I wandered round I heard
another specimen of their civil behavior, among each other.
At first the young man appeared about to befriend me.
" I'll go vdth him as fiir as the park, " he said.
" You'll go with him to hell ! " exclaimed his master^ or what-
ever relation he bore. ^ And who is to look after the horses,
ehr
" A man's life is of more consequence than one evening's
neglect of the horses; somebody must go, " murmured ll£a«
Heathcliff, more kindly than I expected.
** Not at your command ! " retorted Hareton. ^ If you set
store on him you'd better be quiet.
" Then I hope his ghost will haunt you ; «nd I hope Mr.
Heathcliff will never get another temtnt, till the Grange is a
ruin ! " she answered^ d^arply.
^ Hearken, hearken, shoe's cundng on em ! " muttered Joseph,
toward whom I had been steering.
He sat within earshot, milking the cows by the aid of a lan-
tern, which I seized unceremoniously, and calling cmt that I
would send it back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest
postern.
16 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
" Maister, maister, he's staling t'lantern ! " shouted the an-
cient, pursuing my retreat. " Hey,~ Gnasher ! Hey, dog!
Hey, wolf, holld him, holld him ! "
On opening the little door two hairy monstei^ flew at my
throat, hearing me down and extinguishing the light, while a
mingled guffaw from Heathcliif and Hareton put the copestone
on my rage and humiliation.
Fortunately the beasts seemed more bent on stretching their
paws and yawning and flourishing their tails, than devouring
me alive ; but they would suffer no resurrection, and I was
forced to lie till their malignant mastera pleased to deliver me ;
then hatless, and trembling with wrath, I ordered the miscre-
ants to let me out— on their peril to keep me one minute longer
— with several incoherent threads of retaliation, that, in their in-
definite depth of virulence, smacked of King Lear.
The Jvehemence of mjr agitation brought on a copious bleed-
ing at the nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and still I scolded.
I don't know what would have concluded the scene, had there
not been one person at hand rather inore rational than myself,
and more benevolent than my entertainer. This was Zillah,
the stout housewife ; who at leng;th issued forth to inquire into
the nature of the uproar^ She thought that some of them had
been laying violent hands on me ; and, not daring to attack
her master, she turned her vocal artillery against Qie younger
scoundrel.
" Well, Mr. Earnshaw, " she cried, ** I wonder what you'll
have agait next ! Are we going to murder folk on our very
door-stones? I see this house will never do for me — ^look at
t'poor lad, he's fair choking ! Wisht, wisht ! you mun'n't go
on so— come in, and I'll cure that There, now, hold ye still. "
With these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water
down my neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. Mr. Heath-
cliff followed, his accidental merriment expiring quickly in his
habitual moroseness.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy and faint ; and thus com-
pelled, perforce, to accept lodgings under his roof. He told
Zillah to give me a glass of brandy, and then passed on to the
inner room, while she condoled with me on my sorry predica*
ment, and having obeyed his orders, whereby I was somewhat
revived, ushered me to bed.
CHAPTER III.
While leading tli0 way up-Btaixs, she reconnnended that I
should hide the candle and not make a noise, for her master
had an odd. notion about the chamber she would put me in, and
never let any body lodge there willingly.
I asked the reason. •
She did not know, she answered ; she had lived there only a
year or two, and they had so many queer gofftgs on she could
not begin to be curious.
Too stupefied to be curious myself, I fastened my door and
glanced round for the bed. The whole furniture consisted of a
chair, a clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out
near the top, resembling coach windows.
Having approached this structure, I looked inside, and per-
ceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch, very con-
veniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member
of the family having a room to himself. In fact, it formed a lit-
tle closet ; and the ledge of a window, which it inclosed, served
as a table. ^
I slid back the panneled sides, got in vnth my light, pulled
them together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of
Heathcliff and every one else.
The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed
books piled up in on^ comer, and it was covered with writing
scratched on the paint. This vmting, however, was nothing but
a name repeated in all kinds of characters, large and small —
Catherine Eamshato, here and there varied to Catherine Heath-
cliffy and then again to Catherine Linton.
In vapid listlessness I leaned my head against the window,
and continued spelling over Catherine Eamshaw — HcathcliiF —
Linton, till my eyes closed ; but they had not rested five min-
utes when a glare of white letters started from the dark, as
vivid as specters — the air swarmed with Catherines ; and, rous-
ing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my candle-
wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and perfuming the
place with an odor of roasted .calf-skin.
I snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold
and lingering nausea; sat up and spread open the injured tome
18 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
on my knee. It was a Testament, in lean type, and smelling
dreadfully musty : a fly-leaf bore the inscription — " Catherine
Earnshaw, her book, " and a date some quarter of a century
back.
I shut it, and took up another and another, till I had exam-
ined all. Catherine's library was select, and its state of dilapi-
dation proved it to have been well used, tbongh not altogether
for a legitimate purpose ; scarcely one chapter had escaped a
pen-and-ink commentary, at lefast the appearance of one, cover-
mg every morsel of blank that the printer had left.
Some were detached sentenced, other parts took the form of a
regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. At the
top of an extra page, quite a treasure probably when first lighted
on, I was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my
fHend Joseph, rudely yet powerfully sketched.
An immediate interest kindled within me for the unknown
Catherine, and I began forthwith to decipher her faded hiero-
glyphics.
" An awfiil Sunday !'* commenced the paragraph beneath.
** I wish my father were back again. Hindley is a detestable
substitute — his conduct to HeathclifF is atrocious — H. and I are
going to rebel — we took our initiatory step this evening.
''AH day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to
church, so Joseph must needs get up a congregation in the gar-
ret ; and, while Hindley and his wire basked down stairs before
a comfortable fire, doing any thing but reading their Bibles, Til
answer for it, Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy plow-boy werQ
commanded to take otir prayer-books, and mount. We were
ranged in a row oira sack of com, groaning and shivering, and
hopmg that Joseph would shiver too, so that he might give us a
short homily for his own sake. A vain idea ! The service lasted
precisely three hours, and yet my brother had the face to ex-
claim, whefi he saw us descending,,
« • What, done already V
" On Sunday evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we
did not make much noise ; now a mere titter is sufficient to send
us into comers i
•• * You forget you have a master here,* says the tyrant. * I'll
demolish the first who puts me out of temper ! I insist on per-
fect sobriety and silence. Oh, boy ! was that you ? Frances,
darling, pull his hair as you go by : I heard him snap his fin-
gers.'
W U T B E R X N O H S I O H T S« 19
** Frances pulled his bair heartily, and then went and seated
herself on her husband's knee ; and there they were, like two
babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour — ^lish palaver
liiat we should be ashamed o£
** We made -ourselves as snug > as our means allowed in the
arch of the dresser. I had just fastened our pinafores together,
and hung them up £: > r a curtain, when in comes Joseph on an
errand from the stables. Ho tears down my handiwork, boxes
my ears, and croaks,
"'T'maisternobbut just buried, and Sabbath nut oe'i^, und
tf sahnd, uh't gospel still i'yer lugs, and yah darr be laiking ! —
shame on ye ! sit ye dahn, ill childer ! they's good books eneugh
if ye*ll read,'em ; sit ye dahn, and think uh yer sowls !'
** Saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that
we might receive, from the far-off fire, a dull ray to show us the
text of the lumber he thrust upon us.
. ** I could not bear the employment. I took my dingy volume
by the scroop and hurled it mto the dog-kennel, vowing I hated
a good book.
" Heathcliff kicked his to the same place.
" Then there was a hubbub !
**'Maister Hindley T slsouted our chaplain. * Maister, coom
hither! Miss Cathy's riven th'back off Th'Hehnet uh Salva-
tion, un'Heathcliff'apawsed his fit itttuh t'first part uh T'Brooad
Way to Destruction ! It's fair flaysome ut yah let'em goa on
this gait. Ech ! th'owd man ud uh laced'em properly — ^bud
he's goan !'
" Hindley hurried up ftom his paradise on the hearth, and,
seizing one of us by the collar and the other by the arm, hurled
both into the back kitchen, where, Joseph asseverated, * owd
Nick* would fetch us as sure as we were living; and, so com-
forted, we each sought a separate nook to t,wait his advent.
** I reached this book and a pot of ink from the shelf, and
pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and I have got the
time -on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairy-
woman's cloak and have a scamper on the moors under its shel-
ter. A pleasant suggestion — and then, if the surly old ftiatl come
in, he niay believe his prophecy verified — we can not be damper
or colder in the rain than we are here. "
20 WUTHERJNG HEIGHTS.
I suppose Catherine fulfilled he|: project, for the next sentence
took up another subject ; she waxed lachrymose.
" How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make me
cry so ! " she wrote. " My head aches till I can not keep it on
the pillow ; and still I can't give over. Poor JJeathclifF! Hind-
ley calls him a vagabond, and won't let him sit with us, nor eat
with us any more ; and he says he and I must not play together,
and threatens to turn him out of t^e house if we break his
orders.
" He has been blaming our father (how ddred he 1) for treat-
ing H. too liberally, and swears he will redtice him to his right
place — " -
« • . « • «
I began to nod drowsily over the djm page ; my eye wan-
dered & om manuscript to pdnt. I saw a red ornamented title—
" Seventy Times Seven, and the First of the Seventy-First. A
Pious Discourse delivered by th^ Reverend Jabes Branderbam,
in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough. " And while I was, half
consciously, worrying my bi*ain to guess what Jabes Brander-
ham would make of his sul^ct, I sank back in bed, and fell
asleep.
Alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper ! what else
could it be that made me pass such a terrible night 7 I don't
remember another that I can at all compare with it since I was
capable of suffering.
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible of my
locality. I thought it was morning ; and I had set out on my
way home with Joseph for a. guide. The snow lay yards deep
in our road ; and, as we floundered on, my companion wearied
me with constant reproaches that I had not brought a pilgrim's
staff: telling me I could never get into the house without one,
and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which I un-
derstood to be so denoxpinated.
For a moiment I consider it absurd that I should need such a
weapon to gain admittance into my own residence.. Then a
new idea flashed across me. I was not going there ; we were
journeying to hear the famous Jabes Branderham preach from
the text — " Seventy Times Seven ; " and either Joseph, the
preacher, or I had committed the " First of the Seventy Firsts "
and were to be publicly exposed and excommunicated.
We came to the chapel — I have passed it really in my walks
twice or thrice — it lies in a hollow between two hills — an ele-
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 21
valed iiollow near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to
answer all the purposes c^ embalming on the few corpses de-
posited there.. The roof has been kept whole hitherto, but as
the clergyman's stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, and
a house with two* rooms, threatening speedily, to determine into
one, no clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor, especially
a9 it is currently reported that his flock would rather let him
starve than increase the living by bne penny from their own
pockets. However, in my dream, Jabes had a full and attentive
congregation :• and he preached*— good God — what a sermon !
Divided mtofour hundred and ninety parts— each fully equal to
an. ordinary address from the pulpit — -and each discussing a
separate sin! Where he searched for them, I can not tell; he
had his private manner of interpreting the plmse, and it seemed
necessary the brother should sin different sins on every occasion.
They w^re of the most curious character — odd trangressions
that I never imagined previously.
Oh, how weary I grew. How I writhed, and yawned, and
nodded, and revived ^ . How I pinched and pricked myself, and
rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sat down again, and nudged
Joseph to inform me if he would ever have done l "
I was condemned, to hear all out — ^finally, he reached the
" First of the Seventy- Firsts. At that crisis a sudden inspiration
descended on me. ;'I was. moved to rise and denounce Jabes
Branderham as the sinner of* the sin that no Christian need
pardon.
*'Sir, " I exclaimed, " sitting here within these four walls, at
one stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and
ninety heads of your discourse. Seventy times seven times
have I plucked up my hat, and been about to depart. — Seventy
times seven times have you preposterously forced me to resume
my seat. The four hundred and ninety-first is too much. Fel-
low martyrs, have at him ! Drag him down, and crush him to
atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
more! "
" Thou art the Man/** cried Jabes, after a solemn pause,
leaning over his cushion.''Seventy times seven times didst
thou gapingly contort thy visage — ^seventy times seven did I
take counsel with my soul. . Lo, this is human iveakness ; this
also may be absolved I The First of the Seventy-First is come
Brethren, execute upon him the judgment written ! such honor
have all His saints.! "
Itfi W U T HE miNO BBIGBTflL
With that canclading -word, the iHiole assembly, exalting
dieir pilgrim's staves, rushed round me in a body, ai^d I, having
no weapon to raise in selMefisnse commenced grappfing with
Joseph, my nearest and most ferocioiis assailant, tor his. In
the coi^uence of the multitiide, several dobs crossed ; blows
aimed at me fell on other sconces. Presently die whole chapel
resounded with rappings and cotmter-ra^^ings. Every man's
hand was against his nmghbor ; and Brsinderfaam, unwilling to
remain idle, poured fotth his ceal in a shower of loud taps on
the boards of the pulpit, which le^KMided so smartly^ tint, at
last, to my toispeakable rehef^ they woke me.
And what was it that had suggested the tremendous tomult %
what had played Jabes'part in the row I Merely the branch
of a fir-tree that touched my lattice, as the blast wailed by, and
rattled its dry cones against the panes !
I listened doubtingly an instant ; detected the disturber, dien
turned and dozed, and dreamed ii^;ain ; if possible, still more
disagreeably than befiire.
This time I remembered I vras Ipng in the oak closet, and I
heard distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow ; I
heard also the fir-bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it
to the right cause ; but it annoyed me so much that I resolved
to silence it, if possible ; and I thought I rose and endeavored
to unhasp the casement. The hook was soldered into the
staple, a circumstance observed by me, when awake, but fiir-
gotten.
<'I must stop it, nevertheless! " I muttered, knocking my
knuckles through the glass, and stretching an arm out to seize
the importunate branch: instead of whibh, my fingers dosed on
the fingers of a little, icercold hand 1
The intense horror of nightmare came over me ; I tried to
draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melan«
choly voice sobbed—
''Let me in — let me in ! "
" Who are you 1 " I asked, struggling meanwhile to disengage
myself.
" Catherine Linton, " it relied, shiveringly (why did I think
of LdrUon 7 I had read Eamshaw, twetitj times for Linton),
** Vm come home, I'd lost my way on the moor ! "
As it spoke I discerned, obscurely, a child's face looking
through the window-^Terror made me cruel ; and finding it
useless to attempt shaking the creature off, I puOed its wrist on
to the broken pane, anjd_Tal > bed it to and fro till the blood ran
down »id soaked the bed-clothes : still it wailed, ** Let me in ! "
and maintained its t^iacious gripe, almoat maddening me with
fear.
** How can I f't aaicL at length. ^*Let flfte gb, if you want
jioe to let yoa in F*
The fingers relaxed, I snatched mine tivough die hole, hur*
liedly piled the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped
my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer.
I seemed to keep them. closed above a quarter of an honr,
TBt the instant I listened again, there was the doleful cry moan-
mg " OBL
" Begone i " I touted, •* I'll never let you in, not if you beg
fcrtiwenty years ! " -
" It's twenty years, " moomed the voice, ** tvrenty years, I've
been a waif for twenty years 1 " ^
Thereat began a feeble acratching outside, and the pile of
books moved, as if thrust forward.
I tried to jump up ; but could not stir a limb, and so yelled
aloud, iQ a mnzy of fHght.
To my < x)nfusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal. Hasty
footsteps approached my cha)nber door : somebody pushed it
open Math a vigorous hand, and a light glimmered Uirough the
squares at t}ie top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet, and wiping
the perd^iration from my forehead : the intruder appeared to
hesitate, and muttered to himself
At last he said in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting an
answer,
" Is any one here 1 "
I considered it best to confess my presence, for I knew Heath-
clififs accents, and foared he might search further if I kept
quiet.
With this int^Qtion,. I turned and opened the panels — I shall
not soon forget the efifisct my action produced.
Heathcliff stood near the entrance in his shirt and trowsers ;
with a candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as
the wan behind him. The first creak of the oak startled him
like an electric shock : the light leaped from his hold to a dis-
tance of some feet, and his agitation was so extreme that he
could hardly pick it up.
" It is only y < ^!ir guest, sir, " I called out, desirous to spare him
the humiliation of exposing his cowardice forther.''I had the
24 W U T H E R I N O H E I O H T 8.
misfoitune to scream in my sleep, owing to a fiightful nightmare.
I'm sorry I disturbed you. "
" Oh, God confound you, Mr. Lockwood ! I wish you were
at the — , " commenced my host, setting the candle on a chair,
because he found it impossible to hold it steady.
" And who showed you up to this room 1 " , he Gontinued,
crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to sub-
due the maxillary convulsions.''Who was itl I've a good
mind to turn them out of the house this moment.''
" It was your servant Zillah, " I replied, flinging myself on the
floor, ^uid rapidly resuming my garments. " I should not care
if you did, Mr. Heathcliff ; she richly deserves it. I suppose
that she wanted to get another proof that the place was haunt-
ed, at my expense. Well, it is — swarming with ghosts, and
goblins. You have reason in shutting it up, I assure you. No
one will thank you for a doze in such a den ! "
" What do you mean ] " asked Heathclifl*, " and what ai:e you
doing] Lie down and finish out the night, since you art here ;
but, for Heaven's sake, don't repeat that horrid noise. Nothing
could excuse it, unless you were having your throat cut "
" If the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably
would have strangled me ! " I returned. " I'm not going to en-
dure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors, again. Was
not the Reverend Jabes Branderham akin to you on the mother's
side % And that minx; Catherine Linton, or Eamshaw, or how-
ever she was called-— she must have been a changeling — wicked
little soul* She told me she had been walking the earth these
twenty years : a just punishment for her mol:^ transgressions,
I've no doubt. "
Scarcely were these words uttered, when I recoHected the
association of Heathcliff's with Catherine's name in the book,
which, had completely slipped from my memory till thus
awakened. I blushed at my inconsideratiol) ; ^ut, without
showing further consciousness of the oflense, I hastened to add,
The truth is, sir, I passed the first part of the night in " —
Here I stopped afresh — I was about to say " perusing those old
volumes ;^'then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as w^U as their printed contents j so correcting myself.
I went on,
" In spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledgis.
A monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like
counting, or " —
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 25
" What can you miean, by talking in this way to me / " thun*
dered HeathclifF with savage vehemence. " How — ^how dare
you, under my POof — jGrod! he's mad to speak so! " and he
struck his forcdiead with rage.
I did not know whether to resent this language, or pursue
my explanation; but he seemed so powerfully ^ected that I
took pity, . and proceeded with my dreams ; affirming I had
never heard the appellation of''Catherine Linton " before, but
reading it often over produced an impression which personified
itself -wheal had no longer my imagination under control.
Hej^thcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed, as I
spoke, finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. I
guessed, however, fc^. his in-egular and intercepted breathing,
that he struggled to vanquish an access of violent emotion.
Not liking to show him that I heard the conflict, I continued x
my toilet rather noisily* looked at my watch, and soliloquized
on the length of the night :
" Not three o'clock, yet I I pould have taken oath it had been
six — ^time stagnates here — we must surely have retired to rest
at eight I "
" Always at nine in winter, and always rise at four, " said my
host, suppressing a groan ; and, as I fancied, by the motion of
his shadow's arm, dashing a tear from his eyes.
" Mr. Lockwood, " he added, " you may go into my room ;
you'll ^only be in the way, coming down stairs so early : and
your childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me. "
" And for me too, " I replied. " I'll walk in the yard till
daylight, and then I'll be off ; and you need not dread a repeti-
tion of my intrusion. I am now quite cured of seeking pleasure
in society, be it country or town. . A sensible man ought to find
sufficient company in himself. "
" Delightful company! " muttered Heathcliff. " Take the
candle, and go where you please — I shall join you directly.
Keep out of the yard though — the dogs are unchained ; and the -
house — ^Juno mounts sentinel there— and — ^nay, you can only
ramble about the steps and passages — but away with you — I'll
come in two minutes. "
I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber ; when, ignorant where
the narrow lobbies led, I stood still, and was witness, involun-
tarily, to a piece of superstition on the part of fipy landlord, which
beliod, oddly, his apparent sense^ ..
He got upon the bed, and wrenched open the lattice, burst-
B
26 WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS.
ing, as be pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion of
tears.
" Come in! come in! " he sobbed. " Cathy, do come. Oh,
dch—once more ! Oh I my heart's darling, hear me this time —
Catherine, at last! "
The specter showed a specter's ordinary caprice ; it gave no
sign of being ; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through,
even reaching my station, and blowing out the light.
There was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied
this raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and
I drew off, half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at hav-
ing related my ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that
agony ; though why, was beyond my comprehension.
I descended cautiously to the lower regions ; and landed in the
back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly together,
enabled me to re-kindle my candle.
Nothing was stirring except a brindled gray cat, which crept
from the ashes and saluted me with a querulous mew.
Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly inclosed
the hearth ; on one of these I stretched myself, and Grimalkin
mounted the other. We were both of us nodding ere any one
invaded our retreat, and then it was Joseph shuffling down a
wooden ladder that vatiished in the Toof, through a^rap, the
ascent to his garret, I suppose.
He cast a sinister look at the little flame which I had enticed
to play between the ribs, swept the cat from its. elevation, and,
bestowing himself in the vacancy, commenced the operation of
stuffing a three-inch pipe with tobacco; my presence in his
sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too
shameful ^r remark. He silently applied the tube to his hps^
folded his arms, and pufied away.
I let him enjoy the luxuiy unannoyed ; and, after sucking out
the last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up and
departed as solemnly as he came.
A more elastic footstep entered next, and now I opened my
mouth for a " good morning, " but closed it again, the salutation
unachieved ; for Hareton Eainshaw wgls performing his orisons,
sotto voce, in a series of curses directed against every object he
touched, while he rummaged a comer for a spade or shovel to
dig through the drifts. He glanced over the back of the bench,
dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of exchanging civilities
with me as with my companion, the cat.
WtJTSXllX N 6 HEI-CHTB; 27
I guessed by bis preparatians that egress <'vrais allowed^ and,
leaving my bard coodb, :made a movement to follow him. He
noticed tins, and thrust at an ioner door with the end of bis
spade, intimating; by an iaaaiticulate sound, that there was the
place Where I must go if I changed my locality.
I I opened into the hpose, where the females were already
astir, Zillah urging Hakes of flame up- the chimney with a colos-
sal bellows, and Mi's. Heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading
a book by the aid of the blase.
^he held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and
her eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation, desisting from
it only to chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to
push ,away a dog, now and then, that snoozled its nose over for-
wardly into her face,
I was surprised to see Heathcliff there also. He stood by the
fire, his hack toward me, just finishing a dtormy scene to poor
Zillah, who'ever and anou interrupted her labor to pluck up
the comer of her apron, and heave an indignant groan.
** And you, you worthless — — • " he hroke out as I entered,
turuing to his daughtei'-in-law, and CToploying an epithet as
harmless as duck, or sheep, but generally represented by a
dash.
** There you are at your idle tricks again ! The rest of them
. do earn their bread — ^you live on my charity !, Put your trash
away, and find something to do. You shall pay me, for the
plague of having you eternally in my sight-— do you hear^ dam-
nable jade r'
-'I'll .put my trash away, because you can make me if I re-
fuse, " answered the young lady, closing her book, and throwing
it on a chair. " But I'll not do any thing, though you should
swear your tongue out, except what I please! "
HeathcHff lifted his ;hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer
distance, obviously acquainted with its weight.
Having no desire to be entertained by a cat and dog combat^
1 stepped forward briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of
the hearth, and innocent vof any. knowledge of the interrupted
dispute. Each had enough decorum to suspend fiirther hostili
ties ; Heathcliff placed his ^ts out of temptation, in his pock-
ets : Mrs. HeathcliS* curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off,
where she kept her word by playing the part of a statue during
the remainder of my stay.
That was not long. I declined joining their breakfast, and.
28 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
at the first gleam of dawn, took an opportunity of escaping into
the free air, now clear, and still, and cold as impalpable ice.
My landlord hallooed for me to stop, ere I reached the bottom
of the garden, and offered to accompany me across the moor.
It was well he did, for the whole hill-bs(ck was one billowy,
white ocean ; the swells and falls not indicating corresponding
rises and depressions in the ground — many pits, at least, were
filled ta a level, and entire ranges of mounds, the refuse of the
quarries, blotted from the chart which my yesterday's walk left
pictured in my mind.
I had remarked on one side of the road, ut intervals of six
or seven yards, a line of upright stones, continued through the
whole length of the barren : these ivere erected and daubed
with lime, on purpose to serve as guides in the dark, and also
when a fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps, on
either hand with the firmer path : but, excepting a dirty dot
pointing up, here and there, eJI traces of their existence had
vanished ; and my companion found it necessaiy to warn me
frequently to steer to the right, or left, when I imagined I was
following correctly the windings of the road.
We exchanged little conversation, and b^ halted at the en-
trance of Thrushcross park, saying I could make no en*or there.
Our adieus were limited to a hasty bow, and then I pushed for-
ward, trusting to my own resources, for the porter's lodge is un-
tenanted as yet.
The distance from the gate to the Grange is two miles : I
believe I managed to make it four, what with losing myself
among the trees, and sinking up to the netk in snow — a predic-
ament which only those who have experienced it can appreciate.
At any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock chimed
twelve as I entered the house ; and that gave exactly an hour
for every mile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.
My human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me,
exclaiming, tumultuously, they had completely given me up ;
every body conjectured that I perished last night ; and they were
wondering how they must set about the search for my remains.
I bid them be quiet, now that they saw me returned ; and,
benumbed to my very heait, I dragged up-stairs, whence, after
putting on dry clothes, arid pacing a considerable time to and
fro to restore the animal heat, I am adjourned to my study, feeble
as a kitten — almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smo-
king cofifee which the servant has prepared for my refreshment.
CHAPTER IV.
What vain weathercocks we are ! I, who had determined
to hold myself independent of all social intercoiirae, and thanked
iny stars that at length I had lighted on a spot where it was
next to impracticable. I, weak wretch, after maintaining till
dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude, was finally com-
pelled to stnke my colors ; and, ander pretense of gaining infbr*
mation conceivings the necessities of my establishment, I desired
Mrs. Dean, when she brought in supper, to sit down while I
ate it, hoping sincerely she would prove a regular gossip, and
either rouse me to animation, or lall me to sleep by her talk.
" You have lived here a considerable time/'I commenced ;
" did you not say sixteen years V
*'Eighteen, sir ; I came when the mistress was married, to
wait on her; after she died the master retained me for his
housekeeper. "
" Indeed. "
There ensued a pause. She was not a gossip, I feared, un-
less about her own affairs, and these could hardly interest me.
However, having studied for an interval, with a fist on either
knee, and a cloud of meditation over her ruddy countenance,
she ejaculated, ~ -
" Ah, times are greatly ch^tnged since then I "
" Yes, " I remarked» " youVe seen a good many alterations, I
suppose V*
" I have : and troubles too, " she said.
" Oh, I'll turn the talk on my landlord's family ! " I thought
to myself, " A good subject to start — and that pretty girl —
widow — I should like to know her history; whether she be a
native of the country, or, as is mote probable, an exotic that the
sully indigenae will not recognize for kin. "
With this intention I asked Mrs. Dean why HeathclifT let
Thrushcross Grange, and preferred living in a situation and
residence so much inferior.
" Is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order V
I inquired.
" Rich sir ! " she returned. " He has nobody knows what
30 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
money, and every year it increases. Yes, yes, be's rich enough
to live in a finer house than this, but he's very near— close-
handed ; and if he had meant to flit to Thrushcross Grange, as
soon as He heard of a good tenant, he could not have borne
to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more. It is
strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
world! "
" He liad a son, it seems V*
" Yes, he had ane— he ia dead. "
" And diat young lady,. Mra. Heathicliflt is t» widow ! "
" Yetf. " ^
" Where did she come from originally f*
*• Why, sir, she is my late master's, daughter ; Catherine Lin-
ton was her maiden name. I nurse^ her, poor thing \ I did
wish Mr. Heathcliir would remove here, and then we might
have been together again. "
" What, Catherine Linton! " I exclaimed, astonished^ But
a minute's reflection convinced me it was not nay ghostly Cath-
erine. " Then, " I ciontinued, " my predecessor's aame was
Linton r
« It was. " ,
" And who is that Eamshaw, Hareton Eamshaw, who lives
with Mr. Heatbcliff 1 are they relations V
" No f he is the late Mrs. Linton's nephew. "
" The young lady's cousin then ! "
** Yes ; and her husband was her cousin also— one on the
mother's — ^the othpr on the father's side-— Heathcliff married
Mr. Linton's sister. "
" I see the house at Wutbering Heights has'Eamshaw'
carved over the front door. Are they an old family V*
** Very old, sir ; and Hatreton is the last of them, as otir Miss
Cathy is of us— I .mean, of the Lintohs. Have you been to
Wuthering Heights 1 — 1 beg pardon for asking, but I should
Hke to hear how she is ! "
''Mrs. Heathcliff T she looked very well^ and very hand-
some ; yet, I think, not very happy. "
" Oh dear, I don't wonder P'And how did you like the
master 1 "
" A rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean. Is not that his char-
acter] "
*'Rough as a saw-edge, and hard bb wjiinstone ! The less
you meddle with him the better.'*
.WUTHEBIN^O fiBIC^HTS. 81
" .He must have bad some ups and downs in lifa to make him
such a churL Do you know any thing of his history V*
" It's a cuckoo's, sii* ; I know all about it, except where he
was bom, and who wer^ his parents, and how he got his money
at first— -and Hareton has been ^ast out like an unfledged duii-
nock — the unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parish that
does not guess how he has been cheated! "
** Well, Mrs. De^n, it will be a charitable deed to tell me
something of my neighbors. — ^I feel I shall not rest, if I go to
bed; so be good enough to sit and chat au hour. "'
''Oh, certainly, sir.^ I'U just fetch a little sewing, and
then I'U sit aa long as you please but you've caught cold, I
saw you shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive it
out. " , . .
The worthy woman .bustled off; and I crouched nearer the
fire : my head lelt hot, and the rest of me chill ; moreover I was
excited, almost to. a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and
brain. This caused me to feel, not uncomfortable, but rather
fearful, as I am stiB, of serious effects from the incidents of to
day and yesterday.
She returned prasently, bringing a smoking basin, and a
basket of ^ work, and having placed the former on the hob,
drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find me so companion-
able.
Before I came to live here, — " she commenced, waiting no
further invitation to her stoiy, — I was almost always at Wu-
thering Heights^ because my mother, had nursed Mr. Hindley
Eamshaw, that was Hareton's father, and I got used to playing
with the children, J ran errands to6, and helped to make hay,
and hung about the farm ready for any thing that any body
would set me to.
One fihe summer morning — ^it was the beginning of harvest
I remember — Mr. Eamshaw, the old master, came down stairs
dressed for a journey, and after he had told Joseph what was t«
be done during the day, he turned to Hindley, and Cathy, and
me^for I sat eating my porridge with them, and he said,
speaking to his son,
" Now my bonny man, I'm going to Liverpool to-day. What
shall I biing you ] You may choose what you like, only let it
ne little, for I shall walk there and back, sixty miles each way,
that is a long spell ! " .
Hindley named a fiddle, and then he asked Miss Cathy ; she
32 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
was hardly six years old, but she could ride any horse in the
stahle, and she chose a whip.
He did not forget- me, for he had a kind heart, though he
was rather severe sometimes. He promised to bring me a
pocketful of apples and peai*s, and then he kissed his children
good bye, and set off.
It seemed a long while lo us all, the three days of his ab-
sence, and often ^id little Cathy ask when he would be home ;
Mrs. Eamshaw expected l > im by supper-time on the third
evening, and she put the meal hour off after hour j there were
no signs of his coming, however, and at last the children got
tired of running down to the gate to look ; then it grew dark,
she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to be
allowed to stay up j and just about eleven o'clock, the door-latch
was raised quietly, and in stept the master. He threw himself
into a chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off,
for he was nearly killed, he would not have such another walk
for the three kingdoms.
" And at the end of it, to be flighted to death! " he said;
opening his great coat, which he held bundled up in his arms,
" See here, wife, I was never so bestten with any thing in my
life ; but you must e'en take it as a gift of God, though it's as
dark almost as if it came from the devil. "
We crowded round, and over Mis^ Cathy's head I had a
peep at a dirty, raggedy black-haired child, big enough both to
walk and talk — indeed its fate looked older than Catharine's —
yet, when it was set on its feet, it only stared round, stnd re-
peated over and over. again, some gibberish that nobody could
understand. I was frightened, and Mrs. Earnshaw was ready
to fling it out of doore; she did fly up, asked how he could
fashion to bring that, gipsy bmt into the'house, when they had
their own bairns to feed and fend for 1 What he meant to do
with it, and whether he were mad ?
The master tried to explain the matter, but he was really
half dead with fatigue, and all* that I could make out, amongst
her scoldings was a tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless,
and as good as dumb, in the streets of Liverpool, where he
picked it up, and inquired for his owner. Not a soul knew to
whom it belonged, he said, and his money and time being both
limited, he thought it better to take it home with him at once,
than run into vain expenses there, because be was determined
he would not leave it as he found it.
WUTH£RINO H BIGHTS.
Well, the coDclusion was that mj mistress gprumbled beraelf
calm ; and Mi " . Earosfaaw told me to wash it, and give it clean
things, and let it sleep with the children.
Hin^ley and Cathy < 200tented themselves with looking and
Hsteuing till peace was restored, then both began searching
their father^s pockets for the presents he bad promised them.
The formei " was a boy of fourteen, but when he drew out what
had been a fiddle, crushed to morsels in. the great coat, he
blubbered aloud; and Cathy, when she learned & e master had
lost her whip in attending on & e sti-angef, showed her humor
by grinning and spitting at the stupid Uttle thing, earning for
her pains a sound blow from her father,, to teach her cleaner
manners.
They entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or even in
their room, and I had no more- sense, so I put it on the landing
of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. By
chance, or else attracted by hearing his voice, tt crept to Mr.
£amshaw's door, and there he found it on quitting his chamber.
Inquines were made as to how it got there. I was obliged to
confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumamty
was sent out of the house.
This was Heathcliff's first inti*oduction to the family. On
coming back a few days afterwards, for I did not consider my
banishment perpetual, I found they had christened him''Heath-
cliif. " It was the name of ^ son who died in childhood, and it
has served him ever since both for Christian and surname.
. Miss Cathy and he w^re now very thick ; but Hindley hated
him, and to say the truth I did the same, aiid we plagued and
> ^ent on with him shamefully, for I was'nt reasonable enough
to feel my injustice, and the mistress never put in a word on his
behalf when she saw him wronged.
He seemed a sullen, patient child ; hardened, perhapi^, to
ill-treatment ; he would stand Hindley's blows without winking
or shedding a tear, and my pinches moved him only to draw in
a breath, and open his eyes as if . he bad hurt himself by acci
dent, and nobody was to blame.
This endurance made old. Eamshaw fiirious when he dis-
covered his son persecuting the poor fatherless child, as he
called him. He took to Heathcliff strangely, beUeving all he
said (for that matter, he said pi-ecious little, and generally the
tmth), and petting him up far above Cathy, who was too mis-
chievous and wayward for a favorite.
34 W U T H B B I N C^ HEIGHTS.
So, from the very beginning, be bred bad feeling in the house ;
and at Mrs. Eamshaw's death, which happened in less than
two years after, the joung master had learned to regard his
father as an oppressor rather than a friend, and Heathcliff as a
usurper of his parent's- affections, and his privileges, and he
grew bitter with brooding over these injuries.
I sympathized awhile, but when the children fell ill of the
measles, and I had to tend them, and take on me the cares of
a woman at once, I changed my ideas. Heathcliff was dan-
gerously sick,, and while he lay at the worst he would have me
constantly by his pillow ; I suppose he felt I did a good deal
for him, and- he had'nt wit enough to guess that I was com^
polled to do it. However, I will say this, he was the quietest
child that ever nurse watched over. The difference between
him and the others -forced me to be less partial ; Cathy and her
brother harassed me terribly, A^ was as uncomplaining as a lamb ;
though hardness, not gentleness, made him give Httle trouble.
He got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great
meanure owing to me, and praised me for my care. I was vain
of his commendatioDs, and softened tbward the being by whoso
means I earned them, and thus Hindley lost his last ally ; still I
could'nt dote on Heathcliff, and I wondered often what my
master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy, who never, to
my recollectioii,-repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.
He was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible,
though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and
conscious he had only to speak, and all the house would be
obliged to bend to his wishes.
As an instance^ I remember Mr. Eamshatv once bought a
couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when
he discovered it he said to Hindley,
" You must exchange horses with me; I don*t like mine,
and, if you won't, 1 shall tell your father of the three thrashings
you've given me this week^ and show him my arm, which is
black to the shoulder. "
Hindley put out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears.
" You bad better do it at once, " he persisted, escaping to the
porch (they were in the stable), " you will have to, and if I
ipeak of these blows you'll get them again with interest. "
" Off, dog! " cried Hindfey, threatening him with an iron
weight, used for weighing potatoes and hay.
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS. 35
** Throw it, " he replied, standing still, " and then I'll tell how
you boasted that. you would turn me out of doors as soon as he
died, and~see whether he will not turn you out directly. "
Hindley threw it hitting him on the breast and down he fell,
but staggered up immediately, breathless and white, and had
not I prevented it he would have ^one just so to the master,
and got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, in-
timating who had^caused it.
" Take my oolt, gipsy* thenl " said young Eamehaw, " and
I pray that he may break your neck,, take, him, and be damned,
you beggariy interloper ! and wheedle my ^ther out of all he
has^ only afterward show him what you are, imp of Satan — and
take that, I hope he'll kick ou( your brains ! "
HeathclifT had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to hid own
stall — ^he was. passing behind it, when Hindley finished his
speech by knocking him under its feet, and without stopping to
examine whether his hopes were fulfilled, ran. away as fast as
he could,
I was surprized to witness how coolly the child gathered
himself up, and went on with his intention, exchanging saddles
and all; and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to overcome
the qualm whict the. violent blow occasioned, before he entered
the house.,
I persuaded him easily to let me lay the blajae of his bruises
on the hoifee ; he minded little .what tale ^a» told, since he had
what he wanted* He complained so s^om, indeed, of such
stirs as these, that I really thou^ him not vindictive. — I was
deceived, completely, as you will hear*
CHAPTER V.
In the courae of time Mr. Earnshaw began to fail. He had
been active and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly ; und
when he was confined to the chimney-corner he grew grievously
irritable. A nothing vexed him, and suspected slights of his
authority nearly threw him into fits.
This was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to
impose upon, or domineer over his favorite ; he was painfully
jealous lest a word should be spoken amiss to him, seeming to
have got into his head the notion that, because he liked Heath-
cliff, all hated, and longed to do him an ill-turn.
It vvas a disadvantage to the lail, for the kinder among us did
not wish to fret the master, so we hiynored his partiality ; and
that humoring was rich nourishment to the child's pride and
black temper. Still it became in a manner necessary; twice,
or thrice, Hindley's manifestations of scorn, while Jiis father was
near, roused the old man to a fury. He seized his stick to strike
him, and shook vrith rage that he could not do it.
At last our curate fwe had a curate then, who made the living
answer by teaching the little Lintons and Eamshaws, and farm-
ing his bit of land himaelf ), he advised that the young man should
be sent to college, and. Mr. Samshaw agreed, though with a
heavy spirit,! for he said-—
" Hindley was naught, and would never thrive as where he
wandered. "
I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt me to
think the master should be made uncomfortable by his own good
deed. I fancied the discontent of age and disease arose from
his family disagreements^ as he would have it that it did— really
you know, sir, it was in Ms sin^king fi-ame.
We might have, got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for two
people— Miss Cathy^ and Joseph the servant; you saw him, I
dare say, up yonder. He was, and is yet, most likely, the weari-
Bomest self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to
rake the promises to himself, and fling the curses on his neigh-
bors. By his knack of sermonizing and pious discoursing,
he contrived to make a great impression on Mr. Earashaw;
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS. 37
and the more feeble the madler became, the more influence he
gained.
He was relentless in worrying him ^bout his soul's concerns,
and about ruling his children rigidly. He encouraged him to
regard Hindley as a reprobate ; and, night after night, he regu
larly grumbled out a long string of tales against Heathcliff and
Catherine ; always minding to flatter Eamshaw's weakness by
heaping^ the heaviest blaiiie on the last.
Certaiiily, she haii ways with her such as I never Saw a child
take up before | and she put all of us past our patience fifty
times and oftener in a day ; from the hour she came down stairs,
till the hour she went to bed, we had not a minute's security that
she would'Ut be in mischief. Her spirits were always at high-
water markj her tongue always gomg-Hsinging, laughing, and
plaguing every body who -would not do the same. A wild,
wicked slip she was^--^but she had the bonniest eye, and sweetest
smile, and lightest foot in the parish ; and, after all, I believe she
meant no harm ; for, when once she made you cry iu good earn-
est, it seldom hap^ned that she would not keep you company ;
and oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her.
- She was much too fond of HeathcliE^ The greatest pun-
ishment we could invent for her w-as^ to keep her separate
fi-ora him ; yet, she got chided more than any of us on his ac-
count.
In play, she liked exceedingly to act the little mistress ; using
her hands freely, and commanding her companions s she did so
to me, but I wpuld not bear slapping and ordering; and so I let
her know.
Now Mr. Eainshaw did not understand jokes from his chil-
dren : he had always been strict and grave with them; and
Catharine, on her part, had no idea why her father should be
crosser and less patient in his ailing condition, than he was in
his prime.
His peevish reproofs wakened in her a naughty delight to
provoke him ;. she was never so happy as when we were all
scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy
look, and her ready words ; turning Joseph's religious curses
into ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father hated
most ; showing how her pretended insolence, which he thought
real, had more power over Heathcliff than his kindness; how
the boy would do her bidding in any thing, and hU only when
it suited his own inclination.
38 WUTHEBINa HEIGHTS.
After behaving as badly as possible all day, she spmetime^
came fondling to make it up at night.
" Nay, Cathy/'the old man would say, " I can not love thee ;
thou'rt worse than thy brother. Go, say thy prayers, child, and
ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must me that we
ever reared thee I** , .
That made her cry, at first ; and then, being repulsed con-
tinually hardened her, and she laughed if I told her to say she
was sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
But the hour came at last, that ended Mr. Samshaw's trou-
bles on earth. He died quietly in his chair onci October evening,
seated by the fire-side.
A high, wind blustei*ed round the house, and roared in the
chimney :. it sounded wild and stcH'my, yet it was not cold, and
we were all together — ^I, a little removed fi*om the hearth, busy
at my knitting, and Joseph reading his Bible near the table (for
the servants generally sat in the house then, afler their work
was. done). Miss Cathy had been sick^ and that made her stilly
she leaned against her father*s knee, and Heathcliff was lying
on the floor with his head in her lap.
I remember the master, befbre .he fell into a doze, stroking
her bonny hair — ^it pleased him rarely to see her gentle — and
saying —
" Why canst thou not always be a good lass, Cathy ] "
And she tunied her face up to his, and laughed, and answered*
** Why can not you always be a good man, father 1 "
But as soon as she saw him ves;ed agaiti, she kissed his hand^
and said she would sing him to sleep. She began singing very
low, till his fingers dropped from hers, and his head sank on his
breast. Then I told her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should
wake him. We all kept as mute as mice a full half-hour, and
should have ddiie longer, only Joseph, havihg finished his chap-
ter, got up aiid said that he must rouse the master for prayers
and bed. He stepped forward, and called him by name, and
touched his shoulder^ but he would not move-- < rso he took the
candle and looked at him.
I thought there was something wrong as he set down the
light ; and siei^sing tfa€| children each by an arm, whispered them
to'* frame up-stairs, and make little din — they might pray alone
that evening — ^he had sumtnut to do. "
" I shall bid father good-night first, " said Catherine, putting
her arms round his neck^ before we oould hinder her.
WUTBERING B K I 6 H T S.
The poor thing discovered lier loss directly-— ^e screamed
out —
" Oh, he's dead, Heathcliff! he's dead I " .
And they both set up aheart-^breaking cry.
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but Joseph asked
what we could be thinking o€ to roar in that way over a saint in
Heaven. ^ . .
He told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton for die
doctor and the parson. , I could not guess the use that either
would be of^ then. Howevever^ I weot^ through wind and rain,
and brought one, the doctor^ back wi^ me ; the other said he
would come in the morning. ^
Leaving Joseph to explain matteiv, I ran to the children's
room : their door was ajar ; I saw they had never laid down,
though it was past midnight ; but they were calmer, and did
not need me to console them. The little souls wer6 comforting
^each other with better thoughts than I could have hit on ; no
parson in the world ever pictured Heaven so beautifully as thev
did, in their innocent talk ; and» while I sobbed and listened^
I could not help wishing wo were all there safe together.
CHAPTER VL
Mr. Hindley came home to the funeral ; and — a thing that
amazed us, and set the neighbors gossiping right and left-^e
brought Bk wife with him.
What she was, and, where she was bom, he never inform-
ed us ; probably she hajd neither money nor name to recom-
mend her, or he would scarcely have^kept the union from hia
father, .
She was^ not one that would have disturbed the house much
on her own accdunt. ^veiy object she saw, the moment she
er < )ssed the threshold, appeared to delight her ; and every cir-
cumstance that took place about her, except the preparing for
the burial, and the presence of the mourners.
I thought she was half silly, from her behavior while that
went on ; she ran into her chamber, and made me come with
Her, though I should have been dressmg the children ; and there
40 WUTHERIN6 Heights.
■ — ■'>
she sat shivering and clasping hot liands, and asking repeat-
edly —
" Are they gone yet 1 "
Then she. began describing with hysterical emotion the* effect
it produced on her to see black, and started, and trembled, and
at last fell a weeping ; and when I asked what was the matter,
answered she didn't know, but she felt so afraid of dying !
I imagined her as little likely to die as myself. She was
rather thin, but young, and fresh-coraplexioned, and her eyes
sparided as bright as diamonds. I did. remark, to be sure„ that
mounting the stairs made her breathe very quick, that the lea^
sudden noise set her all in a quiver, and that she coughed trou-
blesomely sometimes ; but I knew nothing of what these symp-
toms portended^ and had no impulse to sympathize vnth her.
We don't in general take to foreigners here, Mr. Lockwood,
unless they take to us first. ^
Young Eamshaw was altered considerably in the three years
of his absence. He had grown sparer, and lost his color, and
spoke and dressed quite differently ; and, on the very day of,
his return, he told Joseph and me we must thenceforth quarter
ourselves in the back-kitchen, and leave the house for him.
Indeed, he would have carpeted and papered- a small spare
room for a parlor ; but his wife expressed such pleasure at the
white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes
and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to
move about in, where they usually sat, that he thought it un-
necessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.
She expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her
new acquaintance, -and she prattled to Catherine, and kissed
her, and ran about with her, and gave her quantities of pres-
ents, at the beginning. Her affection tired very soon, however,
and when she grew peevish, Hindley became tyrannical A
few words from her, evincing a dislike to Heathcliff, ^ere
enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy. He
drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of
the instructions of the curate, and insisted that he should labor
out of doors instead, compelling him to do so, as hard as any
other lad on the farm.
He bore his degradation pretty well at first, l)ecause Cathy
taught him what she learned, and worked of played vsrith him
in the fields. They both promised fair to grow up as rude as
savages, the young master being entirely negligent how thev
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS. 41
behaved, and what they did, so they kept clear of him. He
would not even have seen after their going to church on Sun-
days, mAy Joseph and the curate reprimanded his cai'elessnoss
when they absented themselves, and that reminded him to
order Heathcliff a flogging, and Catherine a fast from dinner or
sapper. •'
- But it was one.of their chief amusements to run away to tho
moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the ufter*
punishment grew a mere thing to laugh at. The curate might
set as many chapters as he pleased for Catherine to get by
heart, and Joseph might thrash Heatheliff till his arm ached ;
they forgot eviery thing the minute they were together again, at
least the minute they had conti-ived some naughty plan of re-
venge ; and many a time I've cried to myself to watch them
growing more reckless daily, and I not daring to speak a sylla-
ble, for fear of losing the small power I still retained over the
unfriended creatures.
One Sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished
from, the sitting-room, for making a noise, or a light offense of
the kind, and when I went to call them^ to supper, I could dis-
cover them nowhere.
We searched the hous & , above and below, and the yard, and
stables — they were invisible ; and at last, Hindley,'in b passion,
told us to bolt the doors, and swore nobody should let them in
that night.
The bousehold went to bed ; and I, too anxious to He down,
opened my lattice, and put my head out to hearken, though it
rained, determined to admit them, in spite'of the prohibition,
should, they retuiii.
In a while, I distinguished steps coming up the ix)ad, and the
Hght of a lantern glimmered through the gate.
I threw a shawl over my head, and ran to prevent them from
waking Mr. Eamshaw by knocking. There was^ Heathcliif by
himself; it gave me a start to tee him alone.
" Where is Miss Catherine 1 " I cried, hurriedly. ** No acci-
dent, I hope V*
" At Thrushcross- Xxrange, " he answered ; " and I ipi^ould
have been there too, but they had not the manners to ask me
to stay. "
" Well, you vHill catch it ! " I said ; " you'll never be content
till you'i-e sent about your business. What in the wokM led
you wandering to Thrushcroeft Grange 1 "
42 WUTHERIITG HEIGHTS.
" Let me get off my wet clothes, and I'll tell you all about
it, Nelly, " he replied.
I bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he un-
dressed, and I waited to put out the candle, be continued-:^
** Catby and I escaped firom the wash-house to have a ramble
at liberty, and, getting a glimpse of the Grange lights, we
thought we would just go and see whether the Lintons passed
their Sunday evenings standing shivering in comers, while their
father and mother sat eating and driving, and singing and
laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. Do you
think they do ? Or reading sermons, and being catechised by
their man-servant, and set to leam a column of Scripture names,
if they don't answer properly ? " ^
" Probably not, " I responded. ^ " Tbey are good children, no
doubt, and don't deserve the treatment you receive & r your bad
conduct. "
" Ddn't you cant, Nelly, " he said, " nonsense ! We ran from
the top of the Heights tp the park, without stopping — Catherine
completely beaten in the race, becausp she was barefoot. You'll
have to seek for her shoes in the bo^ to-morrow. We crept
through a broken hedge, groped out* way up the path, and
planted ourselves on a flower-pot under the drawing-room win-
dow. The light came from thence ; they had not put up the
shutters, and^ the curtains were 6nly half closed. Both of us
were able to look in, by standing on the basement and clinging
to the ledge, and we saw — ah ! it was beautiful — a splendid
place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and
tables, and a pure white ceDing bordered by gold, a shower of
glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the center, and shim-
mering with little soft: tapers. Old Mr. and Mrs. Linton were
not there. Edgar and bis sister had it entirely to themselves ;
shouldn't they have been happy 1 We should have thought
ourselves in heaven ! And now, guess what your good children
wete doing 1 Isabella — I believe she is eleven, a year younger
than Cathy — ^lay screaming at the farther end of the room,
shrieking as if witches were running red-hot needles into her.
Edgar stood on the health weeping silently, and in the middle
of the table sat a little dog shaking its paw and yelping, which,
from their mutual accusations, we understood they had nearly
pulled in two between them. The idiots 1 That was their
pleasure ! to quarrf^l who should hold a heap of warm hair;
and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it.
WUTHERINe HEIGHTS. 43
refused to take it. We lauglrad outrigiit at the petted tbings,
we did despise th^m ! When would you catch me wishing to
havd what Catherine wanted I or find us by ourselres, seeking
entertainment in yelling, and sobbing, and rolling on the ground,
divided by the whole room 1 I'd not exchange, for a thousand
lives, my condition here, for Edgar Linton's at Thrusheross
€rrange*«*not if I might have the privilege of ffinging Joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with Hind-
ley's bk > od r
" Hush, hush I " I interrupted. •* Still yott have not told me,
Heathciiff, how Catherine is left b^ind V*
*'! told you we laughed, " he answered. The Lintons heard
us ; and with one accord they shot like arrows to the deor.
There was silence, and then a cry, * Oh, mamma, mamma! Oh,
papa ! (%, mamma, coine here. Oh, papa. Oh !'They really
did howl out sonoething in that way. We made frightfiil noises
to terrify them'still mdre, and then we dropped off the ledge,
because son^ebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
better flee. I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging her on,
when all at once she fell dovni.
'*'Run, Heathcliff, run ! she whispered; ^they have let the
bull-dog loose^ and he holds me !'
" The devil had seized her ancle, Nelly; I heard. his abom-
inable snorting. She did not yell out — no! She would have
scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a
mad cow. I did, though ; I vociferated curses enough to anni-
hilate any fiend in Christendom ; and I got a stone and thrust it
between his j^iws, and tried with all my might to cram it down
his throat. A beast of a servant came up with a lantern, at last,
shouting—^
" * Keep fast. Skulker, keep fast !'
" He changed his note, however, when he saw Skulker's
game. The dog was throttled off— -his huge, purple tongue
hanging half a foot out of lus mouth, and his pendent lips stream-
ing with bloody slaver.
" The man took Cathy up^-nshe was sick ; not from fear, I'm
certain, but from pain. ^ He carried her in; I followed, grum-
bling execrations and vengeance.'
" * What prey, Robert ? hallooed Linton from the entrance'
"'Skulker has caught a little girl, sir,'he replied, and there's
a lad here,'he added, making a clutch at me, * who looks an
out-ajid-ooterl Very hke, the robbers were for putting them
44 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
through the window, to open the doors to the gang, after all
were asleep, that they might murder u^ at their ease. Hold
your tongue, you foul-mouthed thief, you ! you shall go to the
gallows for this. Mr. Linton, sir, don't lay by your gun I'
" * No, no, Robert !* said the old fool. * The rascals knew that
yesterday was my rent day; they thought to have me cleverly.
Come in ; I'll furnish them a reception. There, John, fasten the
chain. Give Skulker some water, Jenny. To beard a magis
trate in his strong-hold, and on the Sabbath, too ! where will
their insolence stop? Obi my dear Mary, look here! Don't
be afraid, it is but a boy — yet, the villain scowls so plainly in
his face, would it sot be a kindness to the country to hang him
at once, before he shows his nature in acts,, as weU a6 features V *
*'He pulled me under the chandelier, and Mrs. Linton placed
her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in honor. The
cowardly children crept nearer, also, Isabella lisping — "
" * Frightful thing ! Put him in the cellar, papa. He's ex-
actly like the son of die fortune-teller, that stole my tame pheasant.
Isn't he, Edgai]'
" * While they examined me, Cathy 6ame round ; she heard
the last speech, and laughed^ Edgar Linton, after an inquisitive
stare, collected sufficient wit to recognize her. They, see us at
church, you know, though we seldom meet them elsewhere.'
** * That's Miss Eamshaw !'he whispered to his inother,'and
look how Skulkei- has bitten her — ^how her foot bleeds !'
'''Miss Eamshaw % Nonsense !'Icried the dame,'Miss Eam-
shaw scouring the country with a gipsy ! And yet, my dear,
the child is in mourning — ^surely it is— ^and she may be lamed
for life!'
" * What cqlpable carelessness in her brother!'exclaimed Mr.
Linton, turning from jjie to Catherine/'I've understood from
Shielders (that was the curate, sir) that l^e lets her grow up in
absolute heathenism. But who is this 1 Where did she pick
up this tsompanion 1 Qho ! I declare he is that strange acqui-
sition my late neighbor made in his jx)umey lo^ Liverpool — ^a
little Lascar, or an American or Spanish castaway.'
" * A wicked boy, at all events,* remarked the. old lady, * and
quite unfit for a decent house ! Did you notice his language,
Linton ? Fm shocked that my children should have heard it.'
" I recommenced -cursing — don't be angry, Nelly — and so
Robert was ordered to take me off. I refused to go without
Cathy ; be dragged me into the garden, pusl^ed the lantern! into
WUTH BRING HEIGHTS. 45
my hand, assured me that Mr. Eamshaw should he informed
of my behavior, and biding me march directly, secured the door
again.
" The curtains were still looped up^at one comer, and I re
Bumed my station as spy, because, if Catheiine had wished to
return, I intended shattering their great glass panes to a million
fragments, unless they let her out.'
" She sat on the sofa quietly, Mrs. Linton took off the gray
cloak of the dairy maid which we had borrowed. for our excur-
sion-shaking her head, and expostulating with her, I suppose ;
she was a young lady, and they made a distinction between her
treatment and mine. Then the womat serrant brought a basia
of warm water > and washed her feet,, and Mr. Linton mixed a
tumbler of negus, and Isabella emptied a plateful of c^kes- into
her lap, and Edgar stood gaping at a distance. Afterward,
they dried and combed her beautiful hair, and gave her a pair
of enormoua, slippers,^ and wheeled her to the Sre; and I lefb
her, as merry as she could be, dividing her food between the
little dog and Skulker, whose nose she pinched as he ate, and
kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the Lintons
— a dim reflection from her own enchanting face — ^I saw they
were full of stupid admiration ; she is so immeasurably superior
to them-«-to every bddy on earth ; is she not, Nelly ] "
** There will mpre come of this business than you reckon on, "
I answered^ covering him up and extinguishing the light; " You
are incurable Heathcliff, and Mr. Hindley wi & have to proceed
to extremities, see if he won't. "
My words came truer than I desired.- The luckless adventure
made Eamshaw furious ; and then Mr. Linton, to mend matters,
paid us a visit himself on the morrow, and read the young mas-
ter such a lecture on the road he guided his family, that he was
stirred to look about him in earnest.
Heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first
word he he spoke to Miss Catherine should ensure a dismissal
and Mrs. Eamshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due
restraint when she returned home, employing ait, not fbrce-^
with force she would have found it impossible.
CHAPTER VII.
Catht stayed ftt Thrttsfacross Grange five weeks, till Obiist-
mas. By that time her ankl^ was thoroughly cured) and her
manners much itnproved. The mistress visited hier often, in
the interval, and commenced her plan of reform, by trying to
raise her self-respect with fine clothes, and flattery, which she
took readily ; so that, instead of a wild, hatless little savage
jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all breath-
less, there lighted from a handsome black pony a very diguiiied
person with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered
beaver, and a long cloth habit which she was obliged to hold
up with both hands that she might sail in.
Hindley lifted bet from her horse, exclaiming, delightedly,
" Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty ! I should scarcely
have known you — ^you look like a lady now-f—Isabella Linton
is not to be compared with her, is^'She, Frances V^
** Isabella has. not her natural advantages, " replied his wife,
''but she musti^nind and not grow wild again here. Ellen,
help Miss Catherine off with her things — stay, dear, you will
disarrange your curls — ^let me untie your hat. "
I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand
plaid silk frock white trousers and burnished'shoes ; and, while
her eyes sparkled Joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to
welcome her, she dare hardly touch them lest they should fawn
upon her splendid garments.
She kissed me gently, I -was all flour making and Christmas
cake, and it would not have done to give me a hiig ; and, then,
she looked round for Heathcliff. Mr. and Mrs. Eamshaw
watched anxiously their meeting, thinking it would enable
them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for
hoping to succeed in separating the two ftiends.
Heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. If he were care-
less and uncared for, before Cathfeiine's absence, he had been
ten times more so since.
Nobody but I even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week ; and children of his age
seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water. Therefore,
not to mention his clothes, which had seen three months'service,
W U T HERIN6HEI6HTS. 47
in nnre and dost, and his thick uncombed Jiair, the surface cf
bis face and hands was dismally beck > uded. He might wel
skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a bright, graceful
damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed counterpart
to himself, as he expected.
" Is Heathcliff not here? " she demanded, pulling off her
gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfiiUy whitened with doing
nothing, and staying in doots.
" Heathcliff, you may come forward, " cried Mr. Hindley en-
joying his discomfiture, and gratified to see what a foi'bidding
young blackguard he would b^ compelled to present himself.
" You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like the
other servants. "
Cathy, catching a -glimpse of her friend in his concealment,
flew to embrace him, she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his
cheek within the second, and then stopped and, drawing back,
burst into a laugh, exclaiming,
" Whyi how very black and cross you look ! and how —
how fiinny and grim ! . But that's because I'm used to Edgar
and Isabella Linton. Well, Heathcliff, have you forgotten roe ] "
She had aome reason to put the question, for shame and
pride threw double gloom over his countenance, and kept him
immovable.
" Shake hands, Heathcliff, " said Mr. Eamshaw, condescend-
ingly ; " once ift a way, that is permitted. "
•* I shall not ! " replied the boy, finding his tongue at last, ** I
shall not stand to be laughed at, I shall'not bear it ! "
And he would have broken ^om the circle, but Miss Cathy
seized him again.
** I did not mean to laugh at you, " she said, " I could not
binder myself, Heathcliff; shake hands, at least! - What are
you sulky fori It was o^ly that you looked odd. If you
wash your face and brush your hair it will be all right. But
you are so dirty I " >
She gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her
own, and abo at her dress, which she mared had gained no em-
bellishment firom its contact with his.
" You needn't have touched me! " he answered, following
her eye, and snatching away his hand. ^'I.^hall be as dirty as I
please, and I like to be dirty, and I will be dirty. "
With that he dashed head foremost out of the room, amid the
meniment of the master and mistress, and to the serious disturb-
48 W^UTUERING HEIGHTS.
ance of Catherine, who could not comprehend how her re-
marks should have produced such an exhihition of bad tem-
per.
After playipg lady's maid to the new comer, and putting my
cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful
with great fires befitting Christmas eve^ I prepared to sit down
and amuse myself by singing carols, all ^one^; regardless of
Joseph's affirmations that he considered the merry tunes 1 chose
as next door to songs.
He had retired to private prayer in his chamber, and Mr.
and Mrs. Eamshaw wdre engaging Miss's attention by sundry
gay trifles bought for her to present to the little Lintons, as an
acknowledgment of their kindness.
They had invited them to spend the morrow at Wuthering
Heights, and the invitation had been accepted on one condition :
Mrs. Linton begged that her darlings might be kept cai'efuUy
apart from that ** naughty, swearing boy. "
Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I smelted the
rich scent of the heating spices, and admired the shining kitchen
utensils, the polished clock decked in holly, the silver mugs
ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled ale for supper,
and, above all, the speckless purity of my particular care — ^the
scoured and well-swept floor.
I gave due inward applause, to every object, and then I re-
membered how old Earnshaw used to come in when all was
tidied, and call me a cant lass, and slip a shilling into my hand
as a Christmas-box ; and from that I went on to think of his
fondness for HeathclifT, and his dread lest he should suffer neg-
lect after death had removed him ; and that naturally led me to
consider the poor lad's situation now, and from singing I changed
my mind to crying. It struck rae soon, however, there would
be more sense w endeiBivoring to repair some of his wrongs than
shedding tears over them. I got up and walked into the court
to seek him.
He was not fai;. I found him smoothing the glossy coat of
the new pony in the 4Sta1}le, and feeding the other beasts, accord-
ing to custom.
" Make haste, Heathcliff, " I said, " the kitchen is so comfort-
able, and Joseph is up-stairs. Make haste, and let me di-ess you
smart before Miss Cathy comes out, and then you can sit to-
gether, with the whole hearth to yourselves, and have a long
chatter till bed-time. "
WUTHBBIXOHEIOHT0. 49
He proceeded with his task, and never turned his head to-
ward me.
** Come — are .you coming? " I continued. " There's a little
cake for each of you, nearly enough ; and youU^ need half an
hour'Q donning. " ^
I waited five minutes ; but, getting no answer, then left him.
Catherine supped with'her brother and sister-in-law^ Joseph
and i joined at an unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on
one side and sauciness on the. other. His cake and cheese re-
mained on the table all night for the fairies. He managed to
continue work till nine o'clock, and then marched dumb. and
dour to his chamber. .'
Cathy sat up late, having a world of -things to order for the
reception of her new friends : she came into the kitchein once
to.speak to her old one, but he was gone, and she only staid to
ask what was the matter with him, and then went back.
In the morning he rose early ; and, as it was a bolyday, car-
ried his ill-humor into the moors,, not reappearing till the fkmily
were departed for church. Fasting and reflection seemed to
have brought him to a better spirit. He, hung about me ^r a
while, and, having screwed up his courage, exclaimed abruptly,
" Nelly, make me decent : I'm going to be good. "
" High time, Heathcliff, " I said ; V* you havt grieved Cathe-
rine ; she's sorry she ever, came home, I dar6 say. It looks as
if you envied her because she is more thought of than you. "
The notion of envying Catherine was incomprehensible to
him ; but the notion of grieving her he understood cleariy enough.
** Did she say she was grieved 1 " he inquired, looking very
serious.
< * She cried when I told her you were off again this morning. "
" Well, I cried last night, " he returned, " and I had more
reason to. cry than she. "
" Yes, you had the reason of going to bed with a -proud heart
and an empty stomach, " said I. " Proud people breed sad sor-
rows for themselves. But if you be ashamed of your touchiness,
you must ask pardon, mind, when she comes iii* You must go
up and offer to kiss her, and say— you know best what to say,
only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her converted into
a stranger by her grand dress. * And now, though I have dinner
to get ready, I'll steal time to arrange you so that Edgar Linton
shall look quite a doll beside ydu, and that he does. You are
younger, and yet I'll be bound you are taller and twice as broad
C
50 WUTHERIN6HEIOUTS.
across the shoulders : you could knock him down in a twinkling
—don't you feel that you could ] " •
HeathclifT's face biightened a moment, then it was oveicast
afresh, and he sighed.
" But, Nelly, ifi knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn't
make him less handsome or me more so. I wish I had light hair
and a fair skin, and was dressed, and behaved as well, and had
a chance of being as rich as he will be !'/
** And cried for mamma at every turn/'I added, ** and ti-em-
blod if a country lad heaved his fist against you, and eat at home
all day for a shower of rain. 0, Heathcliff, you are showings a
poor spirit ! Come to the glass, and 1*11 let you see what yoa
should wish. Do you mark those two lines between your eyes,
and those thick brows, that, instead of rising arched, sink in the
middle ; and that couple of black fiends, so deeply buried, who
never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting under them^
like devil's spies 1 Wish and learn te smooth away the surly
wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly^ and change the fiends to con*-
fident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and
always seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. Don't
get the expression of a vicious Qur that appears to know the
kicks it gets are its desert, and yet hates all the^world, as well
as the kicker, for what it sufTers. "
** In other words, I must wish fi > r Edgar Linton's great blue
eyes and even forehead, " he replied. " I do, and diat won*t
help me to them. "
" A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad, " I con-
tinued, " if you were a regular black, and a bad one will turn
the bonniest into something worse than ugly. And now that
we'voKdone washing, and combing, and sulking, tell me whether
you don't think yourself rather handsome 1 I'll tell you, I do.
You're fit for a prince in disguise. Who knows but your fiaither
was !Bmperor of China and your mother an Indian mieen, each
of them able to buy up, with one .Week's income, iWmthering
Heights and Thrushcross Grange together 1 And you were kid-
napped by wicked sailors, iftid brought to England. Werp I in
your place, I would frame high notions of my birth, and the
thoughts of what I was should give me courage and dignity to
■upport.the oppressions of a little farmer ! "
So I chatted on ; and Heathcliff gradually lost his firown, and
began to look quite pleasant, when, all at once, our conversation
was interrupted by a rumbling sound moving up the road and
WUTHBR'ING BBIOHTV. ftl
entering the court. He ran to the window and I to the door,
just in time to behold the two liintonB descend from the family
carnage, smothered in cloaks and furs^and the Eam^aws dis-
mount from their horses: they oiften rode to. church in winter*
Catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the boui^e ai^ set thefn before the fire, which qUickly put
cofer into their white ^ces.
I urged my companion to hasten now, and show his amiable
humor, and he willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it
that, as he opened die door leading from the kitchen on one side,
Hindley opened it on the other. They met; and the master,
irritated at seeing him dean and cheei & l, or perhaps eager to
keep his promise to Mi*s. Linton, shoved him back with a sudi*
den thrust, and angrily bade Joseph ^ keep the fellow out of the
room-*-send him into the garret till dinner is over. He'll be
cramming his fingers in the tarts, and stealing the firuit, if left
alone with them a minute.''
" Nay^ Sir, " I could not; avoid answering, •'^he'U touch noth-
ing, not he^-«nd, I euppose, he must have his share of > the dain-
ties as well as we. "
" He shall have his share of my hand, if I catch him down
stairs again^ till dark, " cried Hindley. ** Begone, you vaga-
bond! What! you are attempting the coxcomb, are youl
Wait till I get hold of those elegant locks^-see if I won't pull
them a bit longer ! "
" They are long enough already,'^ observed Master Linton,
peeping from the door-way,''I wonder they don't make his
head ache. ItNs like a colt's mane over his eyes ! "
He ventured this remark vrithout any intention to insult ; but
HeathcliflPs violent nature was not pr^ared to endure the ap-
pearance of impertinence firom one whdm he seemed to hate,
even then, as a rival. He seized a tureen of hot apple-sauce,
the first ^ing that came under his gripe, and dashed it full
against the speaker's face and neck-^who instantly commenced
ft lament that brought Isabella and Catherine to the place.
Mr. Eamshaw snatched up the culprit directly, and conveyed
him to his chamber, where, doubtless, he administered a rough
remedy- to cool the fit of passion, for he reappeared red and
breadiiess. I got the dishcloth^ and, rather spitefiilly, scrubbed
Edgar's nose and mouth, afiirming it served him right for < iaed*
dling. His sister began weeping to go home, and Cathy stood
jby codbunded, blosfaiiig for alL
/
52 WUTBBRINQ HEIGHTS.
■ 1 ■ " " ■
< < You should not have spoken tp him! " she expostulated
with Master Linton.''He was in a bad temper, and now
you've spoiled your visit, and he'll be flogged — ][ hate him to be
flogged f I can't eat my diiiner. Why did you speak to him*
Edgar? "
" I didn't, " sobbed the youth, escaping fl-om my hands, and
finished the remainder of the purificatio^ with, his cambric
pocket-handkerchief. *'I promised mamma that I wouldn't say
one word to him, and I didn't I "
" Well, don't cry! " rej)lied Catherine contemptuously.
" You're not killed— don't make more mischief— my brother is
coming — be quiet ! Give over, Isabella ! Has any body hurt
your
" There, there^ children — te your seats ! " cried Hindley,
bustling in. " That brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.
Next ume, Master Edgar, take the law into your own fists-^iC
will give you an appetite ! "
The little party recovered its equanimity at the sight of the
fragrant feast. They were hungry, after their ride, and easily
consoled, since no real harm had befallen them.
Mr. Eamshaw carved bountiful., platefuls; and the mistress
made Uiem merry with lively talk. I waited behind her chair,
and was pained to behold Catherine, with dry eyes and an in-
different air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose before
her.
" An unfeeling child, " I thought to. myself, " how lightly she
dismisses her old playmate's troubles. I could- not have imag-
ined her to be so sel^h. " . ^ .
She Med a mouthful to her lips ; then, she set it down again :
ber cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. She
slipped her fork to the floor,^ and hastily dived under the cloth
to conceal her emotion. I did not call her unfeeling long, for I
perceived she was in .purgatory throughout the day, and weary-
ing to find an oppoitunity of getting by herself, or paying a visit
to Heathcliff*, who had been locked up by the master, as I dis-
covered on endeavoring to introduce to him a private mess of
victuals.
In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that he might
be liberated then, as Isabella Linton had no partner : her en-
treaties were vain, and I was appointed to supply the defi-
ciency..
We got rid of all gloom in the excitement of the exercise, and
WUTHBBINO HEIGHTS. 58
oar pleasure was increased by the arrival of the Gimmerton
band, musteringfifieen strong ; a trumpet, a trombone, clarion*
nets, bassoons, French horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
They go the rounds of all the respectatile bouses, and receive
contributions every Chri8tma3,. and we esteemed it a first-rate
treat to hear them.
After the usual carols. had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees. Mrs. Eamshaw loved ^be music, and so they gave
us plenty.
. Cadierine loved it too ; but she said it sounded sweetest at
the top of the steps, and she went up in the dark : I followed.
They shut the house door below, never noting our absence, it
was so full of people. She made no stay at the stair's head, but
mounted farther to the garret where Heathcliff was confined;
and called him. He stubbornly declined answering for a While
— she perseveied, and finally persu^ed him to hold communion
with her through the boards^
I let the poor things converse unmolested, till I supposed the
songs were, going to cease, and the singers to get some refresh*
ment : then I clambered up the ladder to warn her.
liistead of finding her outside, 1 heard her voice ^within. The
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the
roof, into the skylight of the other, and it was with die utmost
difiiculty I Could coax her out again.
" When she did come, Heathcliff " came with her ; and she in-
sisted that I should take him into the kitchen, as my fellow-ser-
vant had gone to a neighbor's to be removed from the sound of
our " devil's psalmody,'.'as it pleased him to. call it
I told them I intended by no means to encourage their tricks ;
but as the prisoner had never broken his fast since yesterday's
dinner, I would wiilk at his cheating Mr. Hindley that once.
He went down ; J set him a stool by the fire, and offered him
a quantity of good things ; but he was sick, and could eat little i
and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. He leaned
his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and re-
mained wrapt in dumb meditation. On my inquiring the sub-
ject of his thoughts, he answered, gravely —
" I'm trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley back. I don't
care how long I wait, if I can only do it at last. I hope he will
not die before! do ! " -
" for shame, Heithcliff*! " said I. •* It is for God to punish
wicked people ; we should learn to forgive. "
M WUTHEUINO HBI6BT(9*
" No, God won't have the Badsfactioii that I shall,*'he re-
turaed. *'I only wish I knew the best way ! Let me alone,
and I'll plan it out : while I'm thinking of that I don't feel
pain. " —
But, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tales can not divert you.
I'm annoyed how I should dream of chattering on at such a .
rate ; and your gruel cold, and yoa nodding for bed ! I could
have told Heathcliff'^s history, a,ll that you need hear, in half-a-
dozen words. —
Thus inteniipting herself, the housekeeper rose, and pro*
ceeded to lay aside her sewing ; but I felt incapable of moving
from the hearth, and I was very far from nodding:
'* Sit sdll, Mrs. Dean, " I cried,''do sit still anodier half-hour !
You've done just right to tell the, story leisurely. That is the
method I like ; and you inost finish iu the same style.'I am in-
terested in every character you have mentioned, more or less. "
" The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir. "
< ^ No matter — ^I'm not iLccustomed to go to bed in the long
hours. One or two is early enough for a person who libs till
ten. " ^
'*. You shouldn't lie till ten. There's the very prime of the
morning gone long before that time. A. person who has not
done one half his day's work by ten o'clock, runs a chancer of
leaving the other half undone. " .
" Nevertheless, Mrs. Dean, resume your chair ; because to-
morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon. I prog-
nosticate for myself an obstinate cold, at ^east. "
" I hope not, sir. Well, you must allow me to leap over
some three years. During that space, Mrs. Eamshaw " -*-
** No, no, I'll allow nothing of the sort. Are you acquainted
with the mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and
the cat licking its kitten on the rug befoi*e you, you would
Vt^atch the operation so intently that puss's neglect of one ear
would put you seriously out of temper! "
** A terrible lazy mood, I should say. "
" On the contrary, a tiresomely active one. It is mine at
present, and therefore continue minutely. I perceive that peo-.
pie in these regions acquire over people in towns the value that
a spider in a dungeon does over a spider in a cottage, to their
various occupants ; and yet the deepened attraction is not en-
tirely owing to the situation of the looker-on. They c^o live
more in earnest, more in themselves, and less in surface change
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 55
aud frivoloxis exteroal things. I could fancy a love for life here
almost possible ; and I was a fixed unbeliever in any love of a
year's standing. One state resembles setting a hungj-y man down
to a single dish > on which he may con^en^trat^ his " entire appe-
titOi and do it justice — ^the other, introducing him t-o a table laid
out by French cooks ; he can perhaps extract as much enjoy-
ment from the whole ; but eacl) part is a mere atom in his regard
^nd remembrance. "
" Oh! here we are the same as any where else, when you get
to knoitr us,'^ observed Mrs* Dean, somewhat puzzled at my
speech.
" Excuse me, " I responded ; " you, my good friend, are a
striking evidence against that assertion. Excepting a few pro-
vincialisms of slight coiiseqiiehce, you. have no marks of the
manujers that I am habituated to cqnsidet as. peculiar to your
, class. I am sure you have thought a great deal more than the
generality pf servants think. You have been compelled to cul-
tivate your reflective faculties, for want of occasions for fritter-
ing your life away in silly trifles. " ^
Mrs.. Dean laughed.
" I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body, "
she said, " not exactly from living among the hilla» and seeing
one set of faces, and one series of actions, from year's end to
year's end : but I have undergone sharp discipline, which has
taught me wisdom ; ancl then I have read more than you would
fancy, Mr. Lockwood. You could not open a book in this li-
braiy that I have not looked into, and got something out of
also; unless it be that range of Q^eek and, Latin, and that of
French ; and those I know one from another — it is as much as
you can expect of a poor man's daughter.
" However, if 1 am to follow my story in true gossip's fashion,
I had better go on; and instead of leaping three years, I will
be content to pass to the next sunamer — the summer of 1778 —
that is nearly twenty-three years. ago. "
CHAPTER VIII.
On the morning of a fine June day, my first bonny little nurs-
ling, and the last of the ancient Eamshaw stock, was born.
We were busy with the hay in a far-away field, when the
girl that usually brought our breakfasts came running, an hour
too soon, across the meadow and up the lane, calling me a & she
ran.
" Oh, such a grand bairn! " she panted out. •• The finest lad
that ever breathed ! but the doctor says midsis must go ; he says
she's been in a consumption these many months. I heard him
tell Mh Hindley — and now she has nothing to keep her, and
she'll be dead before winter. You must come home directly.
You're to nurse it, Nelly — ^to feed it with sugar and milk, and
take care of it, day and night — I wish I were you, because it
will be all yours when there is no missis ! "
" But is she very ill ] " I asked, flinging down my rake, and
tying my bonnet.
** I guess she is ; yet she looks bravely, " replied the girl,
•* and she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man.
She's out of her head for joy, it's such a beauty. If I were her
I'm certain I should not die. I sliould get better at the bare
sight of it, in spite of Kenneth. I was fairly mad at him. Dame
Archer . brought the fcherub down to master, in the hgusOi^ and
his face just began to ligh* up, then the old croaker steps for-
ward, and, says he, * Eamshaw, it's a blessing your wife has
been spared to leave you this son. When she came, I felt con-
vinced we shouldn't keep her long ; and now, I must tell you,
the wdnter will probably finish her. Don't take on, and fret
about it too much ; it can't be helped.-. And besides, you should
have known better than to choose such a rush of a lass. "
" And what did th^ master answer 1 " I inquired.
" I think he swore— but I didn't mind him, I was straining
to see the bairn, " and she began again to describe it raptur-
ously. I, as zealous as herself, humed eagerly home to admire,
on my part, though I was very sad for Hindley's sake ; he had
room in his heart only for two idols— bis wife and himself— he
doted on both, and adored one; and I couldn't conceive how he
would bear the loss.
WUTHERING^BIOHTB. 57
" When we got to Wufhering Heights, there he stood at the
front door ; and, as I passed in, I ask^d how was the bahy 1
" Nearly ready tp run about, Nell! " he replied, putting on a
cheerful smil^. ^'■
" And tie mistress 1*'I ventured to inquire, " the doctox
says she's — ^*'.'
^* Damn the doctor ! " he interrupted, reddening. " Frances
is quite right — she^H be perfectly well by this time next week.
Are you going upstairs 1 will you tell her that I'll come, if
she'll promise not to talk. I left her because she would not
hold her tongue; and she must^— tell her Mr. Kenneth says
she must be quiet.^'
I delivered this message to Mrs. Eafnshaw; she seemed in
flighty spirits, and replied merrily —
" J hardly spoke a word, Ellen, and there he has gone out
twicJe, cryiilg. Weil, say L protnise I won't speak; but that
does not bind me not; to laugh at him ! "
Poor soul ! Till within a week of her d^th that gay heart
never failed her ;'and her husband persisted doggedly, llay,
furiously, in affirming her health improved every day. When
Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless at that
stage of the malady, and he needn't put him to further expense
by attending her, he retorted —
" I know you need not — she's well — she does not want any
more attendance from you ! She never was in a consumption.
It was a fever ; and it is gone-— her pulse is as slow as mine now,
and her cheek as cool. "
He told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe
him ; but one^ night while leaping on his shoulder, in the act of
saying she thought she should be able to get up to-morrow, a flt
of coughing took her— a very slight one— be raised her in his
arms ; she put her two hands about hisneck, her face changed,
and she was dead.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly
inta my hands. Mr. Earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy,
and never heard him cry, was contented, as far as regarded
him. For himself he grew desperate ; hia sorrow was of that
kind that will hot lament; he neither wept nor prayed; he
cursed and defied ; execrated God and man, and gave himself
up to reckless dissipation.
The servants could not bear his tyitenical and evil conduct
long. Joseph and I were the only two that would stay. I had
58'WUTBBBINO HEiaHTS.
•
not the heart to leave my charge ; aiid besides, you know I bad
been his foster-sister, and excused his behavior more readily
than a stranger would. -
Joseph remained to hector over tenants and laborers ; aind
because it vras his vocation to be where he had plenty < tf wick-
edness to reprove.
The master^s bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty
example for Catherine and HeathcHE His treatment of the
latter was enough to make a fiend of a saint. - And truly it ap*
peared as if the lad were possessed of something diabolical at
that period. He delighted .to witness Hindley degrading him-
self past redemption ; and became daily mor6 notable for savage
Bullenness and ferocity.
I could not half tell what an infernal house we had. The
ciu'ate dropped calling,* and nobody dec^ent came near us at last;
unless Edgar Linton's visits to Miss Cathy might be an except
tion. At fift(3en she was the queen of the country-side; she bad
no peer : and she did turn out a haughty, headstrong creature !
I own I did not like her, after her infancy was past ; and I
vexed her frequently by trying to bring down h^r arrogance ;
she never took an aversion to me, though. She had a wondrous
constancy to old attachments ; even Heathcliff kept'his hold on
her afiectionB unalterably ; and young Lintdnr, with all his supe-
riority, found it difficult to make an equally deep impression.
He was my late master ; that is his portrait over the fireplace.
It used to hang on one aide, and his wife's on the other ; but
hers has been removed, or else you might see something o£
what she was. Can you make that out ^-7-^
Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a sofl-featured
fiice, exceedingly resembling the young lady at the Heights, but
more pensive and amiable in expression. It formed a sweet
picture. The Icmg light hair curled slightly on the temples ;
the eyes were large and serious ; the figure almost too grajce-
ful. I did not marvel how Catherine JBamshaw could forget
her first fiiend lor such an individual. I marveled much how
he, with a mind to correspond to his person, could fimcy my
idea of Catherine Eamshaw.
" A very agreeable portrait, " I observed to the housekeeper.
" IsitKker .
Yes, she answered ; but he looked better -when he was ani-
mated; that is his every-day countenance; he wanted spirit
in general.
\rVTHERINO HBIQBTa.- 09-
Catherine had kept up her acquaintance ^ilh the Lintons & ince
her five weeks'resiaence, among them ; and as she had no temp-
tation to show her r6ugh side in their company, and had the
sense to he ashamed of being rude where she experienced such
invariable courtesy 4 she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and
gentleman by her ingenuous cordiality ; gained the admiration
of Isabella, and the^ heart and. soul of her brother-^-^acquisitions
that flattered her fixmi the first, £ov she was full of ambition, and
led her to adopt a double character, without exactly intending
to decetve any one. .
In the place where she heard Heathcliff termed a *'vulgar
young ruffian, " . > iLiid ^'worse than a biiite, " she took care not to
act hke him; but at hopie she'had small inclination to practice
politeness that would only be laughed at, and i-estrain an unruly
nature when it -would bring her neither credit nor praise.
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering
Heights openly. He had a terror of Eamsb & w's reputation,
and shrunk from encountering him ; and yet he was always re-
ceived with our best attempts at civility : the mastei* himself
avoided offending him, knowing why he came ; and if he could
not be graeious, kept out of the way. I rather think his appear-
ance there was - distasteful to j Catherine; she was not artful —
never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her
two friends meeting at all ; for when Heathcliff expressed con-
tempt of Linton, in his presence, she could not half coineide, as
she did in his absence; and when Linton evinced disgust and
antipathy to Heathcliff, she dared not treat his sentiments with
indinerence, as if depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely
any consequence to her.
I've had many a laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles,
which she vainly strove to hide from my mockery. That sounds
ill-natured — ^bnt she was so proud, it became really impossible
to pity her distresses, till she should be chastened into more
humility.
She did bring heraelf finally to confess, and confide in me.
There was not a soul else that she might fasliibn into an adviser;
Mr. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and Heath-
cliff presumed to give himself a holiday on the strength of it.
He had reached the age of sixteen then, I think, and without
having bad features or being deficient in intellect, he contrived
to convey an impression of inward and outward repulsivenesa
that his present aspect retains no traces of.
60 WUTHBRIN6 HEIGHTS.
In the first place, be hadi by tbat time, lost the-benefit of his
early education : continual hard work, begun soon and concluded
late, had extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit
of knowledge, and any love for books or leatnihg. His child-
hood's sense of superiority, instilled into hini by the favore of
old Mr. Eamshaw, was faded away. He struggled 4ong to
keep up an equality with Catherine in her studies, and yielded
. with poignant though'silent regret ; but he yielded completely,
and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way
of moving upward, when he found he must necessarily sink ber
neath his former level. Then personal appearance sympathized
with mental deterioration ; he acquired a slouching gait and ig-
noble look ; his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated
into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and he
took a grim pleasure, apparently, in exciting the aversion, rather
than the esteem, of his few acquaintance. ^
Catherine and he were constant companions still, at his sea-
sons of respite from labor; but he had ceased to. express his
fondness for her in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion
from her girlish caresses, as if conscious there could be no grat-»
ification in lavishing such « marks of affection on him^ On the
before-named occasion he came into the house to- announce his
intention of doing nothing, while I was assisting Miss Cathy to
arrange her dresd. She had not reckoned on his taking it into
his head to be idle ; and, imagining she would have the whole
place to herself, she managed^ by some means, to inform Mr.
JSdgar of her brother's absence, and was then preparing to re-
ceive him.
" Cathy, are you busy this afternoon V* asked Heathcliff.
" Are you going any where ] " .
" No— it is raining, " she answered. -
" Why have you that silk frock on, then 1 " he said. . " Nobody
coming here, I hope 1 "
" Not that I know of, " stammered Miss ; " but you should be
in the field now, Hedthcliff-— it is an hour past dinner time; I
thought you were gone. "
" Hindley does not of):en free us from his accursed presence, "
obsmed the boy; " I'll not work any more to-day — ^I'U stay
with you. "
" O, but Joseph wfll tell, " she suggested— you'd better go ! "
" Joseph is loading lime on the farther side of Pennistow
Crag; it will take him till dark, and heil never know. "
W0TB BRING HEIGHTS. 61
So saying; be lounged to the fire; and sat down. Catberine
reflected an instant with knitted brows She foand it needful
to smoothrthe way for an intrusion.
" Isabella and Edgar Linton talked of calling this afternoon/'
she said, at the conclusion of a miaute'a. silence. ** As it rains, I
hardly expept them ; but they may come; and if they do, you
i*un the risk of being SQolded for ito good.*'
" Order Ellen to say you are engaged, Cathy, " he persisted ;
** don't turn me but for those pitiful silly, friends of yours ! I'm
on the point, sometimes, of complaining that they— but I'll i
" That they what] " cried Catherine, gazine at him with a
troubled countenance. ^'Oh, Nelly! " she added, petulantly
jerking her head away from my hands ; ** yoii've: combed my
hair quite out of curl ! That's enough-^let me alone. What
are you on the point of cdipplaining about, Heathcliffi "
" Nothing— only look at the almanac, on that wall; " he
pointed to a franied sheet hanging near the window, and
continued :
" The crosses are for the evenings ^ou have spent with the
Lintons,'the dots for those Gtpient with me. Do you see, I've
marked every day V
" Yes — veiy foolish ; as if I took notice ! " replied Catherine
in a peevish tone. " And where is the sense of that ? "
" To show that I do take notice, " said Heathcliff.
" And^ should I always be sitting with you 1 " she demanded,
growing more irritated. ^ " What good do I get 1 what do you
talk about 1 You might be dumb or a baby, for any thing you
say to amuse me, or for any thing yoti do either ? "
" You never told me before that I talked too little, or- that
you disliked my company^ Cathy 1 " exclaimed Keathcliff,. in
much agitation.
" It is no company at all,, when people know nothing and
say nothing, " she muttered.
Her companion rose up, but be had not time to express his
feelings further; for a horde's *feet were heard on the flags,
and, having knocked gently, young Linton enterad, his face
brilliant with delight at the unexpected summons he had
received. . »
Doubtless Cath^ne marked the difference between her
friends as one came in and the other went out. The contrast
resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly coal*
country for a. beautifril, fertile valley ; and his voice and greeting
62 WUTHBRINa HBXanTB.
were as opposite as bis.aspect.. He had a sweet, low manner
of speaking, and pronounced his words as you do, that is, less
gruff than we talk here, and softer,
''* I'm not come too soon, am I ) " he said, casting a look at
ne. I had heguii to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at
the far end in the dresser.
" No, " answered Catherine.''What are you doing there»
N.eUyr'
**My work, Miss, " I replied. (Mr. Hindley had given me
directions to make a third party in any private visits Linteo
chose to pay.)
She stepped behind me and whispered crossly, ** Take your-
self and your dusters off! When company are in ^e bouse,
servants don't commence scoQring and cleaning in the room
where they are ! "
" It's a good opportunity, now that master is away, " I
answered aloud, " he hates me to be iidgeting over these Uiings
in his presence. I'm sure Mr. Edgar will excuse me. "
1 hate you to be fidgeting in my presence, " exclaimed the
> ung lady imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak*
he had failed to recover her equanimity since the little dispute,
with HeathcHff/
" I'm sorry for it. Miss Catherine 1 " was my response ; and I
proceeded assiduously with my occupation.
She, supposing Edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth
from my hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very
spitefully, on the arm.
I have said I did not love her;^ and rather relished mortifying
her vanity nOw and then'; besides, she hurt me extremely, so I
started up from my knees, and screamed out— ^
" O, Miss, jthat'a a nasty trick ! you have no right to nip mo,
and I'm not going to bear it ! "
" I did'nt touch you, you lying creature! " cried she, her
fingers tingling to repeat the a^t, and her ears red with rage.
She never had power to conceal her passion, it always set her
wholtd complexion in a blaze.
" What's that then 1 " . I retorted, showing a decided purple
witness to r^fiite her.
@he stamped her foot, waver^ a moment, and then, irresist-
ibly impelled by the naughty spirit within her, slapped me on
the cheek a stinging blow that filled both, eyes with water.
" Catherine, love! Catherine! " mterposed Linton, greatly
iS'
WUTBEBINO EBIOHTiV
shocked at the double fault of fakeliood and violmice which his
idol bad eommitted. .
** Leave the room, Ellen ! " ahe xepeated, treiubliog all over.
Little Haretos, who followed roe eveiy where > and was
aittidg near me .on the floor,'at seeing my tSsrs^ commenced
crying himself, and sobbed oat complaints against''wicked
aunt Gathy,^ which drew her fiiry upon his unlucky head :
she seized his shoulders, and . shook him till the pocur child
waxed liyid, and £dgar thoughtlessly laid hold^ of her hands
to deliver him. In an instant one waa wrung free, and tlra
astonished young man felt it applied^over his own ear in a way
that could not be mistaken for jest. ^
He drew back > in . confliemajtion*-^! Med > Haretoii in my
arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door
of communication open ; lor I was curious .to watch how they
would settle their disagreement.
The insulted visitor moved t6 the e^Cit where he had laid his
hat, pale tod with a quivering lip. . -
''That's right! " I said to myself, *'take warning, and be-
gone 1 It's a kindness to let you have a glimpse of her geauino
dispositicm.'*
''Where are you going] " demanded. Catherine, advancing
to the door. . - ^
He swerved aside, and attempted to pasa.
" You must not go! " she exclaimed energetically.
" I must and shall I " he replied in a subdued voice.
" No, " she persisted,, grasping the handle, " not jret, Edgar
Linton — sit down, you shall not leave me in that temper. I
should be miserable all night, and I won't be miserable for you! "
" Can I stay afl;er you havestruds; me ? " asked Linton.
Catherine was mute.
" You've made me afiraid, and ashamed of you ; " he con-
tinued, " I'll not come here again! " . »
Her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle*
" Aii^ yovL poAd a deliberate untruth 1 " he said.
" I didn't ! " she cried, recovering her speech : ^* I did
nothing deliberately. Well, go if you please— get away.- And
now I'll cry— I'll cry myself sick ! "
She dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set to
weeping in serious earnest..
Edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court ; there
he lingered. I resolved to encourage him.
64 WUTHSRINO HEIGHTS.
** Miss is dreadfully wayward, sir ! " I called out. " As bad
as any marred child. You'd better be riding home, or eke
she will be sick, only to grieve us. "
The soft thing looked askance through the wiodow — ^he
possessed the power to .depart, as much as a cat possesses the
power to leave a mouse hedf killed, or a bird half eaten.
Ah, I thought, there .will be no saving him. He is doomed,
and flies to his fate ! .
And BO it was ; he turned abruptly, hastened into the house
again, shut the door behind him ; and when I went in a while
after to inform them that Earashaw had come home rabid
drunk, ready to pull the old place about out ears (his oi^*
nary ftame.of-mind in that cdndition), I saw the quarrel had
merely effected a closer intimacy— ^had broken the outworks, of
youthful timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of
friendship, and confess themselves lovers.
Intelligence of Mr. Eiindley's arrival drove Linton speedily
to his horse, and Catherine to her chamber. I went to hide
little Hareton, and to take the shot ou( of the master's fowling-
piece, which he was fond of playing with in his insane excite-
ment, to the hazard of the lives of any who provoked, or even
attracted his notice too much; and I had hit upon the plan of
removing it, that he might do less mischief, if he did go the
length of firing the gun.
CHAPTER IX.
He entered, vocif < ^rating Oaths dreadful to hear ; and caught
me in the act of stowing his i^on away in the kitchen cupboard.
Hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror of encounter-
ing either his wild-beast's fbndness, or his madman's rage-^for
in one he ran a chance of being squeezed and kissed to death,
and in the other of being flung into the fire, or dashed against
the wall — and the poor thing remained perfectly quiet wherever
I chose to put him.
" Thei-e I've found it out at last ! " cried Hindley, pulling me
back by the skin of the neck, like a dog. " By Heaven and
Hell, you've sworn between you to murder that child 1 I know
WUfHeRINGBBIGHTS. G9
how it is, now, that he is always oat of my way. But, with the
help of Satan, I shall make you swallow the carving knife,
Nelly ! you needn't laugh ; for I've just crammed Kenneth
headd'ownmost, in the Blackhorse marsh; and two is the same
as one — and I wanj: to kiU some of you ; I shall have no rest
tilHdo! "
< " But I don't like the carving knife, Mr. Hindley, " I an-
swered ;'4t has been cutting red herrings — I'd rather be shot
if you please.-''^'"
<'* You'd rather be damned 1 " )ie s & id, *^ and so you shall. No
lavv in England can hinder a man from keeping his. house
decent, and mine's abominable ! open your mmith. "
He held the knife in his hand; and pushed its point between
my teeth: but, for my part, I was never much afraid of his
vagaries. I Spat out, and affirmed it tasted detestably— " I would
not take it on any account. "
''Oh ! " said he, releasing me, " I see that hideous little villain
is not Hareton— I beg. your* pardon, Nell — if it be, he deserves
flaying alive for not running to welcome me, and for sci^^aming
jBB. if I were a goblin. Unnatural cub, come hither 1 1*11 teach
thee to impose on a good-heaited, deluded father. Now don't
you think the lad would be handsomer cropped 1 It makes a
dog fiercer, and I love something fierce. Get me a pair of
scissoi's— something fierce and trim ! Besides, it's infernal
affectation — devilish conceit, it is to cherish our ears — we're
asses enough without them. Hush, child, hush ! well then, it is
my darling] wisht, dry thy eyes — ^there's a joy ; kiss me ! What !
it won't f Kiss me, Hareton ! Damn thee, kiss me ! By God,
as if I would rear such a monster ! As sui'e as I'm living, I'll
break the brat's neck. "
Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father's arms
with all his ^iight; and redoubled his yelb when he eanied
him up-stairs ^nd^ lifted him over the bannister. I cried out
that he would frighten the .child into fits, and ran to rescue tiim.
As I reached them, Hindle^ leaned forward on the raits to
listen to a noise below; almost forgetting what he had in his hands.
'* Who is that? " he asked, hearing some one approaching the
stair's foot.
I leaned forward, |ilso, for the purpose of signing to Heath-
cliff, whose step I recognized, not to come fiirther ; and, at the
instant when my eye quitted Hareton, he gave a sudden springy
delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him, anc fell.
66 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
There wa^ scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror
before we saw that the little wretch was safe. Heatbclifi* arrived
underneath just at the critical momeot ; by a natural impulse he
arrested his descent, and setting him oa his feet,'looked up to
discover the author of the accidoEit.
A miser who has patted with a lucky lottery ticket far five
shillings, and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five
thousand pounds, could not ^ow a blanker CQuntenance than
he did on beholding the figure of Mr. Eamshaw above. It
expi-essed, plainer than words could do, the intensest -anguish
at having made himself the instrument of thwarting his own
revenge. Had it been dark I dare say he would have tried to
remedy the mistake by smashing -Hareton's skull on the steps ;
but we witnessed his salvation; and I was presently below,
with my precious charge pressed to my heart.
J^indley descended more leisurely, sobered and abashed.
" It is your fault, EUen,'^ he said, " you should have kept him
out of sight ; you should have taken him firom me ! Is he
injured any where 1 "
" Injured! "'! cried, angrily, " If he's not killed he'll be an
idiot ! Oh ! I wonder his mother does not rise from, her grave
to see how you use him. You're worse than a heathen*— treat-
ing your own flesh and blood in (hat manner 1 "
He attempted to touch the child,, who on finding himself with
me, sobbed off his terror directly. At the first finger his i & ther
laid on him, however, he shrieked again louder than before, and
struggled as if he would go into convulsions.
** You shall not meddle with him ! " I continued, " He hates
you — they all hate you— that's the truth ! A happy family you
have ; and a pretty state you're come to 1 "
**I shall come to a prettier, yet I Nelly, " laughed the mis-
guided man, recovering his hardness. " At present, convey
yourself and him away. — And, hark you, Heathcliff I clear you
too, quite from my reach and hearing...! wouldn't murder you
to-night, unless, pelrhaps, I set the^ouse on fire; but that'«.as
my fancy goes — "
While saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the
dresser, and poured some into a tumbler.
" Nay don't !'-* I entreated, " Mr. Hindley, do take warning.
Have mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for
yourself!''
^* Any one will do better for him than I shall, " he answered.
WITTHJ^RINO BBIOHT8; 6Y
" Have loercy 6b your own soul! " I said, endeavoring to
snatch the glass froip his hand.
''Not IT on the contrary^ I shall have great pleasure in
sending > it to perdition, to punish its Maker,^* exclaimed the
blasphemer, " Here's to- its hearty damnation ! " > ,
He drank the spirits, and impatiently bade us go ; tennina-
ting his con^mand with a secjuel of hbirid imprecations, too bad
to repeat or reroeinber.
** It's a pity he can not kill hi^iself with drink, " observed
KeathclifF, muttering an echo of curses back, when the door
was shut''He's doing his very utmost; but his constitution
defies him.— -Mr. Kenneth says he would wager his mare that
he'll outlive any man on this side GHmmerton, and go to the
grave a koary sinner', unless some hap^y chance, out of the
common, course, bei & ll him. "
I went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb
to sleep. Heatbcliff^^ as I thought, walked through to the bam.
It turned out afterward that he only got as far as the other side
of the settle, when he flung himself on a bench by the wall,
removed firom the fire, and remained silent.
I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and humming a song
that began,
" It was far in the night,, and the bairnies grat,
The mither beneath the moolA heard that, "
when Miss Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her
room, put her head in, c^nd whispered,
" Are you alone, Nelly 1 "
" Yes, Miss, " I replied. ,
She entered and approached the hearth. I, supposing she
was going to say something, Ipoked up. The expression of her
face seemed disturbed and anxious. Her lips, were half asunder,
as -if she meant to speak; and she drew a breath, but it escaped
in a sigh instead of a sentence.
I resumed my song: not having forgotten her recent be-
havior.'-
" Where's Heathcliff'J " she said, interrupting me.
^* About his work in the stable, " was my answer.
He did not contradict me; perhaps, he had fallen into a doze.
There followed another long pause, during which I per-
ceived a drop or two trickle from Catherine's cheek to the
ftags.
08 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
" Ib she . sorry for her shameful conduct 1 " I a^ked myself.
" That will be a novelty, but, she may come to the point as she
will — I shan^ help her!''
No, she felt small trouble regarding any subject save her
own concerns.
" Oh, dear ! " she cried at last. " I am very unhappy ! "
" A pity, " observed I, " you're hard to please — so many
friends and so few ^ares, and can't make yourself content! "
" Nelly, will you keep a secret for me? " she punned* kneel-
ing down by me and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with
that sort of look which turns ofiTbad temper, even when one has
all the right in the world to indulge it.
" Is it worth keeping?* I inquired less sulkily.
" Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out ! I want to
know what I should do. To-day Edgar Linton has asked me
to marry him, and I've given him an answer. Now, before I
tell you wheUier.it wa9 a consent or denial, you tell me which
it ought to have been.*'
" Really, Miss Catherine, how can. I know? " I replied.
" To be sure, considering the exhibition you performed m his
presence this afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse
him ; since, if he asked you after that, he must either be hope-
lessly stupid, or a venturesome fool. " -
" If you talk so, I won't tell you any more,*'she returned
peevishly, rising to her feet ; " I accepted him, Nelly ; be quick,
and say whether I was wrong ! "
" You accepted him 1 then what good is it discussing the
matter ] You have pledged your word, and can not retract. "
" But say whether I should have done so— do! " she ex-
claimed in an irritated tone ; chafing her hands together and
frownitig.
" There are many things to be considered before that ques'*
tion can. be answered properly, " I said sententiotisly; " first
and foremost, do you loVe Mr. Edgar ? "
" Who can help it 1 of course I do, " ^8he answered.
Then I put her through the following catechism ; for a girl
of twenty-two it was not injudicious.
" Why do you love him, Miss Cathy ? "
" Nonsense, I do-^that's sufficient. "
" By no means ; you must say why 1 "
" Well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be with.**
" Bad/'was my commentary.
WUTHERING BBIOHT0. 60
''And because be is young and clieerful. "
" Bad, still. "
*^ And because he loves me. "
" Indifferent; coming there. "
" And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest woman
of the neighborhood, and I shall be proud of haying such a
husband. "
" Worst of all. And, now, say how you-love him V
" As " every 43ody loves. You're silly, Nelly. "
** Not at alL Answer. "
" I love the ground under his fe^t, and the air over his head,
and. every thing he touches, and every word he says ; I love all
his looks, and all his actions, and him entirely, and altogether^'
There now! "
" And why? " -
" Nay — you are making a jest of it ; it is exceedingly ill-
matured! It's no jest to me! said the young lady, scowling
and turning her fape to the fire. v
" I'm very far from jesting, Miss Catherine, " I replied. " You
love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and young, and cheer-
ful, and rich, and loves yoti. The last, however, goes for nothing.
—You would love him without that, probably, and with it you
wouldn't, unless he possessed the four former attractiotis. "
" No, to be sure not— I should Only pity him — hate him, per-
haps^ if he were ugly and a clown. "
" But there are several other handsome, rich young men in
^e world ; handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is. What
should hinder you from loving them ] "
" If there be any, they are out of. my way-^I've seen none
like Edgar, "
" You may see some ; and he won't always be handsome,
and young, ^nd may not always be rich. "
" He is now ; and I have only to do with the present. I
wish you wpuld sp^Kk rationally. "
" Well, that settles it If you have only to do with the present,
marry Mr. Linton. "
" I don't want your permission for that — 1 shaU many him ;
and yet, you have not told me whether I'm right. "
" Perfectly right ; if people be right ta marry only for the
present And now let us hear what you are unhappy about.
Your brother will be pleased ; the old lady and gentleman will
not object, I think ; you will escc^e from a difoiderly, comfort-
70 WUTHEB]N« BEIOSTS.
less home» into a wealtkj, respectable. one ; and yon love Edgar,
and Edgar loves you. All seems smooth and easy — where is
the obstacle 1 "
^*Here! and hereP^ replied Catherine, striking one hand on
her forehead and the other on her breast ^ In whichever place
the fioul lives— *in my soul and in my heavt, I'm convinced I'm
wrong! "
'* That's very strange I I can not make it out "
" It's my secret ; but if yoa will not mock at me, I'll explain
it ; I can't do it distinctly — ^but I'll give you a feeling of how I
feel. "
She seated herself by nie again : her countenance gr^w sadder
and graver, and her clasped, hands trembled.
" NeHy, do you never dream queer dreams 1 " < she said sud-
denly, after some minutes'reflection.
" Yes, now and then, " I answered.
" And so do I. I've dreamed in my life dreams that have
staid with me ever after, and changed my ideas ; they've gone
through and through me, like wine through water, and altered
the color of my mipd. And this is one-^'m gcnng to tell it > ^
but take care not to smile at any part.of it "
" Oh! don't. Miss Catherine ! " 1 cried. " We'r^ dismal
enough vnthout oonjuring up* ghosts and visions to pei-plex us..
Gome, come, be merry, and like yourself 1 Look at little Hare-
ton — he^s dreaming nothing dreary. How sweetly he smiles in
his sleep r'
" Yes ; and bow sweetiy his father curses in his solitude !
You remember him, I dare say, vvhen he was just sucb another
as that chubby thing^-^nearly as young and innocent.. How-
ever, Nelly, I shall oblige you to listen — it's not long ; and I've
no power to be meny to-night. "
" I won't hear it, I won't hear it l** I repeated, hastily.
I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still ; and
Catherine had an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made me
dread something from which I might shape a prophecy, and
foresee a fearful catastrophe.
She was voxed, but she did not proceed. Apparently taking
up another subject^ she re-commenced in a short time.
** If I were in heav^, Nelly, I should be extremely miserable. "
*'Because you are not fit to go there, " I answered. " All
oinoers would be miserable in heaven. "
" But it is 0ot for that I dreamed, once, tibat I was thwe, " .
WUTH^BING BCIOSTS* 71
*^ I tell you I won^t hearken to your dr^anui, Miss Catherine 1
I'll go to bed, " I iDterrupted again.
She laughed^ and held me down, for I made a motion to
leave my Ichair. . :
" This is nothing, " cried she ; ** I was only going* to say that
heaven ^id not seem- to be my home; ^nd I broke my heart
with weeping to come back to earth; and the angels were so
angry that they flung^me out jnto the middle of Sie heath on
the top of Wuthering Heights ; where J woke sobbing for joy.
That vrill do to explain my secret, as well- as the other. I've
no more business to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in
heaven ; and if the wicked man in there had not brought Heath*
cliff so low I shoul^'t have thought of it. It wotild degrade
me to. marry Heathcliff now; so he shall never know how I
love him; and that not because he's handsome, Nelly, but be-*
cause he's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are
made of^ his and mine are the sano^ ; and Jjinton's is as different
as a moonbeam from lightning, or firo^t from fire. " -^
JSre .this speech ended I. became sensible of Heathclifif's pres-
ence. Having notified a slight movement, I turned my head,
and saw him rise £rom the bench, and steal out noiselessly. He
had listened till he heard Catherine say it would degrade her
to marry him^ and then he staid to hear no farther.
My companion, sitting on the g|*ound, was prevented by the
back of the settle froniv remarking his presoice or departure ;
but I started, and bade her hush. ~
f* Why 1 " she asked, gazing nervously round.
''Joseph is here, " I answered, catching opportunely the roll
of his cartwheels up the road ; " and Heathcliff will eome in
with him. I-m not sure whether he weie not at the door this
moment. " . . _ - .
" Oh, he couldn't overhear me at the door ! " said she. " Give
me Hareton while you get the supper, and wh^n it is ready ask
me to sup with you. I want to cheat my uncomfortable con-
science, and be convinced that Heathcliff has no n < Hioii of these
things — ^he has not, has he 1 He does not- know what being in
love is] " ^
< < I see no reason tbathe should not know as weU as you, " I
returned ; " and if you are his choice, he'll be the most unfor-
tunate creature that ever was bom ! As soon as you become
Mrs. Linton, he loses friend, and love, and all ! Have you
considered how you'll bear the separationt and how he'll
72 WUTHERINO HEIGHT 8.
bear co be quite deserted in the world 1 Because, Miss Cath-
orinfe — ^*'
" He quite deserted ! we separated V* she exclainied, with-an
accent of indignation. " " Who is to separate us, pi*ay 1 .They'll
meet the fate of Milo ! Not as long as I live, Ellen — ^for no
mortal creature^ Every Linton on the face of the earth might
meJt into nothing, before I coiild consent to forsake Heathcfiff.
Oh. that's not what I intend — that's not what I mean!'I
shouldn't be Mrs. Linton were such. a price deraanded! He'll
be as much^o me as he has been all bis.lifetiine.. Edgar must
shnke off his antipathy, and tolerate him; at least. He will,
when he learns my true feelings toward him. Nelly, I see now,
you think me a selfish wretch, but did it never strike you that if
I/eathcliff and I married we should be beggai's? whereas, if I
ly.arry Linton I can aid Heathclitf to rise, and place him out of
vty bcother's power.*'
" With your husband's money, Miss Catherine V* I asked.
*'Vou'll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon; and,
Hiough I'm hardly a judge, I think that's the. worst motive
•ou've given yet for being the wife pf young Linton. "
" It is not, " retorted she, " it is the best ! The other's were
^he satisfaction of my whims ; and for Edgar's sake, too, to
natisfy him. This is for the sake of one who comprehends in
his person my feelings to Edgar and myself^ t can not express
it ; but surely you and every b6dy have a notion that there is,
or should be, an existence of yours beyond you. What were
the use of my creation if I Were entirely contained here 1 My
great miseries in this world have been Heathcliff's miseries,
and I watched and felt each from the beginning ; my great
thought in living is himself. If all else perished, and /le re-
mained, I should still continue to be ; and, if all else remained,
and he were annihilated, the universe would turn to d mighty
stranger* I should not seem a pait of it. My love for Linton
is like the foliage in the woods : time will change it, I'm well
aware, as winter changes the trees. My love for Heathcliff
resembles, the eternal rpcks beneath : a source of little visible
delight, but necessary. Nelly, I am Heathcliff— he's always,
always in my mind — not as a pleasure, any more than I am al-
ways a pleasure to myself— but as my ov^ being f so don't talk
of our separation again — ^it is impracticable ; and "
She paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown ; but I
jerked it forcibly away. I was out of patience with her folly.
WUTBERING HEIGHTS. 73
** If I can . make aoy sense of your nonsense, miss/'I said^
" it only goes to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties
you undertake in marrying, or else that you are a wicked, un-
principled girl. But trouble me With no more secrets ; I'll not
promise to keep them. "
" You^il keep that ] " she asked, eagerly.
" No, I'll not promise, " I repeated.
She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph finished
bur conversation ; and Catlierine removed her iseat to a comer,
and nursed Hareton, while I made the supper.
After it -was cooked, my fellow^servant and I began to quar-
rel whO'Should carry some to Mr. Hindley ; and we didn't settle
it till all was nearly cdld. Then we csime to the agreement that
we would let him ask, if he wanted any,. for we feared particu-
larly to go into his presence when he had been some time alone.
" tind hah isn't that nowt cpmed in frough tV field, be this
time ? What is he abaht 1 girt eedle seeght ] " demanded the
old man, looking round for Heathclifil
" I'll call him, " I replied. " He's in the bam, I've no doubt. "
'I went and called,, but got no answer. On returning,
I whispered to Catherine that he had heard a good part of
what she said, I was sure; and told how I saw him quit the
kitchen just as she complained of her brother's conduct regard-
ing him.
She jumped up in a fine fright-^flung Hareton upon the set-
tle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not taking leisure to
consider why she was so flurried, or how ber talk would have
affected him.
She was absent such a while that Joseph pix > posed we should
wait no longer. He cunningly conjectured they were staying
away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. They
were " ill eneugh for ony fahl manners, " be afiirmed, . And, on
their behalf^ he added that night a special prayer to the usual
quarter of > an hour's supplication before meat ; and would have
tacked another to the end of the grace, had not his y6ung mis-
tress broken in upon him with a hurried command that lie must
run down the road, and wherever Heathclifif had rambled, find
and make him re-enter directly 1
** 1 want to speak to him, and I must before I go up-stairs,'
she said. " And the gate is open, he is somewhere out of hear-
ing ; for he would not reply, though I shouted at the top of the
fold as loud as I could. "
D
74 WUTHERING llEIGHTS.
Joseph objected at first ; she was too much in earnest, how-
ever, to suffer cbntradiction ; and at last he placed his hat on
his head, and walked grumbling forth.
Meantime Catherine paced up and down the floor, exclaim-
ing— .
" I wonder where he is — I wonder where he can be ! What
did I say, Nelly % V\6 forgotten. Was he vexpd at my bad
humor this afternoon ? Dear ! tell me what I've said to grieve
him ? I do wish he'd tjome. I do wish he would ! "
" What a noise for nothing ! " I ciied, though rather uneasy
myself. " What a trifle scares you ! It's surely no gi'eat cause
of alarm that Heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the
moors, or even lie, too sulky to speak to'us, in the Bay-loft. I'll
engage he's lurking there. See, if I don't ferret him out ! "
1 departed to renew my search ; its result was disappointment,
and Joseph's quest ended in the same.
" Yon lad gets war un war! " observed he on re-entering.
" He's left th'yate ut t'full swing, and Miss's pony has trodden
dahn two rigs uh com, un plottered through, raight o'er intuh t'
meadow ! Hahsomdiver,, t* maister'uU play t'divil to-morn,
and he'll do weel. He's patience, it sseln wi'*ich careless, offal d
cratera — patience itsseln he is ! Bud he'll nut be soa j^llus —
yah's see, all oil ye ! Yah mun'n't drive him aht uf his heead
fur nowt 1 "
" Have you found Heathcliff, you ass ?*'interrupted Catherine.
" Have you been looking for him, as I ordered 1 "
" Aw 9ud more likker look for th'horsey " he replied. " It'ud
be tuh more sense. But, aw can look for norther horse, nur
man uf a neeght loike this — as black as t'chimbley ! und Heath-
cliff's noan t'chap tuh coom ut maw whistle — ^liappen he'll be
less hard uh hearing wi'ye .'"
It wa4 a very dark evening for summery the clouds appeared
inclined to thunder, and I said we had better all sit down ; the
approachifag rain would be certain to bring him home without
further trouble.
However, Catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity.
She kept wandering to and fro, from the gate to the door, in a
state of agitation wbicJti permitted no repose : and at length took
up a permanent situation on one side of (he wall, near the road ;
where, heedless of my expostulations, and the growling thunder,
and the great drops that began to. plash around her, she re-
mained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and then crying
\^UtHEBiNG HBIGRTd. 76
f»titrigbt. She beat Haretbn, or any child, at a good, passionate
fit of crying.
About midnight, while we still sat up, the storafll came rattling
oyer the Heights in full fury. There wa» a Violent wind as well
nA thunder, and either one or the other split a tree off at the
comer of the building ; a huge bough fell across the ro < rf*, and
knocked down a portion of the east chiipney-stack^ sending a
clatter of stones and soot into the kitchen iire.
We thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us, and Joseph
swung upon his knees, beseeching the Lord to remember the
Patriarchs, Noah and Lot; and, as in former times, spare thd
righteous, though he smote the ungodly. I felt some sentiment
that it must be a judgment on us also. The Jodah, in my mind,
was Mr* Eamshaw, and I shook the handle of bis den that I
might ascertain if he wer^ yet living. He replied audibly
enough, in a fashion which made my companion vociferate more
clamorously than^ before, thatti wide distinction might be drawn
between saints like himself and sinners like his mcuster^ But
the uproar passed away ia twenty ininutes, leaving us all un-
harmed, excepting Cathy, who ^ot thoroughly drenched for her
obstinacy in refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetlesii
knd shawUess to catch as much water as.she could with her hair
and clothes.
She came in, and lay down on the settle, all soaked As sh^
was, turning her face to the back^ atid putting her hands be-
fore it.
" Well, Miss ! " I exclaimed, touching her shoulder; " you ate
not bent on getting your death, are you 1 Do you know what
o'clock it is? Half-past twelve. Come! come to bed ; there'll
no use waiting longer for that foolish boy— hell be gone to Giri*-
merton, and he'll stay there now. He guei^es we shouldn't wake
£ > r him till this, late hour; at least, he guesses that only Mr.
Hindley would be up ; and he'd rather avoid having the door
opened by tbe master. "
" Nay, nay, he's noan at Gimtoelton ! " said Joseph. •* Aw's
fuver wonder, bud he's at t'bothom nf a bog-boile. This Visita-
tion wom't for nowt, und aw wod hev ye tub look aht, Miss—*-
yah muh be t'next. Thank Hivin for all ! All war]cs togither
for gooid tub them as is chozzen, and piked aht firoo^ th'rub-
bidge I Yah knaw whet t'Scripture ses-— " ^
And he began quoting several texts«-^referring us to the chap-
tex & and veises where we might & id them.
76 W U T H E R I N 6 HEIGHTS.
I, aft^r having vainly begged the willful girl to rise and re*
move her wet things, left him preaching, and her shivering, and
betook myself to bed with little Hareton ; who slept as fast as
if every one, had been sleeping round him.
I heard Joseph read on a while afterward; then I distin^-
guished his slow step on the ladder, and then I dropped
asleep.
Coming down spnoewhat later than usual, I saw, by the sun-
beams piercing the chinks of the shutters. Miss Catherine still
seated near the ^replace. The house door was ajar too ; light
entQi*ed from its unclosed windows ; Hindley had come out, and
stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard and drowsy.
" What ails you, Cathy 1 " he was saying when I entered ;
" you; look as dismal as a drowned wh^lp. Why are you so
damp and pale, child 1 "
" Tve been wet, " she answered reluctantly ; " and I'm cold,
that's all. "
" Oh, she is naughty ] " I cried, perceiving the master to be
tolerably sober; " She got steeped in the shower of yesterday
evening, and there she has sat, .the ni^ht through* and I couldn't
prevail on her to stir. "
Mr. Eamshaw stared at us in surprise. ^ " The night through, "
he repeated. " What kept her up 1 not fear of the thunder,
sui'ely ] That was over, hours since. "
Neither of us wished to mention Heathclififs absence, as long
as we could conceal it ; so, I replied, I didn't know how she
took it into her head to sit up; and she said nothing.
The morning was fresh and cool; I threw back the lattice,
,and presently the room was filled iwith sweet scents from the
garden : but Catherine called peevishly to me.
" Ellen, shut the window.'I'm starving! " And her teeth
chattei^d as she shruuk closer to the almost extinguished em-
bers. ^
" She's ill, " said Hindley, taking her wrist, " I suppose that's
the reason she would not go to t«d. Damn it! I don't want
to be troubled with more sickness here. What took her into
the rain 1 "
'^Running after t'lads, as usuald! " croaked Joseph, ciatching
an opportunity, from our hesitation^ to thrust in his evil tongue.
" If aw wur yah, maister, aw'd just slam t'boards i'tSeir
faces ajl on *em, gentle and simple ! Never a day ut yah're
off, but yon cat uh. Linton comes sneaking hither — and Mist
WUTHERING HEIGHT si 77
Nelly sboo^s a filie lass! shoo sits watching for ye i't'kitchen;
and as yah're in at one door, he's aht at t'other. Und, then^
wer grand lady goes a coorting uf hor «ide I Its bonny be-
havior, lurking amang t'iields, after twelve ut'night, wi that
fehl, flay some divil uf a gipsy, Heathcliff! They think aw^m
blind;'but aw'm noan, now't ut t'soart! Aw seed young
Linton, boath coming and going, and aw seed yhh ^directing
his discourse-to me). Yah gooid fur nowt, slattenly witdh ! nip
up and bolt intuh th'hahb, t'minutp yah heard t'maistier's horse
fit clatter up t'road. .
" Silence, eavesdropper ! " cried Catherine. " Noiie of your
insolence before me 1 Edgar Linton cam^ yesterday by chance,
Hindley : and it was I who told him to be off: because I knew
you would not like to have met him as you were. "
" You lie, Cathy;, no doubt, " answered her brother, ** and
you are a confounded simpleton ! But never mind Linton at
present. Tell me, were you not vrith Heathcliff last night!
Speak the truth now. You need not be afraid of harming him.
though I hate him as much as ever, he did me a good turn a
short, time ago that will make my conscience tender dC'break-
ing-his neck; To prevent it I shall send him about his bo^iness
this very morning; and after fae*8 gone I'd advise you all to
look sharp. I shall only have the more humor for you !**
" I neversaw Heathcliff last night, " answered Catherine, be-
ginning to sob bitterly : " and if you do torn him out of doors
I'll go with him. But perhaps you'll never have^ an opportunity
— perhaps he^s gone. " Here she burst into uncontrollable grief,
luid the remainder of her words were inarticulate.
Hindley. lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bid
her get ta her room immediately, or she shouldn't cry for
nothing ! I obliged her to obey ; and I shall never ft)rget what a
scene she acted when we reached hfer chamber. It tenified me,
I thought she was going mad, and I begged Joseph to run fov
the doctor.
It proved the commencement of deliriunr; Mr. Kenneth, as
scion as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill; she had a
fever.
He bled her, and he told me to let her live 6n whey and water-
gruel ; and take care she did not throw herself down stairs or
out of the window; and then he lefl^ for he had enough to da in
the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary distance
between cottage and cottage. *
78 W^THEBINO 0EI«iITtl^
Though I can not say I made a gentle nttrse^ and Joseph and
the ipaster were no better ; and though our natient was as weaii*
some and as headstrong as a pc^tient coula be, she weathered
it through.
Old Mrs. Linton paid us several visits, to be sure, and set
things to rights and scolded ^nd ordered us all; and when
Catherine was convalescent, she insisted on conveying her to
Thrushcross Grange ; for which delivercvnce we were very grate*
fuL But the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness ;
she and her husband took the fever, and died within a few days
of each other.
Our. young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate
^nd haughtier than ever. Heathcliff had never been heard of
since the evening of the thunder-storm ; and one day I had th^
misfortune, when she had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the
blame of his disappearance on her (where indeed it belonged
(UB she well knew). From that period, for several months, she
(seaaed to hold any communication with me, save in the relation
pf a m^te servant. Josc^ph fell un4er a ban also; h & wauU
Pjpeak his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a
little girl ; and she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress ;
f^nd thought that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated
with consideration. , Then the doctor had said that she would
not bear crossing much s she ought to have her own way ; and
it was nothing less than murder, in her eyes, foi; any one to
presume to stand up and contradict her.
From Mr. fiamshaw and his ^mpanions she kept aloof;
and, tutored by Kenneth and by serious threats of a fit that
fvften attended her Aiges, her brother allowed her whatever she
pleased to demand, and geperally avoided aggravating her fiery
temper. He was rathet too indulgent in humoring her caprices ;
pot from affection, 1»ut from pride ; he wished earnestly to see
l^er bring honor to the family by an alliance wi^ the Lintons ;
and as long as she let him alone, she might trample us like
slaves, for aught he cared I
£4gfr Linton, as multitudes have been before, and will be
afler him, was infatuated $ and believed himself the happiest
man alive on the day he led her to Ginuherton chapel, Uiree
years subsequent to his father's death.
Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to leave
Wuthering Heights and accompany her here. Liule Hareton
was nearly five years old^ and I had just begun to teach him his
WUTHEHIKG nEIOHTf. 79
letters. We made a Bad parting, but Catherine's tears were
more powerful than ours. When I refused to go, and when
she found her entreatie;s did not move me, she went lamenting
to her husband and brother. The former offered nie n^unificent
wages f the latter^ ordered me to pack up— -he wanted no women
in the house, he 8a,id,'now that there was no mistress; and as
to Hareton, the curate should take him in hand, by and by.
And so I had but one choice left-r-tp do as I was ordered. I
told the ihaster he got rid of all decent people only to run to
ruin a little faster ; I kissed Hareton good by; and, since then,
he has b^n a stranger, ^nd it's very queer to think it, but I've
no doubt, he has completely forgotten all about Ellen Dean,
and that he was ever more than all the world to her, and she to
him ! —
At this point of the housekeeper's story she chsoiced to glance
toward the time > -piece over the chimney; and was in amaze-
ment, on seeing tne minute-hand measure half-past one. She
would not hear of staying a second longer. ^ In truth, I felt
rather disposed to defer the sequel of her narrative, myself: and
now, that she is vanished to her rest, and I have meditated for
another hour or two, I shall summon courage to go also, in
spite of SLching lazinei^s of head and limbs.
CHAPTER X. ;
A CHARMING introduction to a. hermit's life ! Four weeks'
torture, tossing, and sickness! Oh, these bleak winds, and
bitter, northern skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory coun-
try surgeons ! And, oh, this dearth of the human physiognomy,
and, worse than all, the terrible intimation of Kenneth that I
need not expect to be out of doors till spring !
Mr. Heathcliff has just honored me with a call. About seven
days ago he sent me a brace of grouse~r-the last of the season.
Scoundrel ! He is not altogether guiltless in this illness of
mine ; and that I had a great mind to teill him. But, alas !
how could I offend a man who was charitable enough to sit at
my bedside a good hour, and talk on some other subject than
pills and draughts, blisters and leeches 1
60 WUTH BRING HEIGHTS.
This is qurte an easy intciTal. I am too weak to read, yet 1
feel as if I could enjoy something interesting. Why not have
up Mrs. Dean to finish her tale ? I can recollect its chief inci-
dents, as far as she had gone. Yes, I remember her -hero had
run off, and never been heard of for three yeara : and the
heroine was married. I'll ring ; she*!! be delighted to find me
capable of talking cheerfully.
Mrs. Dean came. S ■. "
" It wants twenty ipinutes, sir, to taking the medicine, " she
commenced.
" Away, away with it ! " I replied ; " I'desire to have — "
" The doctor says you must drop the powders. "
** With all my heart ! Don't interrupt me*'Come and take
your seat here. Keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of
phials. Draw your knitting out of your pocket— that will do—:
now continue the history of Mr. Heathclift*, fi'om where you left
off, to the present day. Did he finish his education on the Con-
tinent, and come back a gentleman*? or did he get a sizer's
place at college 1 or escape to America, and earn honors by
drawing blood firom his foster country ? or .make a fortune more
promptly on the English highways 1*'
" He may have done a little in all these vocations, Mr. Lock-
wood ; but I couldn't give my word for any. I stated before
that I didn't know how he gained his money ; neither am I
aware of the means he took to raise his mind fi*om the savage
ignorance into which it was sunk; but, with your leave, I'll
proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will'amuse,. and
not weary you. Are you feeling better this mon^ng ] "
" Much. " — ,
That's good news. I got Miss Catherine and myself to
Thnishcross Grrartge ; and, to my agreeable disappointment, she
behaved infinitely better thai? I dared to expect. She seemed
almost oyer fond of Mr. Linlon ;- and even to his sister she
showed plenty of affection. They w6re both very attentive to
her comfort, certainly. It was not the thorn bending to the
honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn.
There were no mutual concessions; one stood erect, and
the others yielded ; and who can be ill-natured and bad-tem-
pered when they encounter, neither opposition nor indifference ?
I observed that Mr. Edgar had a deep-rooted fear of ruffling
her humor. He concealed it from her; but if ever he heard
me answer shai-ply, or saw any other sei-vant grow cloudy at
W n T H £ > R I N 6 HE I 6 H T S. 81
Bome iinpenous order of hers, he wouM show his trouble by a
frown of displeasure that nev^r darkeneid on his own account.
He, many a time, spoke sternlv to me about my pertness; and
averred that the stab of a kni & could not inflict a worse pang
than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed. 1
Not to giieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy; and,
for the space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as harmless aa
sand, because no fire came near to explode it, Catherine had
seasons of gloom and silenee, now and then; they were ro >
spected with sympathizing silencd by her husband, who as-
cribed them to an^ alteration in her constitution, produced by
her perilous illness, aa she was~ never subject to depression
of spirits before. The return of sunshine was welcomed by
answering sunshine from him. I believe I may assert that
they were really in- possession of deep and growing happi«
It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the long run j
the mild and generous are only more justly selfish than the
domineering— and it ended when circumstaiices caused each to
feel the one's interest was not the chief consideration in the
other's thoughts.
'On a mellow evening in September, I was coming from the
garden with a h^avy basket of apples which I had been gather-
ing. It had got dusk, and the moon looked over the high wall
of the couit, causing, undefined shadpws to lurk in the coineis
of the numerous projecting poitions of the building. I set my
burden on the house steps by the kitchen door, and lingered
to rest, and draw in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet air
my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when
I beard a voice behind me say —
" Nelly, is that your
It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone ; yet there was
something in the manner of pronouncing my name which made
it sound familiar. I turned about to discover who spoke,
fearfiilly^ for the doors were shut, and I had seeu nobody on
approaching the steps.
Something stirred in the- porch; and inoving nearer, I dis-
tinguished a tall man, dressed in dark clothes, with dark face
and hair. He leaned against the side, and held bis fingers on
the latch, as if intending to open for himself.
" Who can it be V I thought. " Mr. Eamshaw 1 Ob, no I
The'voice has no resemblance to his/'
63 WITTHEEING 0EI«9T|k
" I have waited liere an hour, " he resamed, while I coptin-
ued staring ; ** and the whole of that time all round has been
as still as death, I dared not enter. Yoa do not know m6]
Look, I'm not a. stranger r'
A ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, apd half
covered with black whiskers ; the brows, lowering, th^ eyB &
deep set atnd singular. I remembered the eyes. .
" What! " I cried, uncertain whether to regard him as 9k
worldly visitor, and I raised my hands in amazement. " What (
you come back J^ Is it really you 1 Is it 1 "'
" Yes, Heathcliff, " he replied, glancing from me up to. the
windows which reflected a score of glittering tnoons, bu|
showed np lights from within. ^'Are they at home — rwhere U
she ? Nelly ,^ you are not glad — ^you needn't be so disturi > ed«^
Is she here ] Speak ! I want to have one word with her— r
your mistress. Go, and say some person from Gimmertoi) de*
sires to see her. "
" How will she take it 4 " I exclaimed, " what will she dal
The surprise bewilders me— it will put her out of her head I
And you are Heathcliff? But altered ! .N & y» there's no com-
prehending it. Have you been for a soldier V*
♦*Go, and cany my message, " he intemipted, impatiently^
Fm ih hell till you do! "'
He lifted the latch, and I entered; but when I got to the
parlor whei*e Mr. and Mrs. Linton w«re, I could not persuade
myself to proceed.
At length, I resolved on making an excuse to ask if they
would have the candles lighted, and I opened the door.
They Hat together in a window whose lattice lay back
against the wall, and displayed beyond the garden trees and
the wild ^en park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a long line
of mist winding nearly to its top (for very soon ^tex you pads
the chapel, ai you may have noticed, the slough that runs from
the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of the glen) ;
Wuthering Heights rose above this silent vapor, but our old
house was invisible — ^it rather dips down on the other side.
Both the rooin, and its occupants, and the scene they gazed
on, looked wondrbusly peaceful. I shrank reluctantly from
performing my. errand ; and was actually going away, leaving it
unsaid, after having put my question about the candles, when a
seiise of my folly compelled me to return, and mutter,
** A person from Gimmerton wishes to see you, ma'am. "
W U T H B R:I N G H S I O B T fl, 63
" What does he want ? asked Mrs. Linton.
" I did not question fainir'I answered.
" Well, close tbe curtains, Nelly, " she said, " and bring up
tea. I'll be back again directly. "
She quitted the apaitment; Mr. Edgar inquired carelessly,
who it was ]
" Some one the mistress does not expect, " I replied. " That
Heathcliff, you recollect him, sir, who used to live at Mr. Earn-
shaw's. "
" What, the gipsy-^the plough-boy t " he cried. " Why did
you not say so to Catherine V*
" Hush L you must not call him by those names, master, " I
said. " She'd be sadly grieved to hear you. She was nearly
heart-broken when he ran off; I guess his return will make a
jubilee to her. "
Mr. Lin^n walked to a window on the other side of the
room that overlooked the coiiit. He unfkstened it, and leaned
out. I suppose they were below, for he exclaimed quickly,
" Don't stand there, love 1 Bring the person in, if it be any
one particular. " .
Ere long, I heard the click of the latch, and Catherine flew
up^stairs, breathless and wild, too excited to. show gladness;
indeed, by her face, you would rather have surmised an awful
calamity.
''Oh, Edgar, Edgar ! " she panted, flinging her arms around
his neclE.'* Oh, Edgar, darling ! Heathclin'a come back — he
is I " And she tightened her embrace to a squeeze.
" Well, well, " cried her husband, crossly, *? c[on't strangle
me for that ! He never struck me as such a marvelous trea-
sure. There is no need to be frantic I " .
" I know you didn't like him, " i^e answered, repressing a
little the intensity of her delight. *'Yet for my sake, you must
be friends now. Shall I tell him to come up ] "
" Here, " he said, " into the pailor 1 "
" Where elsel " she asked.
He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suita*
ble place for him.
Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll expression — ^half angry,
half laughing at his fastidiousness.
" No, " she added, after a while, " I cannot sit in the kitchen.
Set two tables here, Ellen, one for your master and Miss Isa«
bella, being gentry ; the other for Heathcliff ^d myself, being
84 WCTHEIING HEIGHTS.
of the lower orders. Will that please you dear! Or must J
have a fire lighted elsewhere 1 If so, give directions. I'll
run down and secure my guest. I'm afraid the joy is too.great
to be real ! "
She was about to dart off again ; but Edgar arrested her.
" You bid him step up, " he said, addressing roe, " and,
Catherine, try to be glad, without being absurd ! The whole
household need not witness the sight of your welcoming a run-
away servant as a brother. "
I descended, and found HeathcliflT waiting under the porch,
evidently anticipating an invitation to enter. He followed my
guidance, without waste of words ; and I nshei^ him into the
presence of the master and mistress, whose flushed cheeks be-
trayed signs of warm talking. But the lady's glowed with
another feeline when her fiiend appeared at the door; she
sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to Linton;
and then she seized Linton's reluctant fingers, and crushed them
into his.
Now fully revealed by the- fire and candlelight, I was amazed
more than ever, to behold the transformation of Heathclifif. He
had grown a tall, athletic, well-formed man j beside whom my
master seemed quite slender and youthUke. His upright car-
riage suggested the idea of his having been in the army« His
countenance was much older in expression and decision of fea-
ture than Mr. Linton's ; it looked intelligent, and retained no
marks of former degradation. A half-civilized ferocity lurked
yet in the depressed brows, and eyes full of black fire, but it
was subdued ; and his manner was even dignified, quite
divested of roughness though too stem for grace.
My master's surprise equaled or exceeded mine; he re-
mained for a minute at a loss how to address the plough-boy, as
he had called him ; Heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and
stood looking at him coolly till he chose to speak.
•* Sit down, sir, " he said, at length. ** Mrs. Linton, recalling
old times, wcmld have me give you a cordial reception, and, of
course, I am gratified when any thing occurs to please hen "
" And I also, " answered Heathcliff, " especially If it be any
thing in which I have a part. I shall stay an hour or two
willingly. "
He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her gaze fixed
on him as if she feared he would vanish were she to remove it.
He did not often raise his to her ; a quick glance now and then
WtJTHBRING HEIGHTS. 85
sufficecl ; but it flashed back, each time more cohfidenily, the
Undisguised delight he drank from'hei-s.
They were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
embarrassment ; not so Mr. Edgar, he grew pale with pure an-
noyance, a feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose— ^
and stepping across the rug, seized HeathcKff's hands again, and
laughed like one beside herself^
" I shall think it a dream to-morrow ! " she cried. ** I shall
not be able to believe that I have seen, and touched, and spoken
to you once more — and yet, crael Heathclilf ! you don't deserve
this welcome. To be absient and silent for three years, and
never to think of'me \ "'
" A little more than you have thought of me ! " he murmured.
" I heard of your mairiage, Cathy, not long'sipce; and, while
waiting in the yard below, I meditated this plan— just to have
one glimpse of your face — a stare of surprise, perhaps, and pre-
tended pleasure ; afterward settle my score with Hindley ; and
then prevent the law by doing execution on myself. Your wel-
come has put these ideas out of my mind ; but beware of meet-
ing me with another aspect next time I Nay, you'll not drive
me off again. You were really sorry for m'e, were you 1 Well,
there was a cause. I've fought through a bitter life since I last
heard yoiur voice, and you must forgive me, for I struggled only
for you !'*
" Catherine, unle^ss we are to have cold tea, please to come t6
the table, " interrupted Linton, striving to preserve his ordinary
tone, and a due measure of politeness. " Mr. Heathcliff will
have a long walk, wherever he may lodge to-night; and I'm
thirsty. "
She took her post before the urn ; and Miss Isabella came,
summoned by the bell : then, having handed their chairs for-
ward, I left the room.
The meal hardly endured ten minutes. Catherine's cup was
never filled, she could neither eat, nor drink. Edgar had mfade
a slop in the saucer, and scarcely swallowed a mouthful.
Theii* guest did not protract his stay, th^t " eyening, above an
liour longer. I asked, as he departed, if he went to Gfimmerton 1
" No, to Wuthering Heights, " he answered, " Mri Eanishaw
invited me when I called this morning.'*
Mr. Eamshaw invited him ! and he called on Mr. Eamshaw!
1 pondered this sentence painfully, nftev he was gone. Is he
turning out a bit of a hypocrite, and coming into the country to
66 WUTHERING HEIGHTCU
ivork mischief under a cloak 1 I mused — I had a presentiment,
in the hottom of my heart, that he had better have remained
away. ,
About the middle of the night, I was wakened from my first
pap by Mrs. Linton gliding into my chamber, taking a seat on
my bed-side, and pulling Ine by .the hair to rouse me.
" I can not rest, Ellen ; " she said by way of apology. " And
I want gome living creature to keep me company in my happi-
ness ! Edgar is sulky, because I'm glad of a tning that doe^
not interest him. He refuses to open his mouth, except to utter
pettish, silly speeches ; and he affirmed I was cruel and selfish
for wishing to talk when he was so sick and sleepy. He al-
ways contrives to be sick at the least cross ! I gave a few sen-
tences of commendation to Heathcliff, and he, either for ahead-
ache or a pang of envy, began to ciy ; so I gc»t up and left him. "
" What use is it praising Heathcliff to him 1 " I answered,
" As lads they had an aversion to each other, and Heathclifi*
would hate just as much to hear him praised— it's human nature.
Let Mr. Linton alone about him, unless you would like fin open
quarrel between them.*'
M But does it not show great weakness V* pursued she. *'I'nj
not envious^— I never feel hurt at the brightness of Isabel! a'9
yellow hair, and the whiteness of her skin ; at her dainty ele-
gance, and the fondness all the family exhibit for her.'Eveii
you, Nelly, if we have a dispute sometimes, you back Isabella
at once ; and I yield, like a. £ > olish mother, I call her a darling,
and flatter her into a good temper. It pleases her brother tp
see us cordial, and that pleases me. But they are very much
alike. They are spoiled children, and fancy the wwld was
made for their acconamodatioa; and, though I humor both, I
think a smart chastisement might improve Uiem, all the same. "
" You're mistaken, Mrs. Linton, " said I, " They humor yoi;
— -I know what there would be to do if they did not ! You can
well afford to indulge their passing whims, as long as their busi:
ness is to anticipate all your desires. You may, however, ^fall
out, at last, over something of equal consequence to both sides ;
and then those you term weak are very capable of being as ob*
Stinate as you I "
" And then we shall fight to the death, shan't we, Nelly 1 " sh«
returned, laughing, " No ! I tell you, I have such faith in Lin-
ton's love that I believe I might kill him, and he wouldn^t wish
to retaliate. "
WUTHEEINQ ^|SIOPT0. 81
I advised her to value bim tbe more for biA affection.
" I do, " she answered, " but be needn't resort to whining for
trifles. It is childish ; and instead of melting into tears because
I said that HeathclifT was qow worthy of any one's regard, and
it would honor the first gentleman in the country to be his friend^
lie ought to bavB said it for me, and been delighted from sym-
patliy. He must ^et accustomecl to bim, and he may as well
Uke him-'-considering bow JEieathcliff has reason to object to
him, I'm Bure. he behaved excellently ! "
- " What do you think of bis going tO Wutl^ering Heights V* %
inquired.'" He is reformed in every respect, apparently — < )uitQ
a Chriatian-^^-ofiering die right hand of fellowship to his enemies
allroundT'
'^ < *He explained it, " she replied. " I wondered as much as
you^ He said he called to gather infarmfition concerning me
from you, supposing you tesided there still; and Joseph told
Hindley, who came out and fell to questioning him of what he
bad been doing, and bow be had been living, and finally desired
bira to walk in. There were some, persons sitting *at cards— ^
HeathclifT joined them ; my brother lost some money to bim ;
and, finding him plentifully supplied, be requested that he would
come again in the evening, to which he confuted. Hindley is
too reckless to select his acquaintance prudently ; be does'nl
trouble himself to reflect on tbe causes be might bave^for-mis*
trusting one whom be has basely injured. But HeathclifT affirms
his principal reason for resuming a connection with his ancient
persecutor is a wish to install himself in quarters at walking dis-
tance from the Grrange, and an attachment to the house where
we Hved together ; and, likewise, a hope that t shall have more
opportunities of seeing him there than I could have if he settled
in Gimmerton. He means to offer liberal payment for permis*
aion to lodge at the Heights ; and doubtless my brother's covet-
ousness will prompt him to accept the terms ; be was'always
greedy, though what he grasps vnth one band, he flings away
with the other. "
/'It's a nice place for a young man to fix bis dwelling in ! "
said I, " Have you no fear of the consequences, Mrs. Linton 1 "
" None for my fiiend, " she. replied, " his strong head will keep
bim fi'ona danger: a little for Hindley; but he can't be made
morally worse than he is; and I stand between him and bodily
harm. The event of this evening bas retonciled me to Gq4 *na
humanity 1 I bad risen in aogry rebelUon against provid^Qce,
hS WUTHERINO HEIGHT 8.'
Oh, I've enSurecl very, very bitter misery. Nelly, if that crea-
ture, knew how bitter, he'd be ashamed to cloud its removal with
idle ^petulance. It was kindness for him which induced me to
bear it alone : had I expressed tbe agony I frequently^ felt, he
would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently as
I. However, it's over, and ril take no revenge on his folly. I
can afford to suffer any thing hereafter! Should the -meanest
thing alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn the other,
but I'd ask pardon for provoking it ; and, as a proof, I'll go
make my pcax;e with Edgar instantly. Good night^ — I'^m an
angel! "
In this self-complacent conviction she departed ; and the suc-
cess of her fulfilled resolution W8^s obvious on the morrow. , Mr:
Linton had not only abjured his peevishness (though his spirits
seemed still subdued hj the exuberance of Catherine's vivaci-
ty), but he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella with her
to Wuthering Heights in the afternoon ; and she rewai-ded him
with such a summer of sweetness and affection in i-etum, as
made the house a paradise for several days ; both master and
servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.
Heathcliff— Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future— used the
liberty of visiting at Thnishcross Grange cautiously at first : he
seemed estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion.
Catherine also deemed it judicious to moderate herexpressiomi
of pleasure in receiving him ; dnd he gradually established hi^
right to be expected. -
He retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood
was remarkable, and that served to repress all startling demon*
strations of feeling. My master's uneasiness experienced a lull,
and further circumstances diverted it into another channel for s
space.
His new source of trouble sprang from, the n6t anticipated
misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible
attraction toward the tolerated guest. She was at that time'a
charming young lady of eighteen; infantile in manners, though
possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a keen temper, too, if
nritated. Her brother, who loved her tenderly, was appalled
at this fantastic preference. Leaving aside the degradation of
an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his
property, in default of heirs Tnale/ might pass into such a one's
power, he had sense tc/comprohend Heathcliff's disposition — to
know that, though his exteriot W8» altered, his mind Was Ua-
W 17 T H E R I N G H E I O H T 8. 80
changeable and unchanged. And he dreaded tjiat mind ; it re-
volted him ; he shrank forebodingly from the idea of committing
Isabella to its keeping.
He would have recoiled still more bad he been aware that
her attachment rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it
awakened no reciprocation of sentiment ; for the minute he dis^
covered its existence, he laid the blame on Heathcliffs deliberate
designing.
We had all remsorked, during some tirdef that Miss Linton
fretted and pined over something. She grew cross and weari-
some, snapping at and teasing Catherine continually, at the im-
minent risk of exhausting her limited patience. We excused
her, to ^ certain extent, on the plea of ilj health ; she was
dwindling and fading before our eyes. But one day'when she
Bad been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast, com-
plaining that t^e sei-vants did not do what she told them ; that
the mistress would allow h^r to be nothing in the house, and
Edgar neglected her ; that she had caught a cold with the doors
being left open, and we let the parlor fire go out on purpose to
vex her; with a hundred yet more^ frivolous accusations, Mrs.
Linton peremptorily insisted that she should get to bed ; and,
having scolded her: heartily, threatened to send for the
doctor.
Mention of Kenneth caused her to exclaim instantly that her
health was perfect, and4t was only Catherine's hariahness which
made her unhappy. ^
" How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling? " cried
tlie mistress, amazed at the unreasonable assertion. " You aro
surely losing your reason. When have I been harsh, tell
" Yesterday, " sobbed Isabella, « and now ! "
** Yesterday ! " said her sister-in-law. " On what occasion 1 "
" In out^ walk along the moor ; you told me to ramble wher«
1 pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliff. "
- " And that's your notion of harshness? " said Catherine,
laughing. " It was no hint that your company Was superfluous ;
we didn't care whether you kept with lis or not; I merely
thought Heathcliff's talk would have nothing entertaining for
your eara. "
" Oh, no,'* wept the young lady, " yo^ wished me away be-
cause you knew I liked to be there. "
" Is she sane 1 " asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to me. " I'D
90 WUTHKEINGHEIOHTA.
repeat our conversation word for word Isabella, and you poii^t
out any charm it could have had for you/'
** I don't mind the conversation, " she answered : I wanted tp
be with " -r-
'* Well i " said Catherine, perceiving her.lxesitatQ to complete
the sentence.
" With him ; and I won't be always sent off! " she cotitinued,
kindling up. ** You are a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desir^x
no one to oe loved but yourself t "
''You are an impertinent little monkey! " exclaimed Mrs.
Linton, in suiprise. " But I'll not believp this idiocy 1 It is
impossible that you can covet the admiration of Heathcliff
— ^that vou can consider hjim an agreeable person! I hope I
have misunderstood you, Isabella ? "
** No, you have not, " said the infatuated girl.''I love him
more than ever you loved Edgar ; and he might love me if yo^
would let him ! "
''I wouldn't be you lor a kingdom, then ! " Catherine de-
clared, emphatically -r-* and she seemed to speak sincerely.
'* Nelly, help me to convince her of her madness. Tell \^x what
Heathcliff is — an unreclaimed creature, without refinementr^
without cultivation ; an arid wilderness of furze and wbinstone.
I'd as soon put that little canary into the park on a winter's day
as recommend you to bestow your heart on him! It is deplor-
able ignorance of his character, child, and nothipg^^ke, which
makes that dream enter your head. Pray don't imagine that
he conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath a stem
exterior I He's not a rough diamond — a pearl-containing oyster
of a rustic ; he's a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. I never pay to
him, Let this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungen-
erous or cruel to harm them. I say. Let thom alone, because I
should hate them to be wronged : and he'd crush, you, like a
sparrow's egg, Issibella, if he found you a troublesome charge.
I know he couldn't love a Linton ; and yet, he'd be quite capa-
ble of marrying your fortune and expectations. Avarice is
growing with him a besetting sin. There's my picture ; and
I'm his friendf-HSO much so that had he thought seriously to
catch you, I should, perhaps, hav6 held my tongue and let yoa
fall into this trap. "
Miss Linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
** For shame I for stame ! " she repeated, angrily, ** You avp
worse than twenty foes, you poisonous fitiepd ! "
" Ah!- you wcm't believe tne then?'said Catfaerine. " You
tbink I speak from wicked selfislmess 1 "
" Fm certain you do, " retprted Isabella ; " and I sbudder at
your
, " Good ! " cried tbe otber. " Try for yourself, if that be yocur
spirit j I have done, and yield the argument to your saucy inso*
lence. "
i'And I must suffer for ber egotisin! " she sobbed, as Mrs,
Xiinton left the room. /'All, all is against me ; she has blighte4
my single consolation. But she uttered falsehoods, didn't she I
Mr. HeathcliC is not a fiend ; he has an honorable soul, and a
true one, or how could he remember her V
''Banish him from ydur thoughts. Miss, " I said. ^ He's a bird
of bad omen; no mate for you; Mrs. Linton spoke strongly^
^nd yet I can't contradict her. $he is better acquainted with
bis heart than I, or apy one besides i fuid she never would rep
resent him as ^orse than he is. Honest people don't hide theii:
deeds; How has he been living ] how has he g0t rich ? why is
he staying at Wuthering Heights — ^the house of a man whom he
abhors ? They say Mr. Earnshaw is worse and wop^e since he
came. They sit up all night together continually s and Hindley
has been boirowing money on his land ; and does nothing but
play and drink} I heard only a week ago; it was Joseph whp
told mfr— I met hini at GiiQm^rt < »^ "
*** Nelly,'he said, *we*s hae.a Orahnr's'qvest enah, at ahr
folks. One on'em's a'mostgettin hi§ finger cut off wi'banding
t'other froo'sticking hisseln loike a cawlf. That's maister, yah
knaw, ut's soa up uh going tub t'grand'si^es. He's noan feared
uh t'Bench uh judges, norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nor
Mathew, nor noan on'em, m^t he I He fair like's he langs tub
set his brazened face ageap'em 1 And yon honny lad Heath-
cliff, yah mind, he's a rare un 1 He can gim a laugh, as weel's
enybody at a raight divil's jest Does he niver say iiowt of his
fme living amang us, when he goes tub t'Grange I This is I'
way on't — ^up at sun-dahn ; dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
can'le lught till next day, at nooin^ — then t'fooi] gangs batining
un raving tub bis cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fin-
gers i'thur lugs for varry shaume ; un'th'knave, wid), he cam
cahnt his brass, un'ate, un'sleep, un'off tuh his neighbor's tub
gossip wi't'wife. I'course, he tells Dame Catherine hah hor
mther's goold runs intuh his pocket, and her father's son gallops
dahn t'broad road, while he flees afore tuh oppen t'pikes V
92 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.'
■ ■
Now, Miss Linton, Joseph is an old rascal, but no Har ; ancL, if
his account of Heatbcliff's conduct be true, you would never
think of desiring such a husband, would you V*
" You are leagued with the rest, Ellen ! " she replied. " I'll
hot listen to your slanders. What malevolence you must have
to wish to convince me that there is no happiness in the world-l "
Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself^
or persevered in nursing it perpetiiallv, I can not say ; she had
little time to reflect. The day after there was a justice-meeting
at the n^xt town ; my roaster was obliged to attend ; and Mr.
Heathcliff, aware of his absence, called rather earlier than
tisual.
Catherine and Isabella were sitting in the library, on hostile
terms, but silent. The latter alatmed at her recent indiscre-
tion, and the disclosure she had made of her secret feelings in
a transient fit of passion ; the former, on mature consideration,
really offended with her companion ; and, if she laughed again
at har pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her.
She did laugh as Ae saw Heathcliff pass the window. I was
sweeping the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on her
lips. Isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained
till the door opened, and it was too late to attempt an escape,
which she would gladly have done had it been practicable.
" Come in, that's right ! " exclaimed the mistress, gayly, pull-
ing a chair to the nre. ** Here are two people sadly in need of
a third to thaw the ice between them ; and y6u are the very
one we should both of us choose. HeathcHff, I'm proud to
show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you more than myself.
I expect you to feel flattered— nay, it's not Nelly ; don't look at
her ! My poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by mere
contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. It lies in
your own power to be Edgar's brother! No, no, Isabella, you
shan't run off*, " she continued, arresting, with feigned playful-
ness, the confounded girl who had risen indienantly.. " We
were quarreling like cats about you, Heathcliff; and I was
fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and admiration ; and,
moreover, I was informed that if I would but have the manners
to stand aside, my rival, as she will have heiself to be, would
shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send
my image into eternal oblivion ! "
** Catherine, " said Isabella, calling up her dignity, and dis-
daining to straggle fiom the tight grasp that held her. ** I'd
WUTBEBIN6HEIGHTS. 88
thank you to adhere to the truth, and not slander me, even in
joke! Mr. He^thclifF, be kind enough to bid this fnend,of
youi-s i*elease me-^— she forgets that you and I are not intimate
acquaintances, and what amuses her is painful to me beyond
expression. "
As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked
thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning
him, she turned, and whispered an earnest appeal for hberty to
her tormentor.
** By no means ! " cried Mrs. Linton in answer. " I won't be
named a dbg in^he manger again. You shall stay, now then !
Heathclifif, why don't you evince satisfaction at my pleasant
news 1 Isabella swears that the love Edgar has for me, is
nothing to that she^ enteitaind for you. I'm sure she paade some
speech of the kinc), did she not, Ellen] And she has fasted
ever since the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and
rage that I dispatched her out of your society, under the idea
of its being unacceptable.'^
" I think you belie her, " said Heathcliff, twisting his chair to
face them. " She wishes to be out of my society now,, at any
rate! " ^
And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might
do at a strange repulsive animal, a centipede from tlie Indies,
for instance, which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the
avei-sion it raises.
The poor thing couldn't bear that; she grew white and red
in rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the
strength of her small lingers to. loosen the firm clutch of Oathr
erine, and perceiving that, as fast as she raised one iing^r off her
arm, another closed down, and she could not remove the whole
together, she began to make use of her nails, and their sharpness
presently ornamented the detainer's with crescents of red.
" There's a tigress ! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting her free,
and shaking her hand with pain.''Begone, for God's sake,
and hide your vixqn face! How foolislrto reveal those talons
to hun. Can't you fancy the conclusions he'll draw % Look,
Heathpliff! they are instruments that will do execution — ^you
must beware pf your eyes. "
" I'd wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me, "
he answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her.
" But, what did you mean by teasing the creature in that man-
ner, Cathy 1 You were not speaking the truth, ^ere you] "
94 W UTH ER I N6 H EI6H T8.
" I assure you I was, " she returned. " She has been pining
for your sake several weeks ; and raving about you this mora-
ing, and pouring forth a deluge of abuse, becjause I represented
your failings in a plain light, for thfi purpose of mitigating her
adoration. But don't notice it fuither. I wished to punish her
sauciness, that's all. I like her too well,, my dear Heathcliff, to
let you absolutely seize and devour her up. "
" And I like her too ill to attempt it, " said he, " except in a
very ghoulish fashion. You'd hear of odd things, if I lived
alone with that mawkish, waxen face, the most ordinary would
be painting on its white the colors of the rainbow, and turning
the blue eyes black, every day or two ; they detestably resemble
Linton's. "
" Delectably, " observed Catherine. " They are dove^ eyes
—angel's ! "
" She'd her brother's heir, is she not 1 " .he asked, after a brief
silence.
" I should be sorry to think so, " returned his companion.
** Half-a-dozen nephews shall erase her title, please Heaven !
Abstract your mind from'the subject, at present-^-ydu are too
prone to covet your neighbor's ^oods : remember tku^ neighbor'^
goods are mine. " .
" If they were mine, they would be none the less that, " said
Heathcliff, " but though Isabella Linton may be silly, she is
scarcely mad ; and — in short we'll dismiss the nmtter as you
advise. "
From their tongues, they did dismiss it 7 and Catherine, prob*
ably, from her thoughts. The other, I felt certain, redalled it
often in the course of the evening ; I saw him smile €0 himself
— grin rather — ^and lapse into ominous musing Whenever Mrs.
Linton had occasion to be absent from the apartment.
I deteimined to watch his movements. My heart invariably
^eaved to the master's, in preference to Catherine's side ; with
reason, I imagined, for he was kind, and trustful, and honora-
ble : and she— she could not bfe called the opposite, yet she
seemed to allow herself such wide latitude that I had little faith
in her principles, and stfll less sympathy for her feelings. I
wanted something to happen which might have the effect of
freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Mr. Heath-
cliff, quietly„.leaving us as we had been prior to his advent.
His visits were a continual nightmare to me ; and, I suspected,
to my master ako. His abode at the Heights was an oppDes*
WUtHBElNO HEIGHTS. 95
Bion past explaining/ I felt that God had forsaken the stray
she^p there to its pwn wicked wanderings, and an evil heast
Srowled between it and the fold, waiting his time to spring and
estroy. ^
CHAPTER XI.
Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitudoi
I have got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go
see hMr all was at the farm ; I have persuaded my conscience
that it was a duty to warn'him how people talked regardin^^
his'ways; and then I have recollected his confirmed bad
habits, and hopeless of bepefiting him, have flinched from
re-entering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be
taken at my word.'
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a
journey td Gimmerton. It was about the period that my
narrative has reached — a bright, frosty afternoon ; the. ground
bare, and the road hard and dry.
I came to a stone where the highway hranches off on to the
moor at your left hand y a rpugh sand-pillar, with the letters
W. H. cut on its north side, on the east G-., and on the south-
•west T. G. It serves as guide-post to the Grange, aud Heights,
and village.
The sun shone yellow on its gray head^ reminding me of
summer; and 1 can not say why, but all at once a gush of child's
sensations flowed into my heart. Hindiey and I held it a
fevorite spot twenty years before.
I gazed long at the weather-worn block ; and, stooping
down, perceived a hole near the bottom still full of snail-shells
and pebbles, which we were fond of storing there with more
perishable things — and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I
beheld my early playmate seated on the withered tuif ; his
dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand scooping
out the earth with a piece of slate.
" Poor Hindiey ! " I exclaimed involuntarily.
I startedr— my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary
belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight into
96 WUTHERINOB£I6HTfl.
mine ! It vanished in a twinkling ; but immediately I felt an
irresistible yeaiiiing to be at the Heights. Superstition urged
me to comply with this impulse — supposing he should be dead !
I thought — or should die soon ! — supposing it were a fiign of
death !
The nearer I got to the house the more agitated I grew :
and on catching sight of it I trembled ^n every limb. The
apparition had outstripped me ; it stood looking through the
gate. That was my first idea on observing an elf-locked,
brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars.
Further reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my Hare-
ton, not altered greatly since I left him, ten months since.
''God bless thee, darling !''I cried, forgetting instantaneously
my foolish fears. " Ha^reton, it*a Nelly-^Nelly, thy nut^.*'
He retreated out of arm's length, and picked up a large
flint.
" I am come to see thy father, Hareton, " I added, guessing
from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all,
was not recognized as one with me.
He raised his missile to hurl it ; I commenced a soothing
speech, but could not stay his hand. The stone struck my bon-
net, and then ensued fi'om the stammering lips of the little fel-
low a string of curses, which, whether he comprehended them
or not, were delivered ^ith practiced emphasis, and distorted
his baby features into a shocking expression of malignity.
You may be certjtin this grieved more than angered me.
Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket, and offered it to
propitiate him.
He hesitated, and then (matched it from my hold, as if ho
fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoint him.
I showed another, keeping it out of his reach.
" Who has taught you those, fine words, my bairn, " I in-
quired. " The curate 1 "
" Damn the curate and thee ! Gie me that, " he replied.
** Tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it»!'
said I. " Who's your master ] "
" Devil daddy, " was his answer.
" And what do you learn from daddy 1 " I continued.
He jumped at the fruit ; I raised it higher. " What does he
teach you ] " I asked.
" Naught, " said he, " but to k6ep out of his gait. Daddy
can not bide me, because I swear at him. "
W 17 r BEX IN 6. HEIGHTS. 07
; r^-^ . { — . _
" Ab! and the devil teaches you .to swear at daddy? " I
observed.
** Ay— nay/* he drawled.
" Whothenr ^ -
" Heathcliff. "
I asked if he liked Mr. Heathcliff 1 . :
" Aye 1 " he answered again.
Desinng to have his reasons for liking him, I could only
gather the sentences. . ** I known't-^he pays dad back what ha
gies to me-— he curses daddy for cursing me— he says I mun do
as I will/'
" And the curate does not teach you ^ to read and write,
then V I pursued. •
No ; I was told the curate should have bis ■ ■ ■ teeth dashed
down his throat, if he stepped over the threshold- Heath-
cliff had promised that*
I put the orange in his hand ; and bade him tell his father
that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to i^eak with
him, by the garden gate.
He went up^ the walk, aod entered (he house ; but instead
of Hindley, Heathcliff appeared on the door stones, and I turned
directly and ran down the road as hard as ever I could race,
making ho, halt tilM gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared
as if I had raised a goblin.
This is not much connected with Miss Isabella's affair, except
that it urged me to resolve, further, on mounting ^gilant guard
and doing my utmost to check the spread ^f such bad influence
at the Grange, even though I should wake a domestic storm by
thwarting Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
The next time Hea^cHff came, -my young ladychanced to be
feeding some pigeons ie the court. She had never spoken a word
to her sister-in-law for thi^ee days ; but she had likewise, dropped
her fretful complaining, and we found it a great comfort.
Heathcliff had not the habit of bestowing a single unneces-
eary civility on Miss Linton, i knew. . Now, as soon as he be-
held her, his first precaution wa3 to take a sweeping survey of
the house-front I was standing by the kitchen window, but I
drew out of sight. He then stepped across the pavement to
her, and said something ; she seemed embarrassed, and desirous
of getting away ; to prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm :
she averted her fece; he apparently put some^ question which
ahe had.no mind to answer. Tbete was anoAer rapid- glance
E
98 wuTHsmiNo BKiaHTa.
•t the honse, an < ] suppoeing himself uiiseeiiy tlie 8Coiin < ]rel had
the impudence lb embrace her.
" Judas ! Traitor ! " I ejaculated ; ** yoa are a hypocrite too,
are you t A deliberate deceiver. "
" Who is, Nelly 1 " said Catherine's voice at my elbow — ^I had
been over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her en-
trance.
** Your worthless iriend ! " I aDSwered wamdy, ^'the sneaking
rascal yonder— ah, he has caught a glimpse of us-^he is coming
in ! I wonder will he have the art to find a plausible excuse^
for making love to Miss, when he told you he hated her V*
Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself free, and run into the
garden ; and a minute after, HeathclifiT opened the door.
I couldn't withhold giving some loose to my indignation ; but
Catherine angpnly insisted on silence, and threatened to order
me out of the kitchen, if I dared be bo presumptuoua as to put
in my insolent tongue.
" To hear you, people might think you were the mistress ! "
she cried. " You want setting down in your right place!
Heath cliff, what are you about, rising this stir ? 1 aaid you
must let Isabella alone ! I heg you will, unless you are tired
of being received here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts
against you 1 "
'* God forbid that he should try ! " answered the black villain
—I detested him just then« " God keep him meek and patient!
Every day I grow madder after sending him to heaven ! "
" Hush ! " said Catherine shutting the inner door. " Don't
vex me. Why have you disregarded my request! Did she
come across you on purpose V*
•* What is it to you ]** he growled, I have a right to kiss her,
if she chooses, and you have no right to object — Fm not ytmr
husband ; you needn't be jealqus of me ! "
" I'm not jealous of you ; replied the mistress ; " I'm jealous
for you. clear your face, you shan't. scowl at me ! If you like
Isabella, you shall marry her. But, do you like her 1 Tell the
tiutb, Heathcliff. There, you won't tinswer. I'm certain you
don't. "
" And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying that
man 1 " I inquired.
" Mr. Linton should apprave, " returned my lady decisively.
" He might spare himself the trouble, " said HdathcHif, " I
could do as well without bis approbation; waAp m to you^
Catherine, I nave a mind ta speak a few words now, while we
are at it-^I want you to be aware that I ^now you have treated
me infemaHy-^infemally V Do you hear 1 And, if you flatter
r > urself that I don't perceive it you are a fool-^and if you think
can be consoled by sweet words you are an idiot— -and if you
fency I'll .suffei unrevenged, 1*11 convince you of the contrary in
a very little while i Meantitne, thank yoii tor telling me your
sister-inF-law's secret I swear 1*11 ihsdce the most of it, and
stand you aside ! " /
** What new phase of his character is this 1 " exclaimed Mrs,
Linton, in amazement. - " I've ti*eated you infemally^-^and
you'll take revenge ! How will you take it, ungrateful brute 1
How have I treated you infernally 1 "
" I seek no revenge on you,*'replied Heathclifi* less vehement •
If'*'That's not the plan. The tyrant grinds down hh slaves
and they don't turn a^inst him, they prush those beneath them.
You are weleome to torture me to death for your amusement ;
only allow ine to amuse myself a little in the same- style. And
refrain from insult as much as you are able. Having leveled
my palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire your
own charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you
really wished me to inairy Isabella^ I'd cut my throat. "
** Oh the evil is that I Rmnot jealous, is it i " cried Catherine.
" Well, I won't repeat my offer of a wife. It is as bad as
offering Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting
misery. You prove it. Edgar is restored from the ill-temper
he gave way to at your coming; I begin to be secure and
tranquil ; and you, restless- to know us at pekce, appear re-
solved on excititig a quaixel. Quarrel with Edgar if you
please, fieathclifl', and deceive his sister ; you'll hit on exactly
the most efficient method of revenging youreelf on me. " -
The conversatioti ceased; Mrs. Linton sat down by the fire,
flushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her was growing
intractable: she could neit)ier lay norcohti-ol it. He stood on
the hearth) with folded arms, brooding on his evil thoughts; and
in this position I left them, to seek the'master who was w6nder-
ing what kept Catherine below so long.
" Ellen, " said he, when I entered, " liave you seen your mis-
tress] "
" Yes, she's in the kitchen, sir/* I answercjd. *'She^s sadly
put out by Mr. Hoathcliff's behavior t and, indeed, I do think
It's time to arrange bis visits on another ibptiiig. There's harm

100 WUTBBKIHO QSIOBTS.
ia beiog too soft, and now it's come to tbis^^. " And I related
the scene ia the court, and, as Bear as I dared, the whole suh-
seqaent dispute. ^ I fancied it could not be yery prejudicial to
Mrs. Linton, unless she made it so afterward, by asa^uming the
defensiye for her guest.
Edgar Linton had difficulty in hearing me to the close. His
first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of blame.
" This is insufferable I " he exclaimed. " It is disgrac^ul that
she should own him ibr a fiieud, and force his company ob me I
Call me two men out of the hall, Ellen. Gathexine shall linger
no longer to argue with the low ruffian — I have humored her
enough. "
He descended, and, bidding the servants wait in the passage,
went, followed by me, to the kitchen. Its occupants had ra-
coromenced their angry discussion ; Mrs. Linton, at least, was
scolding with renewed vigor; Heathcliff had m^vedto the
window, and hung his head, apparently somewhat, cowed by
her violent rating. .
He saw the master first, and made a hasty, motion that she
should be silent; which she obeyed abruptly, en discovering
the reason < ^his intimation.
'* How is this ] " said Linton, addiessing her ,^''what notion,
of propriety nmst you have to remain here, aft^r the language
which has been held to, you by that blackguard 1 . I suppoBO
because it is hb ordinary talk you think nolJbing of it ; you are
habituated to his baseness^-and, perhaps, imagine I can get used
to it too ! "
" Have you been listening at the door, Edgar 1 " asked the
mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her bus-,
band, implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation.
Heathcliff, who had ru^ed his eyes at the former speech,,
gave a sneering laugh at the lattei% on/purpose, it seemed, to
draw Mr. Linton's attention to him.
Hck succeeded; but Edgar did not mean to entertain hii^
with any high flights of passion.
'*I have been so far ft)rbearing with you, sir, " he said,
quietly ; " not that I was ignorant of your miserable, degradeci
character, but I felt you were only partly responsible for that;
and Catherine, wishing to keep up your acquaintance, I ac-
quiesced — ^foolishly. Your presence is a moral poison that
would contaminate the most virtuo.us; for that causey and to
prevent worse consequences, I. shall dewy you h^^after admis-.
WUTSERINO H1SIGHT9. 101
sieA into this house, and give nc^ice now that 1 require your
instant ^ departure. Three minuti^s'd^ay will render it in-
voluntary and ignominious. "
Heathcliff measured the'height and breadth of the speaker
with an eye full of derision.
" Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull ! " he said.
" It IS in danger of splitting its fikull against my knuckles. By
God, Mr. Linton, I'm xxprtally sorry that you are not worth
knocking down !'^
My master glanced toward the passage, and signed me to
fetch the men — ^he had no intention of hazarding a personal
encounter.
I obeyed the hint; but- Mrs.. Linton suspecting something,
followed, and when I attempted to caU them, she pulled me
back, -slammed the door to, and locked it.
" Fair means T'she said, in answer to her husband's look
-of angry surprif^e. " If you have not the courage to attack him,
make an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will cor-
rect you of feigning morQ valor than you possess. No, 1*11
swallow the key before you shall get it! I'm delightfully
rewarded for my kindness to each ! After constant indulgence
of one's weak nature, . and the other's bad one, I earn, for
thanks^ two jsarhples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity !
Edgar,. I was defending you and. yours; .atid I wish Heath-
clilf may flog you sick, for daring to think an evil thought
of me ! "
. It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that
effect on the master. He tried to wrest the key from
Catherine's gra^p; and for safety she flung it into the hottest
part of the fire i whereupon^ Mr. JSdgar was taken with a
nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.
For his life he could not avert that access of emotion ; mingled
anguish and humiliation overcaine him completely. He leaned
on the back of a chair, and covered his face.
** Oh ! Heavens ! In old days this would win you knight-i
hood! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton. " We are vaiiquished ! Heath-
cliff would as soon lift a finger at you as the king would march
his army against a colony of mice. Cheer up, you ^han'^t be
hurt ! Your type is wot a lamb, it's a sucking leveret. "
" I wish you joy of the -mi Ik- blooded coward, Cathy! " said
her friend. " T compliment you on your taste : and that is the
slavering, shivering thing you preferred to roe! I would not
102 WUTBB & INO HEIGHTS.
"'': >
strike him with my fist, but I'd kick him with my foot, atiJ ex-
perience considerable satisfaction. Is he weeping, or is he going
to faint for fear 1 "
The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton
rested a push. He'd better have kept his distance: my master
quickly sprang erect, and struck himfiill on the throat a blow that
would have leveled a slighter man.
It took his breath for a minute ; aiid, while he choked, Mr.
Linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from
thence to the front entrance.
** There ! you've done with coming here, " cried Catherine:
" Get away, now — ^he'll return with a brace of pistols, and half-
a-dozen assistants. If he did overhear us, of course, he'd neyer
forgive you. You've played me an ill turn, HeathclifTI- But
go — make haste ! I'd rather see Ed^ar at bay than you. "
" Do you suppose I'm going wiUi that blow burning. in roy
gullet 1 " he thundered. " By Hell, no! I'll crush his ribs in
like a rotten hazle-nut before I cross the threshold ! If I don't
floor him now, I shall murder him sometime ; so, as you value
his existence, let me get at him f
" He is not coming, " I interposed, framing a bit of a lie.
" There's the coachman, and the two gardeners;, you'll surely
not wait to be thrust into the road by them ! Each has a blud-
geon, and master will, very likely, be watching froih the parlor
windows to see that they fulfil his orders. "
The gardeners and coachman were there, but Linton was with
them. They had already entered the court. H^athcliff, on
second thoughts, resolved to avoid a straggle against three
underlings; he seized the poker, smashed the lock from the
inner door, and made his escape as they tramped in.
Mrs. Linton, who was very much excited, bid me accompany
her up stairs. She did not know liiy share in contributing to the
disturbance, and I was anxious to keep her in ignorance.
" I'm nearly distracted, Nelly ! " she exclaimed, throwing her-
self on the sofa. " A thousand smiths'hammers are beating in
my hea^ \ Tell Isabella to shun me — this uproar is owing to
her; and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at
present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to Edgar, if you see
him again to-night, that I'm in danger of being seriously ill — I
wish it may prove true. He has startled and distressed me
shockingly I I want to fiighten him. Besides, he might come
and begrin a string of abuse or complainings ; . I'm certain I
w u T H » ri 1^ a a B I € p T ». 108
Bhould recriminate, and'God knows where we should end !
Wilf'you do so, my good Nelly ? You aie aware that I am no
way blaraable in thia matter: What possessed bim to turn lis-
tener? HeathcHfTs talk was outrageous after you left us ; but
I could soon have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant
nothing. Now, all is dashed wrong by the fool's craving to hear
evil of self, that haunts some people like a demon 1 Had Edgar
never gathered our conversation, he would nevet have Wen the
worse for it. Really, when he opened on me in that unreason-
able tone of displeasure, after I had scolded Heatbcliff* till I was
hoftise for Am, I did not cire;, hai-dly, what ihey did to " each
other, especially as I felt that, however the scene closed, we
should all be driven asunder, ft)r nobody knows how long!
Well, if I can not keep Heathcliff for my friend, if Edgar will
be mean and jealous, I'll try to break their hearts by breaking
my own. That will be a prompt way .of finisliing all, when I
am pushed to extremity ! . But it's a deed to be reserved for a
forlorn hope — I'd not take Linton by surprise with it. To this
point he has teen discreet in dreading to provoke me ; you must
-represent the peril of quitting that policy ; and remind hira of
my passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy. I wish
you could dismiss/that apathy out of your countenance, and look
rather more anxious about me I "
The stolidity with which 1 received these instructions was, no
doubt, rather exasperating ; for they were delivered in perfect
sincerity ; but I believed a person who could plan the tuming of
ber fits of passion to account beforehand, might, by exeititig her
will, manage to feontrol herself tolerably, even while under their
influence ; and I did not wish to " frighten " her husband, as she
said, and multiply bis annoyances for the purpose of seiTing her
selfishness. -
Therefore I said nothing when J met the nmster coming to-
ward the parlor ; but I took the liberty of turning back to listen
whether they would resume their quarrel together.
He began to speak first.
" Remain where you are, Catherine, " he said, without any
anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. " I
shall not stay. I am neither come to wrangle, nor be reconciled :
but I wish just to learn whether, after this evening's events, you
intend to continue your intimacy with — "
" Oh, for mercy's sake, " interrupted the mistress, stamping
her foot, " for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it nowl
104 WUTHERINO HKIGHTS.
Your cold blood can not be worked into a fever — ^your veins
are full of ice-v^ater — but mine ai:e boiling ; and th« sight of such
chillness makes them dance.*'
" To get rid of me — answer my question, " persevered Mr.
Linton. " You must answer it ; and that violence does not
alarm me. I have found that you cati be as stoical as any one
when you please. Will you give up Htfathcliff hereaflm*, or
will you give up me 1 It is impossible for you to be my friend
and his at the same time, and I absolutely require to know which
you choose. "
" I require to be let alone 1 " exclaimed Catherine, furiously.
" I demand it I Don't you see I can scarcely stand 1 Edgar,
you — you leave me i " -
She rung the bell till it broke with a twang : I entered leisure^
ly. It was enough to tiy the temper of a saint, such senseless,
wicked rages ! , There she lay, aashing her Head against the
arm of the sofa and gi-inding her teeth, so, that you might fancy
she would crush them to splinters !
Mr; Linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and
fear. He told me to fetch some water. She had no breath for
speaking.
I brought a glassful, and, as she would not drink, I sprinkled
it on her face. In a few seconds she stretched hwself out stiff,
and turned up her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blauched and
livid, assumed the aspect of death.
Linton looked terrified.
" There is nothing in the world the matter, " I whispered. I
did not want him to yield, thoug^h I could not help being afraid
in ray heart. .
" She has blood on her lips ! " he said, shuddering.
" Never mind ! " I answered, tartly; and I told him how she
had resolved, previous- to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of
frenzy. -
I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she heard me, for
she started up — her hair flying over her shoulders, her eyes
flashing, the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preter-
naturally. I made up my mind for broken bones at least ; but
she only glared about her for an instant, and then rushed from
the room.
The master directed me to follow; I did, to her chamber:
door; she hindered me from going farther by securing it against
me.
WUT BERING HEIGHTS. lOS
As she never -offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I
went to ask whether she would have some carried up.
. •* No ! " she. replied, peremptorily. .
The same question was repeated at dinner and tea, and again
on the morrow afier, and received the same answer.
Mr. Linton, on his part, spent his time in the library, and did
not inquire concerning his, wife's occupations. Isabella and he
had had an hour's interview, during which he tried to elicit from
her some sentiment of proper hon-or for Heathcliff's advances }
but he could make nothing of her evasive replies, and was obliged
to .close the examination unsatisfactorily, adding, however, a
solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage that
worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship be-
twefeii herself and him;
CHAPTER XIT. .
While Miss Linton mopejd about the park and garden, always
silent, and almost always in tears, and her brother shut himself
up among books that he never opened^ wearying, I guessed, with
a oontinual vague expectation that Catherine, repenting her con-
duct, would come of her own accord to ask pardon and seek a
reconciliation — and she fasted pertinaciously, under the idea,
ptobably, that at every meal Edgar was ready to choke for her
absence, aiid pride'^lone held him from running to cast himself
at her feet — I yirent about my household duties, convinced that
the Grange, bad but one sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged
in my body.
I wasted no condolences on Miss, nor any expostulations on
my misti-ess, nor did I pay attention to the sighs of my master,
who yearned to hear his lady's name, since he might not hear
her voice.
I detemiined they should come about as they pleased for me ;
and though it was a tiresbmely slow process, I began to rejoice
at length in a faint dawn of its progress, as I thought at first.
Mrs. Linton on the third day unbarred her door, and having
finished the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired a re-
newed supply and a basin of gruel, for she believed she was
dying. That I set down as a speeck meaht for Edgar's cars. I
E*
106 WUTHEKINO HEIGHTS.
believed no such thing ; so I kept it to myself, and brought her
some t«a and diy toast.
She ate and drank eagerly ; and sank hack on her pillow,
again clenchifig her hands and groaning.
" Oh, I will die, " she exclaimed^ " since no one cares any thing
about me. I wish I had not taken that. "
Then a good while after I heard her murmnr,
" No, ini not die^— he'd be glad — ^he does not love- me at all
— he would never miss roe ! "
" Did you want any thing, ma'am 1 " I inquired, still pt^-
serving my external composure, in spite of her ghastly counts
nance, and strange, exaggerated manner.
" What is that apathetic being doing 1 " she demanded, push*
ing the thick entangled locks from her wasted face. " Had he
fallen into a lethargy, x)r is he dead ? "
" Neither, " replied I ; " if you mean Mn Linton. He's toler-
ably well, I think, though his studies occupy him rather more
than they ought ; he is continually among his books, since he
has no other society. "
I should not have spoken so, if I had. known her true con-
ditioi), but I could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part
of her disorder.
" Among his books ! " she cried, confounded. " And I dying !
I on the brink of the grave 1 My God ! does he know how
I'm altered 1 " continued she, staring at her reflection in a mir*
ror, hanging against the opposite wall. " Is that Catherine
Linton] He imagines'me in a pec-^in play, perhaps. Can
not you inform him that it la frightful earnest T Nelly, if it bo
not too late, as sooii as I learn how he feels, I'll choose between
these two : either to starve, at once— -that would be no punish-
ment unless he had a heart — or to recover and leave the coun-
try. Are you speaking the truth about him now ] Take care.
Is he actually so utterly indifferent for my life ? "
" Why, ma'am, " I answered, " the master has no idea of
your being deranged ; and, of course, he does not fear that you
will let yourself die of hunger. "
" You think not ] Can not you tell him I will V she return-
ed ; " persuade him — speak of your own mind — say you are
certain I will ! "
'* No, you forget, Mrs. Linton, " I suggested, " that you have
eaten some fodd with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you
will perceive its good effects. "
W0THEft]N0 .KEIOHTa. 107
*'If I were Cfnly sure it woold kill him, " she interruptedly
" I*d kill myself directly 1 These three awful nights, Tve never
closed my lids— and oh, I've-been tormented! I've. been haunt-
ed, Nelly! But I begin to, fancy you don't like me. How
strange! I thought, though every body hated and despised
each other, they could not avoid loving me — -and they have all
turned to enemies in a few hours. Tket^ have, I'm positive*
the people here. How dreary to meet death, surrounded by
their cold faces ! Isabella^ terrified and repelled, a£i*aid to en-
ter the room, it would be so dreadful to watch Catherine go.
And Edgar standing solemnly by to see it over; then offering
prayers 4 > f thanks to God for restoring peace to his house, and
going back to his books / What, in .the name of all that feels,
has he to do with bookSf when I am dying 1 "
She could not bear the notion which I had put into her head
of Mr. Linton's philosophical resignation. Tossing about, she
increased her feverish bewilderment to madness, %nd tore the
pillow with her teeth ; then, raising herself up all burning, de-
sired that I would open the window. We were in the middle
of winter, the wind blew strong from the northeast, and I oh-
jected.
Both the expressions flitting over her face, and the changes
of her moods, began to alarm tne tenibly ; and brought to my
recollection her former illness^ and the doctor's injunction that
she should not be crossed.
A minute previously she was violent ; now, supported on one
arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey her, she seemed to find
chikiish diversion- in palling the feathers from the rents she had
just jnade^ a;nd ranging theni on the sheet according to their
different species : her mind had strayed to other associations.
** That's a turkey's, " she mui*mured to herself; " and this is
a wild-duck's; and this is a pigeon's. Ah^ they put pigeons'
feathers in the pillpws — no wonder I couldn't die ! Let me
take care to throw it on the ilooi* wh«n I lie down. And here
is a moor-cock's; and this — ^I should know it among a thousand
-p— it's a lapwing'si. Bonny; bird ! wheeling .over our heads in
the middle of the moor. It wanted to get to its nest, for the
clouds touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. This feather
was pieked up from the heath, the bird was not shot — we saw
its nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. Heathcliff set a
trap over it, and the old ones dare not come. I made hira
pronuse he'd i > ever «hoot a lapwing after that, and he didn't.
106 WCTHEKIH6 BEISBT8.
Yes, here are more ! Did he shoot my lapwings, Nelly t Are
they red, any of them t Let me look.''
" Give over with that baby-work ! " I intermpled, dragging
the pillow away, and turning the holes toward the mattresSy for
she was removing its contents by handfals. " Lie down and
shut your eyes, you're wandering. There's a mess ! The down
is flying about like snow ! "
I went here and there collecting it.
" I see in you, Nelly, " she continued, dreamily, *'an aged
woman — you have gray hair and bent shoulders. This bed is
the fairy cave under Penistone Crag, and you are gathering elf-
bolts to hurt our heifers ; pretending, while I am near, that they
are only locks of wooL That's what you'll come to fifty yean
hence ; I know you are not so now. I'm not wandering, you're
mistaken, or else I should believe you really were that withered
hag, and I should think I was under Penistone Crag; and I'm
conscious it's night, and there are two candles on the table,
making the black press shine like jet. "
" The black press ? where is that ? " I asked. " You are talk-
ing in your sleep ! "
" It's against the wall, as it always is, " she replied. " It
does appear odd — ^I see a facfe in it ! "
" There is no press in the room, and never was, " said I, re-
suming my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch
her.
" Don't you see that face ? " she inquired, gazing earnestly at
the mirror.
And, say what 1 could, I was incapable of making her com-
prehend it to be her own ; so I rose and covered it with a
shawl.
" It's behind there still !'^ she pursued, anxiotisly. " And it
stirred. Who is it 1 I hope it will not come out when you are
gone ! Oh, Nelly, the room is haunted 1 I'm a & aid of being
alone! "
I took her hand in minfs, and bid her be composed, for a suo^
cession of shudders convulsed her franle, and she would keep
straining her gaze toward the glass.
" There's nobody here, " I insisted, " It was yourself, Mrs.
Linton ; you knew it a while since. "
" Myself! " she gasped, " and the clock is striking twelve I
It's true, then ; that's dreadful ! "
Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her
•W U^ H BftlKTO HEIGHT B. 100
eyes. I attempted to steal- to tbe door with an xntention of
calling her husband', but I was summoned back by a piercing
shriek. The shawl had dropped from the irame.
" Why, what is the matter 1 " cried I, ** Who is coward now 1
Wake up ! That is the ^lass — ^the mirror, Mrs. Linton ; and
you see yourself in it, and there am I, too, by your side. "
Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the horror
gradually passed from her countenance ; its paleness gave place,
to a glow of shame. - ,
** Oh, dear ! I thought I was at home, " she sighed. " I thought
I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Heights. Because I*m
v^eak, my brain got confused, and'I screamed unconsciously.
Don't say any thing, but stay with me. I dread sleeping ; my
dreams appall me. " .
" A sbutid sleep would do you good, ma'am, " I answered;
" and I hope this suffering will prevent your trying starving
again. "
" Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house ! " she
went on bitterly, wringing her -hands. " And that wind sound-
ing in the firs by the lattice. Do let me feel it*— it comes
straight down the^ moor— do let me have one breath ! "
To pacify her, I held the casement ajar a few seconds. A
cold blast rushed through ; I closed it, and returned to my post.
She lay still now, her face bathed in tears. Exhaustion of
body had entirely subdued her spirit ; our fiery Catherine was
no better than a wailing child t -
" How long ia it since I shut myself in here? " she asked,
suddenly rowing.
" It was Monday etening, " - I replied, " and this. Is Thursday
night, or rather Friday morning, at present; "
" What ! of the same week ] " she exclaimed. •* Only that
brief time ] " >
" Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-tem-
per, " observed I.
" Welf, it seems a weary number of hours, " she muttered,
doubtfully ; " it must be more— I remember being in the parlor
after they had quarreled ;, and Edgar being cruelly provoking,
and me running into this room desperate. As soon as ever I
had barred the door, utter blackness overwhelmed me, and I
fell on the floor. I couldn't explain to Edgar how certain I felt
of having a fit, or going raging mad, if he persisted in teasing
me ! I^ had no command of tongue or brain, and he did not
110 WUTBERINO H EIGHTS.
guesB my agony, perhaps ; it barely left me se^nse to try to
escape from him and his voice. Before I recovered sufEcieotly
to see and he^, it began to be dawn ; and, Nelly, I'll tell you
what I thought, and what has kept recunang aba recurring till
I feared for my reason : I thought, as I lay there with jfny
head against that table leg» and my eyes dimly discerning the
gray square pf the window, that I was inclosed in the oak-
paneled bed at home ; and my. heart ached \Vith some great
grief which, just waking, I could not recollect. I pondered
and worried myself to discover what it could be; and, roost
strangely, the whol & last seven years of pay life grew a blanji !
I did not recall that they had been at alL I was a child; my
father was just buried, and my misery arose from the sepai'ation
that Hindley had ordered between me and HeatKcliff. I was^
laid alone, for the first time^ and rousing from a dismal doze
after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to pUsh the panels
aside ; it struck the table-top ! I swept it along the carpet, and
then memory burst in — my late anguish was swallowed in a
paroxysm of despair. J cart not say why I felt so wildly wretch*
ed ; it must have been temporary derangement,- for there is
scarcely cause. But, supposing, at twelve years old, I had. been
wrjBnched from the Heights, and every early association, and
xny all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, and been convert*^
ed at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the lady of Xhrushcross Grange,
and the wife of a stranger, an exile and outcast thencefoith
from what had been my world— you may fancy a glimpse of
the abyss where I groveled ! Shake your head as you will,
Nelly, you have helped to unsettle me !'You should have
spoken to Edgar, indeed you should, and compelled . him to
leave me quiet. Oh, I'm burning ! I wish'I were out of doore,
I wish I were a ^rl again, half savage, and hardy, and free, and
laughing at injuries, not maddening under them ! Why am I
80 changed 1 why does my blood rush into a h^ll of tumult at a
few words ] I'm sure I should be myself were I once among
the heather, on those hills. Open the window again wide, fasten
it open ! Quick ! why don't you move ] " , .
^* Because I won't give you your death of cold, " . I an-;
swered.
" You won't give me a chance of life, you mean, " she said
sullenly. " However, I'm not helpless yet, I'll open it myself. "
And sliding from the bed .before I could hinder her, she
crossed the roon^, walking very uncertainly, direw it back, and
WUTHERING B JS I O H T 0. Ill
bent out, careless of the frosty air, that cut about her shoulders
as keen as a knife.
I entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire. But
I soon found her ddirioas strength much surpassed mine (she
WHS deliiioiis I became convinced by her subsequent actions
and ravings).
There was no moon, and every thing beneath lay in misty
darkness ; not a light gleamed from any house, far or near ;'all
had been extinguished long ago; and those at Wuthering Heights
were never visible — still she asserted she caught their shining.
** Look ! " she cried eagerly, ** that's my room, with the
candle in it, and the trees swaying before it — and the other
candle is in Joseph's garret — Joseph sits up late, doesn't he 1
He's, waiting till I come home thatt he may lock the gate : well,
he'll wait a while yet. It's/ a rough journey, and a sad heart
to travel it ; and we must pass by^ Gimmerton Kirk, to go that
journey ! We've braved its ghosts often together, and dared
each other to stand among the graves, and ask them to come.
But Heathqliff, if I dare you now, will you venture 1 If you
do, I'll keep you. I'll not lie there by myself; they may bury
me twelve feet deep, and throw the church down over me ; but
I won't rest till you are with me — I never will ! " ^
She paused, and resumed with a strange smile, " He's con* >
sidering — ^he'd rather I'd come to'him 1 Find a way, then!
not through that kirkyard. You are slow ! Be content, you
always followed me I " .
Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was plan-
ning how I could reach something to. wrap about her, without
quitting my hold of herself, for I cpuld not trust her alone by
the gaping lattice ; when to my consternation, I heard the
rattle of the door-handle, and Mr. Linton entered. He had
only then come from the library ; and, in passing through the
lobby, had noticed our talking, and been attracted by curi < jsity
or fear to examine what it signified, at that late hour.
" Oh, sir I " I cried, checking the exclamation risen to his
lips at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of
the chamber, " my poor mistress is ill, and she quite maetters
me ; I can not manage her at all ; pray, come and persuade
her to go to bed. Forget your anger,- for she's hard to guide
any w^ay but her own. "
" Catherine ilH " he said, hastening to us. " Shut the win-
dow, Ellen ! Catherine ! why— " ^'
112 WUTHcERING H^EIGHTS.
He was silent; the haggardness of Mrs. Linton's appearance
smote hira speechless, and he could only glance, from her to
me in horrified astonishment. - ^
" She's been fretting her6/* I continued, " and eating scarcely
any thing, and n«ver complaining; she would admit none of
us till this evening,^ and so we couldn't inform you of her state,
as we were- not aware of it ourselves — but it is nothing. "'
I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master
frowned. " It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean 1 " he Said sternly.
" You shall account more clearly for keeping me ignorant of
this! " And he took his wife in his arms,. and looked at her
with anguish. -
At firet she gave him no .glance of recognition-— be was
invisible to her abstracted gaze. The delirium was not fixed,
howevei- ; having, weaned her eyes from contemplating the
outer dai'kness, by degrees she centered her attention on him,
and discovered who it was that held her.'- .
" Ah ! you are come, are you, Edgar Linton V^ she said, with
angfy animation. " You are one of those things that are ever
found wben least wanted, and when you are wanted, never! I
suppose, we shall haVe plenty of lamentations, now^ — I see we
shall^— but they can't keep me from my narrow home out yon-
der — my resting place where I'm bound before spring is over !
There it is, not among the Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof^
but in the open: air with a headstone, and you may please your-
self, whether you go to them or come to me !**
" Catherine, what have you done. 1 " commenced the master.
" Am I nothing to you, any more ] Do you love that wretch^
Heath— "
" Hush ! " cried Mrs. Linton. " Hush, this moment ! You
mention that name, and I end the matter instantly by a spring
from the window! What you touch at present, you may have ;
but my soul will be on that hill-top before you lay hands on me
again. I don't want you, Edgar ; I'm past wanting you. Re-
turn to your books ; I'm glad you possess a consolation, for all
you had in me is gone. " .
" Her mind wanders, sir, " I interposed. " She has been
talking nonsense the whole evening; but let her have quiet
and proper attendance, and she'll rally. Hereafter, we must
be cautious how we vex her.''
" I desire no further advice from you, " answered Mr. Linton.
" You knew your mistress's nature, and you encouraged me u
WUTHKRING HBI6BT8; 119
.'.''s .'■ .''"'
liars^BS her. And •]it > t to giye me one bint of how she has been
these three days ! It was heartless ! laonths of sickness could
not cause such a change S " .
I began to defend myself, .thinking it too bad to be blamed
far another's wicked waywardness !
" I knew Mrs^ Linton's nature to be headstrong apd doraineer-
ingi* cried I ; " but I didn't know that you wished to foster her
fierce temper I I did not know that, to humor her, I should wink
at Mr, Heathclifil Iperformed the duty of a fidthful servant in
telling you, and I have got a faithful aervant's wages 1 Well,
^ it will teach me^o be careful next time. Next time you may
gather intelligence for yourself ?'*
" The next time you bring a tale to me, you shall quit my
service, Ellen Dean, " he replied.
VYoy'd rather hear n'othing ^bout it, I suppose, then,
Mr. Linton 1 " said L " Heathcliff has your permission to
come a coi^rting. to Miss, and to drc^ in at every oppoitunity
your absence oSers, on purpose to poisoln the mistress against
you.r
Confused as Catherine was, her wits were alert at applying
our conversation.
<'Ah ! I^elly has played traitor^ " she exclaiibed, passionately,
" Nelly is my hidden enemy: — you witch ! So you dp seek elf-
bolts to hurts us ! Let me go, and I'll make her rue ! I'll make
her howl a racautation ! " . ,
A maniac's fury kindled under her brows ; she struggled
desperately to disengage herself from Linton's arms»- I felt no
inclination to tarry the event; and resolving to seek medical
aid on my own responsibility, I quitted the chamber.
. In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a
bridle hook is diiven into the wfi^ll, I saw something white
moved irregulai*ly, evidently by another agent than the wind.
Notwithstanding my hurry, I staid to examine it, lest ever after
I should have the conviction impressed on my imagination that
it was a creature of the other world.
My surprise and perplexity were great to discover, by touch
more than vision. Miss Isabella's springer^ Fanny, suspended
to a handkerchief, and neai*ly at its last gasp.
I, quickly released the animal, and lifted it into the garden.
I had seen.it fellow its mistress up-stairs, when she went to
bed, and wondered much how it could have got out there, and
what mischievous person had treated it so.
114 wrTHBKINft BB.iaRtB^
. While untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me.
that I repeatedly caught the beat of horses'feet galloping at
some distance ; but there were such a number of things to oe-
cupy my reflections that I bftrdly gave the circumstance a
thought, though it was a strange sound, in XhtLt place, at two
o'clock in the morning.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his bouse to
see a patient in the village as I came lip the street ; and my
account of Otftherine Linton^B malady induced him to accooH
pany me back immediately.
He was a plain, rough man ; and^ be made no scruple to
speak his doubts of her surviving this second attack 7 unless she
were more submissive to his direction^ than she had shown her-
self before.'
*• Nelly Dean,^* said he, " I can't help fancying there's an, ex-
ti'a cause for this. What has there been to do at the Grange 1
We've odd reports up hei*e. A stout, heatty lass like Catherine
does not & 11 ill for a trifle; and that soit of people should not
either. It's hard work bringing them througn fevers^ and such
things. How did it begin V*
" The master will inform you, " I answered ; ** but you are
acquainted with the Eamshaws'violent dispositions, and -Mrs.
Linton caps them all. I may say this : it commenced in a
quarrel. She Was struck during a tempest of passion with a
kind of fit. That's her account, at least; for shefiew off in the
height of it, and locked herself up. Afterward, she refused to
eat, and now she alternately raves, and rantains in a half dream,
knowing those about her, but having her mind filled with all
sorts of strange ideas and illusions. "
" Mr. Linton will be sorry 1 " observed Kenneth, interroga-
tively.
" Sorry 1 he'U break his heart should any thing happen 1 " I
replied. ** Don't alarm him more than necessary. "
" Well, I told him to beware, " said my companion, " and he
must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning! Hasn't
he been thick with Mr. Heathcliff lately 1 "
" Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grrange, " rerplied I,
'* though more on the strength of the mistress having known
him when a boy, than because the master likes hiA company.
At present, he's discharged from the trouble o£ calling ; owing
to some presumptuous aspirations after Miss Linton which he
manifested. I haidly ^ank he'll be taken in again. "
.WUTHBBiNG HBIOBT9. IIS
" And < loes Miss Linton turn a cold slioulder on him V* wtti
the doctor's next question.
" I'm not in ber confidence, " returned I, reluctant to con-
tinue the subject.
" No, ebe's a sly one/'he remarked, shaking bis head. " She
keeps her own counsel \ But she's a real little fool. I have it
from .good authority, that, last night, and a pretty night it was 1
she and Heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back
of your bouse rahove two hours'^ find he pressed her not to go
in again, hvl just mount his horse and away with him ! My
infbrmant said she could only put him off by pledging her word
of honour to be pr^alred on their iirst meeting after that ; when
it was to be, he did'nt hear, but yoa ur^e Mr. Linton to look
sharp! "
'This news filled m^ with fresh fears ; I outstripped Kenneth,
and ran most of the.waiy bapk. The little dog was yelping in
the garden yet. I spared. a minute to open the gate for it, but
instead of going to the house door, it coursed up and down,
snuffing the grass, and would h & ve escaped;, to the road, had I
not seized and conveyed it in with me. - *
On ascending to Isabella's room, my suspicions were con-
firmed ; it was empty. Had I been a few hours sooner, Mrs.
Linton's illness might have aiTested her rash step. But what
could be done now ? There was a bare possibility of over-
taking them if pursued instantly. / could not pursue them,
however; and I dare not rouse the family, and fill the place
with confusion ; still less unfbld the business to my master, ab-
sorbed as he was iniiis priesent calamity^ and having no heart
to spare foir a second gnef 1
I saw nothing for it, bu); to hold'my tongue, and suffer mat-
ters to take theii'course ; and Kenneth being arrived, I went
with a badly composed countenance to announce him.
Catheiine lay in a troubled sleep ; her husband had suc-
ceeded in soothing the, access of frenzy; he now hung over
her pillow, watching every shade, and QVery change of her
painfully expressive features.
The doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hope-
fully to him of its having a favorable termination, if we could
only presei*ve around ber perfect and constant tranquillity. To
me, he signified the threatening danger was, not so much death
as permanent alienation of intellect.
I did not close my eyes that night, nor did Mr* Linton ; in*
116 .WUTHERIX'G HEIGHT^.
deed, we never went to bed ; and the servants were all up long
before the usual hour, moving through the house with stealthy
tread, and exchanging whispers as they encountered each other
in their vocations. Every ope was active but Miss Isabella;
and they began to remark how sound she slept. Her brother
too asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient for her
presence, jind hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her
sister-in-law.
I ti'embled lest he should send me to call her; but I was
spared the pain of being tbe & rat proclaimant of her flight. One
of the maids, a thoughtless girl^ who had been on an early
errand to G-immerton, came panting up-stairs, open-mouthed,
and dalshed into the chamber, crying,
" Oh, dear, dear ! What mun we hate next 1 Master,
master, ouy yoiing lady — " .-'
'* Hold your noise ! " . cried I hastily, enraged at het clamorous
manner.
" Speak lower, Mary. What is the matter %'* said Mr. Linton.
** What ails your young lady V*. •'
" She's gone, she's gone ! Yon'Heathcliff's run off wi'her !'*
gasped the girl.
" That is not true 1 " exclaimed Linton, rising m agitation.
** It can not be. How has the idea entered your head I Ellen
Dean, go and seek her^-^it is incrisdible— it can not be. "
As he spoke, he took the servant to the door, and then re-
peated his demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
" Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here, " she.
stammered, " and he asked whether we wern't in trouble at the
Grange. I thought he meant for Missis's sickness, so I answered,
yes. Then says he, *They's somebody gone after'em, I guess.'
I stared. He saw I knew naught about it, and he told how a
gentleman and lady bad stopped to have a horse's shoe fastened
at a blacksmith's shop, two miles oi^t of Gimraerton, not very
long after midnight ! and how the blacksmith's lass had got up
to spy who they were ; she knew them both directly. Arid she
noticed the man. Heathcliff it viras, she felt certain, nob'dy
could mistake him; besides he put a sovereign iti her fathei-'s
hand for payment. The lady had a cloak about her face ; but
having desired a sup of water, while she drank it fell backhand
she saw her very plain. Heathcliff held both bridles as they
rodo on, and they set their faces from the village^ and Weqt ais
6at a» tb^ rough roads would let them. The loss said nothing
W U X B E B t N 6 HEIGHTS.* 117
to her father^ but she told it all oyer Gimmerton this mom-,
ing. " - .
I ran and peeped, for form's sake, into Isabella's room : con
firming, when I returned; the -servant's statement. Mr. Linton
had resumed his seat by the bed ; ati my re-entrance, he raised
his eyes, i^ead the meaning of my bltok aspect, and dropped
them without giving an order, or. uttering a word.
*'Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing
ner back^ " I inquired. ^* How should we do ] "
" She went of her own accord, " answered the master; " she
had a right to go if she pleased. ^Trouble me no* more about
her. Hereafter she is only my sister in name; not because I
disown her, but becailse she has- disowned me. "
And that was all he said on the subject ; he did not make ..a
single inquiry further,, or mention her in any way, except direct-
ing me to send, what property she had in the hquse to her fresh
home, wherever it was, when I knew it.
CHAPTER XUL
For two months the fugitives remained absent ; in those two
months Mrs. Linton encountered and conquered the worst shock.
of what was denominated a brain fever. No mother could have
nursed an only child more devotedly than Edgar tended heer.
Day and bight he was watdiing, and pati,ently enduring all the
annoyances that instable nerves and a shaken reason could in-
flict: and, though Kenneth remarked that what he saved from,
the gra^ve would only recompense his care by forming the source
of constant future anxiely ; in fact, that his nealth and. strength
were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity, he
knew no limits in.gratitude and joy when Catherine's life was
declared out of danger ; and hour after hour he would sit be-
side her, tracing the gradual return to bodily health, and flatter-
ing his too sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would
settle back to. its right balance also, and she would soon be en-
tirely her former self.
The first time she left her chamber, was at the commencement
of the following March. Mr. Linton had put on her piUpwr in.
^
118 WUT1IBilN« HBIOHTS;
tiie raorning, a handful of golden crocnses ; her eye, long straager
to any gleam of pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone de*
lighted as she gathered them.eageriy together.
" These are the earliest So^v^ers at the Heights! " she.ex*
claimed.'* They remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sun«
shine, and nearly me)ted snow. Edgar, is there not a south
wind, and is not the snow almost gone V*
*• The snow is quite gone; down here, darling!** replied her
hushand, *'and I only see two white spots on the whole range
of moors. The sky is hlue, and the larks are singino^, and the
hecks and brooks are all brim full. Catherine, Ic^st spnug at this
time, I was- longing to have you under this roof — now, I wi^h
you were a nnle or two up those hills, the air blows ao sweetly,
I feel that it would ciire you. "
" I shall never be there, but once inore ! " said the invalid ;
" and thed you'll leave me, and I shall remain, for ever. Next
spring youMl long again : to have me under this roo{ and you'll
look back, and think you were happy to-day. "
Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer
her by the fondest words ; but, vaguely regarding the flowers,
she let the tears collect on her lashes, and stream dowh her
cheeks unheeded.
We knew she was really better, and therefore decided that
long confinement to a single place produced much of this de-
spondency, and it might be, partially i^movefl by a change of
scene.
The master told me to light a fire in the many weeka* desert-
ed parlor, and to set an easy chair in the sunshine by the win-
dow ; and then he brought her down, and she sat a long while,
enjoying the genial heat; and, as we expected, revived by the
objects round her, which, though familiar, were free from the
dreary associations investing her hated sick-chamber. By even-
ing she seemed gi-eatly exhausted; yet no arguments could
persuade her to return to that apartment, and 1 had to arrange
the parlor sofa for her bed, till another room could be pre-
pared. ,'
To obviate the fatigue of mounting find descending the stairs,
we fitted up this, where you lie at present, on the samei floor
with the parlor : and she was soon strong enough to move from
one to the other, leaning on Edgar's arm.
j^h, I thought myself she might recover, so waited on as she
Waa^ And there was double cause to desire it, for on her exis^
vrvrnpniv G betohtb. 119
esod depended that of another; we chertsbed the hope that in
a little while Mr. Linton's heart would be gladdened, and hid
kinda secured from a stranger's gripe, by the birth of an heir.
I should mention that Isabella sent to her brother, some six
weeks from her departure, a short note, announcing her mar-
riage with Heathcliff. It appeared dry and eold ; but at the
bottom was dotted in v^ith pencil an obscure apology, and an^
entreaty foir kind remembrance and reconciliation, if her pro-
ceeding had offended him, asserting that she could not help it
then, and, being done, she had now no power to repeal it.
Linton did not reply to this, 1 believe ; and in a fortnight
more I got a long letter which I considered odd, coming from
the pen of a biide jiist out of the honeymoon. I'll read it, for I
keep it yet; Any relic of the dead is precious, if they were
ralued living. It begin
** D£AR Ellen,
** I came; last night to Wuthering Heights, and heard, for the
first time, that Catherine has been, and is yet, very ill. I must
not. write to her, I suppose, and my brother is either tdb angry
or too distressed to answer what I sent him. Still, I must write
to somebody, Jmd the only choice left me is you.
■ " Inform Edgar that I'd give the world to see his fcwe again
—that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four
hours after I left it, and is there at this moment, iull of'warm
feelings for him and Catherine ! I can't follow it though''^
(thore words are underlined ^they need not expect me, and
they may draw what conclusions they please, taking care, how-
ever, to lay nothing at the door of my weak, will or deficient
affbctiop.
'* The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I want to
ask you two questions : the first is— ^
• •* How did you contrive to. preserve the common sympathies
of human nature when you resided here 1 I can not recognize
any sentiment which those around share with me.~
*'The Second question I ^ve great interest in : it is this— -
'" Is Mr. Heathclifi* armau ? If so, is he mad 1 And if not, is
he a devil ? I shan't tell my reasons for making this inquiiy ;
but I beseech you to explain, if you can, what I have man-led
«— that is, when you call to see me ; and you must call, Ellen,
very soon. Don't write, but come/ and bring me something
from Edgar.
120 WUTBERING HE I G B T S.'
" Now you sliall hear how I have been received in my new
home, as I am led to imagine the Heights will be. It is to
amuse myself that I dwell on such subjects as the lack of exter-
nal comforts ; they never occupy my thoughts except at the mo-
ment when I miss them. I should laugh and dance for joy if I
found their absence was. the total of my miseries, and the rest
jvas an unnatural dream 1
" The sun set behind the Grange, as we turned upon the
moors J by that I judged it to be six o*clock ; and my compan-
ion halted half-an-hbur to inspect the park and the gardens,
and, probably, the place itself, as well as he could ; so it was
dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of the fatmhouset
and your old fellow-servant, Joseph, issued out to receive us by
the light of a dip candle. He did it with a courtesy that re-
dounded to his credit. His fii-st act was to elevate his totch to
a level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under lip,
and turn away.
" Then he took the two horses and led them into the stables,
reappearing for the purpose of kcking the outer gate, as if we
lived in an ancient castle.
" Heathcliflf staid to speak to him, and I entered the kitchen
— ^a dingy, untidy hole ; I dare say you would not know it, it
is so changed flince it was in your charge.
" By the fii-e stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb and dirty
In garb, with a look of^ Catheiine in his eyes and about his
mouth.
" * This is Edgar's legal nephew,'I reflected—^* mine in a
manner ; I must shake hands, and^ — yes— I must kias bitn. It
is right to establish a good underat^inding at the beginning.'
'* I approached, and, attempting to tak & his chubby fist, said,
"'How do you do, my dear V -
** He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
, "'Shall you and I be friends, Hareton V was my next essay
at conversation.
" An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not
'frame off,'rewarded my pei^severaucie.
" • Hey, Throttler, lad !'whispered the little wretch, rousing
a half- bred bull-dog from its lair in a comer. * Kow, wilt tun
be ganging V he asked, authoritatively.
•* Love for my life urged a compliance; I stepped over the
threshold to wait till the othei-s shpuld enter. Mr. HeathclifF
was nowhere visible; and Joseph, whom T followed to the stBff
.WfJTHBRIHO. ^BIG£tT«. 131
^le6, and requested to accompany me inp after atariog and mut*
taring to himself, screwed up his nose and replied —
" * Mim I mim 1 tuixa ! . Did iver Christiaii bpdy hear owt like
it ] Minching un'jnunching ! ^ Hah can aw tell whet ye say V
*''I say, I wish you to cotue with m^ into the house V I cried,
thinking him^ deaf, yet highly disgusl^ed at hia rudeness.
tn -^Qj, Q^ ^Q Y ^^. getten summut else -to do,'he- answered,
aticl continued his work, moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and
surveying my dreiSs and countenance (the former a great deal
too fiue, but the latter, I'm sure, as sad as he could desire) with
sovereign contempt.
•''I walked round the yard, and through a wi < ;ket, to another
door, at which I took the liberty of knocking, in hopes aocae
more civil servant might show himself.
" Aftei* a short suspense it was. opened by a tall, gaunt man,
without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his
features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his
shoulders ; and Ms eyes^ too,, were iD^ a ghostly Ga^nne's,
with all. their beauty annihilated. ^ •
" * What's your business here 1- he demanded, grimly*'Who
are you 1* . . .
" *My name wa* Isabella Linton,* I replied.'You've seen
me before, sir. I'm lately married to Mr. Heathcliff; and he
has brpught me here— -I suppose by your permission.'
"'Is he come back, then? asked the hermit, glaring like a
hungry wolf.
"'Yes — we came just now,'I said j'but he left me by the
kitchen door; smd when I would have gone in, yoipr little boy
played sentinel over the place, and lightened me oS by the help
of a bullrdog.'
" *Jt's well the hellish villain has kept his word!'growled
my future host, sea^^bing the darkness beyond me in expecta-
tion of discovering Heathcliff, and then he indulged in a soliloquy
of execrations^ and threats of what ho would have d«ae had the
* fiend'deceived him. - ^
" I repented having tried this second enti-ance ; and was almost
inclmed to slip away before he finisbed curbing, but ere I could
jcxecute that intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened
ihe door.
" There was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge
apartment, whose floor had grown, a uniform gray ; and the once
DtHliant pewter dishes, which used to .attri^ct my g«« when I
122 WUTHSBINO HEIGHT fl.
was a girl, partook of a simflar obscurity, created by tarnisb and
lust.
" I inquired whether I inight call the maid, .and be conducted
to a bed-ropmi Mr. Earn & haw vouchsafed no answer. He
walked up and down, with his hands, in his pockets, apparently
quite forgetting my piesence ; and his abstraction was evidently
80 deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that I shrank
from disturbing him again. ^ ..
" You'll not be surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particularly
cheerless, seated in worse than solitude, on that inhospitable
hearth, and remembering that four miles distant lay my delight-
ful home, containing th6 only people I loved on eaith: and
there might as well be the Atlantic to part us, instead of those
four miles. I could not overpass them I .
" I questioned with myself — Where must I turn for comfort?
and — mind you ^ion't tell Edgar, or Catherine — above «very
sorrow beside, this rose pre-eminent — despair'at finding nobody
who could or would be my ally against HeathcKff!
" I had sought shelter at Wuthering Heights,, alniost gladly,
because I was secured by that arrangement from living alone
with him ; but he knew the pec^le we were coming among,
and he did not fear their intermeddling.
" I sat ^nd thought a doleful titee ; the clock struck eight, and
nine, and still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on
his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan, or a bitter ejacu-
lation forced itself put at intervals.
** I listened to detect a wonian's vpioe in the house, and filled
the interim with wild regrets, and^dismaV anticipations, which,
at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing, ^nd weeping.
" I was not aware how openly I grieved, tilj Eamshaw halted
opposite,'in his measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly
awakened sui^rise.. Taking advantage of his recovered atten-
tion, I exclaimed —
"'I'm tired with my journey, and I want to go to bed!
Where is the maid-servant] Direct me to her, as she wont
come to me !'
" * We have none,'he answered ; * you must wait on yourself!
** * Where must I sleep, then V- I sobbed. I Was beyond re-
garding self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretched-
ness.
*• * Joseph will show you Heathclifif's chamber/ said he ; * open
that door-— ke!3 in there.'
W'U TBRRIK6 HEIGHTi. 128
^''I was going to ^obeyv but he sudddily arresCod me, and
added in the strangest tone —'-
"'Be so good as f o turn your lock, and draw your bolt—
don't omit it !'
« • Well !'I said.'But why, Mr. Eamshaw V I did not relish
the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with Heathcliff.
"'Look here T he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a curi-
ously constructed pistoC having a double edged spring knife
attached to the barrel. *■ That's a great. tempter to a desperate
man, is it not } I can not resist gomg up witn this, every night,
and try^g his door : jf once I find it open, he's done for ! 1 do
it invariably, even though the minute before 1 have been recall-
ing a hundred reasons that should make me* refrain — ^it is soiyie
devil that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killing him.
You fight against the devil, finr love, as long as you may ; when
the time comes, not all the angels in heaves shall save him !
'^ I surveyed the weapon inquisitively ; a hideous notion struck
me. How powerful I should be possessing'such an instrument !
I took it fi-om hia hand, and touched the bjade. He looked
astonished at the expression my face ajssumed during a brief
second. It was not horror, it was covetousness. Ha snatched
the pistol back. Jealously ; shut the knife, and returned it to its
concealment.
" •I don't care if you t^ll him,'said he.'Put him on his
guard, and watch fbr him. You know the terms we are on, I
see ; his danger does not shock you.'
•* * What has Heathcliff done to you V I asked. « In what haa
he wronged you, to warrant this appalling hatred ] Wouldn't
it be wiser to bid him quit the house V
"'No,'thundered Eamshaw, * should he ofier to leave me,
he's a dead man ; persuade him to attempt it, and you are a
murderess ! Am I to lose aU^ without a chance of retrieval?
Is Hareton to.be a beggar 1 Oh, damnation! T^ciU have it
back ; and I'll have his gold too ; and then his blood ; and hell
shall have his soul ! It will be ten times blacker with that
guest than ever it waa before !'.
" You've acquainted me, Ellen, with your old master's habits.
He is clearly on the verge of madness-^^e was so, last night, at
least. I shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant's
ill-bred moroseness as comparatively agreeable.
" He now recommenceq his moody walk, and I raised the
Ititch, and escaped into the kitchen.
134 WUTHBEIN'G H*« I G H T ■.
** Joseph WBB bending over tbe fire, peeritigf into a large pan
that flwung above it; and a wooden. bowl of oatmeal stood on
^aa settle close by. The contents of tbe ^an began to boil, and
he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl; I conjectured that
this preparation was probably ftr our supper, and, being hungry,
I resolved it should be eatable*— so crying out, sharply — * TU
make the porridge !'I r^tnoved the Vessel out of his reach,
and proceeded to take off my hat and nding habit. * Mr. Earn-
shaw,'I continued,'directs me to -wait if > n myself^^I will. I'm
not going to act the lady among you, for fear 1 should starve.'
'*'Gooid Lord !'he muttered, sitting down, and^strokihg hw
ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle. *■ If they'» tub be
fresh ortherings — just when aw gotten used tub two maisters, if
aw mun hev a mistFess set o'er my heead, it's loike time tab h^
flitting* Aw liiver did think tub say t'day ut aw mud lave th
owld place— but aw dahtat's nigh at bend ! " •
*'This lamentation drew no notice from me ; I went briskly
to work; sighing to remember a period when it would hfve
been all merry fun ^ hvX eompeH^ speedily to drive off the
remembfan < )e. It racked me to recall jwst happiness, and the
greater peril there was of conjuring up its apparition, the quicker
the tMble ran round, and the faster the hand & ls of meal fell
into the waten
" Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indigna-
tion.
" * Thear !'he ejaculated. * Hareton, thah will*ht sup thy
porridge tub. neeght ; they'll be nowt bud lumps* as big as maw
nave. Thear, ageaff! Aw'd fling in bowl un all, if aW wer
yah ! Thear, pale t'guilp off, un'then yah'il hae. done wi*t^
Bang, bang. It's a marcy t* bothom isn't cleaved aht !'*
** It was rather a rough mess, I ewn, when poured into the
basins ; .fcu^ had been prorided, and a gallon pitcher of new
milk was brought from the dairy, which Hareton seized, and
commenced drinking and spilHng from the expansive lip.
''.I expostulated, and desired ibat he should have nis in a
mug ; amrming that I could not taste the liquid treated so dirtily.
The old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety; aa-
fiuring me, repeatedly, that • the bairn was every bit as gooid* as
I, *and eveiy bit as wollsome,'and woridepng how I could
frishion . to be so conceited ; meanwhile, the infant ruffian con-
tinued sucking ; and glowered up at me defyingly^ as he slavered
into the jug.
^* 1 flbaH have my 0iipp«r in aiMlfafir robnit'I obmL'Hav9
you no place you caU a parlor V
^^^I^rhrf'heBdbtnd^nmerhit^/parhr/ Nay^ we've noa
ymrior^ MjyA dunnut IoUdo tver company, lihtty** maiMer't $
ud'if yafa duBbut bike m^aetefr^ tbefm ubJ
^''Tkea I ^Hkll go upnitaiis/ I moBweswA ; ^iftnyw loe a €!»» & «•
berP
^I pot my iMttU on a tray, and wenftiBj^self to ietdi aoma
more milk* ...
^ Wjth great grumfaitiags, tfa6 fi^low nsae, aad preceded me
in my ascent x vre maunted |o the giarets; he opemaga dooiv
now and then» to look into the apartment^, we passed. ^
**'Here^ a lahm*'he said, at lait; flingkig baek m cx« & ky
board -en htngaa. * ICs vreel eneugfa tub nXe a few poaridge wL
Tfae/s a pack uh corn i't'comer, tfaear, tneelerly dane^ if
^a;h're fearad uAi ixraskying y«r gnoid aflk dona, ^«:ead yer
hankeixhir Qt t'top odV
** The'rahm^ was a kind of hmiber^hole snelHog B6tmg of
knalt and grain ; vadoua aaoioi of which aitides yvere pled
around, leaving a wide, bare space in die. middle*
*'* Wby^ man 1'I exdaiitied, feeing-httii ai^^riiy^ ^tfais ii not a
place to sleep im ^ I vdsh to see my bed-soom/
**'iBed^ni^me P he repeated, in a tone of mockery., *Yah'i
see ail t'^ac^^rMmertbeer ]»- < ^y0n^ini»d.'
•'* He pointed into the aecend garret, only difibring from tfa^
first in being more naked about the wa^, and having a larae^
loM^, tnntainlefla bed, with an indigoN^olored quilt, at oiie end.
^ ^* * What do I watit with youn V I retorted.'I sappose Mb.
Heathcliff does not lodge at the top of the house, does bel'
"'C^! it's Maister Heathd^9 yah're wentingi " cried hev
as if making a new discovery.'Couldn't ye uh said soa, at
onst 1 un thai, aw mud uh telled ye, baht all this wark, ut tfaat*i
lust one yah cannut sea^^e alks keeps it lodced, un'noVdy
nrer mells oii't but htsseln.'
'" You've a nice house, Joseph,'I eotdd not refrain from
observing,'and pleasant inmates; end I think ite concentrated
essence of all the madness in the world took up its abode in my
brain the day I linked my fate with theirs ! Howid^w, that is
. not to the present purpose^there are- othev rooms. For heaV'*
en's sake, be quick, and let me settle somewhere -^ .
" He made no reply to this'adjuratwn; only plodding dog»
gedlf down the wooden steps^ and haliaDg belbre^an apiirtraeni;
126 WUTBEKINO H£I9HT8r
^ich, fr(»n that halt, and the superior quality of its farniture, I
conjectured to be the best one. -
'There was a carpet, a good one; but the pattern was ob*
literated by dust ; a fireplace hung with cut paper, dropping
to pieces ; a handsome oak bedstead with ample crimiBon cur-
tains of rather expensive material, and modem make. But
they had evidently experienced rough usage, the valances hung
in festoons, wrenched from their rings; and- the iron rod sup-
porting them was bent in an arc, on one side, causing the drapery
to trail upon the Aocm:. The chairs were also damaged, miany
of them severely; and deep indentatiol9u» deformed 2ie panels
of the walls.
** I was endeavoring to gather resolution for entering, and
taking possession, when my fool of a guide announced- " —
" * This here is t'maister's.'
** My supper by this time .was C(^d, my appetite gone, and
my patience exhausted. I insisted on being provided instantly
with a place of refuge,, and melins of repose.
" * Whear the divil,'began the reliisfioiis elder, -^he Lord
bless us! The Lord forgie us! Whear the keU, wold jh
gang ) ye marred, .weoijsome nowt I Yah seen all bud Hare-
ton's bit uf a chamber. They's nut another hdile tub lig dahn
ini'th'hahse!'
''I was so vexed, I flung my tray, and its contents on the
ground; and then seated myself at the st & ir's head, hid my face
in my hands, and cried.
" * Ech ! ech !'exclaimed Joseph. * Weel done. Miss Cathy !
Hahsiver, t'maister sail just tum'le o^er them brocken pots;
un'then we's hear summut ; we's hear hah it's tub be. Gooid-
iur-nowt madhng 1 yah desarve pining froo this tub Churstmas,
flinging t'precious gifts uh God under fooit i'yer flaysorae
rages ! Bud, aw'm mista'en if yah shew yer aperrit lang.
Will HeathcliflT bide sich bonny ways, think ye ? Aw nobbut
wish he muh cotch yq i'that plisky. Aw nobbut wish he may.'
" And so he went scolding. to his den beneath, taking the
candle with him, and I remained in the dark.
** The period of reflection succeeding this silly action, com-
pelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my pride, and
choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its effects. .
" An unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
Throttler, whom I now recognized as a son of our old Skulker;
it had spent its whelphood at the Grange, and waa given by my
WUTHBRIN0 HEIGHTS. 127
father to Mr. Hitidley. I fancy it knew me — ^it pushed its nose
against inine by way of salute, and then hastened to devour the
porriH^, while I groped from step to step, collecting the shat-
tered eardienware, and drying the spatters of milk from the
bannister with my pocket < handkerchie£
'^Our lahdrs were scarcely over when I heard Eamshaw's
tread in the passage ; my assistant tacked m his tail, and ptessed
to the. wall; I stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's en-
deavor to avoid him was unsuccessful, as I guessed by a scutter
down stairs, and a prolonged, piteous -yelping. I had better
luck. He passed on > entered his chamber, and shut the door.
*'Directly afler, Joseph came up with Hareton, to put bun
to bed. I had found shelter in Har^ton's room, and the old
man on seeing me, said —
. " • They's rahm fur boath yah, un yer pride, nah, aw sud
think i'th'hahse. It's empty ; yah muh hev it all tub yersein,
un.Him as ^llas maks a third, A'sich ill company ! "
'^Gladly did! take advantage of this intimation ; and the
minute I flung myself into a chair, by the -fire, I nodded, and
slept.
V My slumber was ddbp and sweet ; though over far too
soon. Mr. HeatbclifiT awoke me ; he had just come in, and
demanded, in his living manner, what I was- doing there ]
" I told him the cause of niiy staying up so late — that he had
the key of our room in his pocket.
" The adjectiye owr gave mortal offence. He swore it was
not, nor never should Be mine ; and he'd-^but I'll not re{^eat
his language, norde8terib0 his habitnal conduct; he is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence 1 I sometimes
wonder at hioH with ^^ intensity that deadens my fear: yet,
I assure you, a tig^r, or a venomous sei*pent could not rouse
teiTor in me equal to that which he wakens.'He told me of
Catherine's illness, and accused my brother of causing it;
promising that I should be Edgar's proxy in suffering, till he
could get a hold of him.
V I do hate him — ^I am wretched— i[ have been a fool! Be-
ware of uttering one breath of this to any one at the Grange.
I shall expect you every day^--don't disappoint me !
»• Isabella/'
CHAPTER XIV;
A» 800B as I had perused this epistle, I went to the master,
and informed him that his sister.had arrived at the Heights, and
sent nie a letter expressing her sorrow lor Mrs. Linton's situa-
tion, and her ardent desire to see Hini; with a wish .thatrhe
would transflsit to her, as early ftd possible, some token of for*
g^veness bj me.
" ForgiTeness V* said Lioton. ** I have nothing to Ibrgiro
her, Ellen — you may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon,
if you like, and say that I am not angry} hut I'm sOrtif to have
lost her : especially as I can never think she'll be happy. It is
out of the question my going to see her, however ;, we are eter*
naHy divieled ; -and should ^e really vfish to obBge me, lot her
persuade the villain she has married to leave the conntry.'*
" And yott won't write her a little note, sir? " I asked, implor-
ingly.
" No/'^ he answered ; ^ it 4tf needless. My eommunicatSon
vtrith HeathcUff's family shall be a« sparing as his with mme. It
shall not exist I "
Mr. Edgar'e coldness depressed me exoeddingly; and aH the
way from the Grange, I puzzled my brahis how to put more
heart into what he said, when I repeated it ; and how to soften
his refusal of even a few lines to console Isabella.
I dare say she had been on the watch for me since morning:
I saw her looking through the lattice, as I came np the garden
causeway, and I nodded to her; bttt i^e di^ew back, as tf afraid
of being observed. ^ -
I entered without knocking. There never was such a dreary,
dismal scene .as the formerly cheerftil house presented ! I must
confess that, if I had baen in the young lady's place, I would at
least have swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster.
But she already partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which
encompassed her. Her pretty face was wan and listless ; her
hair uncurled;- some locks hanging lankly down, and some care-
lessly twisted round her head. Probably she had not touched
her dress since yester-evening.
Hindley was not there. Mr. HeathcHff sat at a table, turning
oyer Botoe pupen in bis poclc^t^ioc^ ; but he tdse wh^n I ap-
peared^ lusked mehow^I did,^ite friendly, and offered me a
i^iair^
He was the only tiawg tbete that aeeiaed deoeac, and i thought
he nov^^ looked better* So much had circumstances altered
their positions, that he would certain! j hnre ttmek a stratiger
as a hoim. and bred gentlemaa^ asd his wife as a Uiorough little
slattern I
She came forward- easetly to greet me; and beld OBt one
]b«Lnd to take the expected Jetter.
I (^ook my head. She wouldn't nndeiBtand the hint, but fol«-
lowed me to a eideboard^ wiiera { went to lay my bonnet» and
importuned me^ in a v^iiBper, to grre bet di^ectljr wkc^ I had
brought. :
KeathcUff guessed the measing of her matitenireA, and said,
. f'If you heeve got any thing & r IsabeHa, as no doubt yoti
have, Nelly, give it to her. Yon needn't malU a secret of it ;
We have no secrets between us. "
^*'Oh, I have nodung, " I replbd, diinkhig it best to speak the
truth at oace.''My master bid tno tell h^ sister that she muM
not expect either a letter or a visit fram- bim at present* He
sende his love,. ma'am, and his.wiiriies for y^ur happuaess, and hii
pardon for Ae grief you bave^ occasioned ; bat be thinks that
after this time his boosehold and the household here ^ould
dr < ^ intm«oDimunication-; us notbing good eeuld ee^toeof keep-
ing it up-- ^
. Mrs. HeathcliiTs lip quivared slightly) ftnd i^e returned to
her seat in the window. Her huslMind took his stand od die
. faearthstdne, near me, and began to pUt-qtMstkjtns eoncmning
Catherine. -^\
I told bim as in«cli as I lihchigbt pmper of her illness, and be
extorted from me, by eroas-eacamin»tioii, meat of the facts con*-
nec^d with it9 origin.
. I Watned her, as Ae doserved, for bringing it aH ofi herself t
and elided by hoping tbat he would follow Mn Lintoh^s exan^
pie, asd avoid fotuze iateiference with bis ibmily^ for gdod ov
evil. .
**Mra. Itintob w sow jnst Tecovering, " I iMnid^'^ishell never
be like she was, but her life is spared^ and if you really have a
regard for her, yon'li shun cfossii^ her way again. Nay, you'll
meve out of this countiry .entirely $ 4Uid that too may not regret
it, rU mfom .you CaAerine liinfcini k Imb diftten* now UtotA
130 WUTHEKIN6 HEIGHTS.
your old friend Catherine Elamshaw as that young lady is dif-
ferent from me ! Her appearance is changed greatly, her char* ^
acter much more so ; and the person who is compelled of neces-
sity to be her companion, will only Sustain his aflS^ction hereafter
by the remembrance of .what she once was, by common human-
ity, and a sense of duty !?
*'That is quite possible, " remarked Heathcliff, forcing himself
to seem c & lm, ** quite possible that your master should have
nothing but common humanity, and a sense of duty to fall back
upon. But do you imagine diat I shall leave Catherine to bis
duti/ BXkd humdnitt/ ? and can you compare my feelings respect-
ing Catherine to his 1 Before you leave this house, I must exact
a promise from you, that you'll get me an interview with her-—
consent or refuse, I vnll see her ! What do you say? "
" I say Mr, Heathcltfi^ " I replied, " you must not — you never
shall thix > ugh my means. Ajiother encounter between, you and
the master would kill her altogether ! "
" With your aid that may be avoided, " he continued ;'* and
should there be danger of such an event — should he be the cause
of adding a aingle trouble, more to'her existence — why, I think
I shall be justified in going to extremes I I wish you had sin-
cerity enough to tell me whether Catherine would suffer greatly
from his loss. The fear that she would restrains me, and there
you see the distinction between our feelings. Had he bedn in
my place, and I in his, though I hated him with a hatred that
turned my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against
him. You may look incredulous if yeu please I I never would
have bamshed him from her society as long as she desired his.
The moment her regard ceased, I would have torn his heart out
and drank his blood! But iillthen, if you don't believe me,
you don't know me— till tiien, I would have died by inches
before I toadied a single hair of his head ! "
** And yet, " I interrupted,''you have no scruples in ooni-
pletely ruining all hopes pf her pierfect restoration, by thrusting
yourself into her remembrance, now when she has nearly for^
gotten you, and involving her in a new tumult of discord and
istress. "
" You suppose she has neariy forgctten me 1 " he said. " Oh,
Nelly! you know she has not! . You ki^ow as well as I do,
that for every thought she spends on Linton, she spends a thou-
sand on me ! At a most miserable period of my life, I had a
notion of the kind ; it haunted me on my r^um to the neigh-
WUTBKXING BBIOHT8.'181
borhood, last summer, Wt only her own sssurance could make
me admit the horrible idea again. And then, Linton wduld be
nothing, nor Hindley, .nor all the dreams that ever I dreamed.
Two words would, comprehend my future— -^o^ and hdU-^^Xr
istence; after losing her, would be hell.
** Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment that she valued Ed-
gar Linton's attachment more than mine ; if he loved with all
the powers of his puny being, he. couldn't lovie as much in eighty
y^ars bb I could in a day. And Catherii > e has a heart as deep
as I have ; the sea! could be as readily contained in that horse-
trough as her whole affection be monopolized by him. Tush !
He is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her horse.
It is not in him to be loved like me ; how can she love in him
lyhat he has not ] "'
" Catherine and Edgar are as fohd of each other as any two
people can beJ''oried Isabella, with suddeu vivacity.''No one
has alright to talk in that manner, and I won't bear my brother
d^reciated in. silence ! "
. ** Your brother is wondrous fond of you, too, isn't he 1 " ob-
served HeathclifiT, scornfully.''He turns you adrifb on the
world with surprisiiig alacrity. "
" He is not aware of what I suffer, " she replied. " I didn't
tell him that. " .
*♦ You have been telling him something, then — ^you have writ-
ten, have you ] "
" To say that I was married, I did write — ^you saw the note.**
" And nothing since Y*
" No. "
" My youpg lady is looking sadly the worse for her change
of condition,^'I remstrked. " Somebody's love comes short in
her case, obviously — whose, < I may guess ; but perhaps I
shouldn't say. "
'* I should guess it was her own, " < said Heathxsliff.''She de-
generates into a mere slut I She is tired of trying to please me,
uncommonly early. You'd hardly credit it, but the very mor-
row of our wedding, she v^^as weeping to go home. However,
she'll suit this, house so much the better for not being over nice,
and I'll take care she does not disgrace me by rambling abroad. "
" Well, sir, returned I, " I hope you'll consider that Mrs,
Heathcliff is accustomed to be looked ^fler, and waited on ; and
that she has been brought up like Ka only daughter, wjbom every
one was ready to aerve. You must, let her have a maid to keep
182 W'XTTHfiAINd Aifit & HTS.
tfainge tidy about her, and yoa must treat har kindly. Whatever^
be your notion of Mr. Edg^r, you can not doubt that she has a
capaeily ior strong attachments, or she wouldn't have abandon*
ed'the eleguncies, aiid comforts, and friends'of her ibrhier home^
to fix contentedly in such A wilderness as this, wkh you. "
** She .abandoned them und^ a dekiisioB, " he answered,'* pic-
turing io me a hero of romance, and expecting ntilimited indul-
gences from my cbiTalnous deyotion. i can hardly regard her
in the light of a rational d^ature, so obstinately has she peVsist*
ed in fc^ming a fiibulous notion of my character, and aeling oh
the false impi^eesions she cherished. But; at ^st; I flunk she be-
gins. to know me-— I don't pferceive the silly smiles ond^grimaGeB
that provoked me at first; and the senseless incapability of dis-
cerning, that I was in earnest when I gave her toy opinioli of
her infatuatioUy and herself. It was a reinarkable effi^rt of per-
spieacity to diseoiwr that I did not love her. I believed, at one
time, no lessons could teach her tl^st! and yet it ia pooriy
learned ; for this moming'she announced, as a piece^f appalling
intelligence, tliaC I bed actually succeeded m ihaking her hate
me ! A positive^ labor of Hercules, 1 assure you ! If it be
achieved, I have cause to return thanks ; can I trust your asser*
tioD, Isabellas-are you sijre- you htle me ? If I let you alone
for half a day, won't you come sighine and wheedling to me
again) I darosay she would ra^er I had «eefned ti^ll tender-
ness before you ; it wounds het^ vanity to have the truth exposed-.
But I don't care who knows that the passion was wh6]ly on one
side, and I never told her a lie about it« She can not accljse
me of showine a bit of deceitful softness. The first thing ^le
saw me do, on coming out of the Grange, wasto hUng up her
little dog; and when'She pleaded for it, me first Words I uttered
were a wish titat I had the hanging of every being belonging t6
her, except one : possibly, she took that exception fer herselR
But no bhitality disgust^ her*— I suppose she ba & ati ifinate ad-
miratioR of it, if only her precious person were secure from iii^
jury! Now, was it not tibe depih of absurdity^r^-of genuine
idiocy— ^fbr ^at pitiiul, slavish, mean-mioded brach ta dream
that I could love her? Tell your master, Nelly, that I nevei >
in all my life^ BMt with such an abject thing as she is ; she eve»
disgraces the name of Linton ; and I've sometimes r^ented^
i & om pure lack of invention, in my experiments on what she
could endure, and still ci^ep shamefally cringing btfek T But
tell him also to set his fraternal and magisieiiaihiQftft at ease*-*'
m^ -rTr- ■ ■ 1 ■ - —
CJbftt I keep stricdy within the liiiiks of^t^e law — I have avoidedi
up to this peiiod, giving her the slightest right to claini a sepa*
frfttion ; end wbat's iBore, bhe'd thank nobody ^ dividing us —
if ^he d'^red to go she migtit^-Jthe nuisance of her presence
K»utwe«sfas the gratification to be derived ftom tormentaiir
" Mr: Healhcliff, " said I, <'tMtf is the talk of a madmim, and
^oor MfWe, mtm lik^lj, is convinced yon are mad ; and, fer that
reason, -sbb has borne with you faidberto s bat now that you say
«b^ Hifey go, shell doubtless avail herself of the permission.
Ydu ai»e tto^ so bewitched naa'am, are you, as to remain with
Iiim of your own- accord ]**
** Take caare, Bfien!** answered Isabella, her eyee sparicling
IrefuHy; there was no^ mfedoubting, by tbeir expression, the
lull *ucce*8 ef her partner^s endeavors to make himself do-
tested* •♦ Dott*t put'Mfla in a single word he speaks. He's a
lying fietfd, a inons!»r, and not a hutHati^ being f IVe been told
I miglie *^ye him before;^ an^ INre made the attempt, but I
dare net repeat hi Onhf-SUen^ promise you'll not mendbn a
ayttcflite ef his infamous convetisation to my brotlier or Catherine*
Wliatever he may pretend, he wisheil to provoke Edgar to dear
peration.'He says he lias married me on purpose to obtain
portrer over Mm ; and be shan't obtain it-^I*U die fiwt ! I just
hope, I pray, that he may ibrget his diabolic^ prudence, and
kill nie ! llie -single p^sasure I can imagino, ia to die, or to dee
him dead! "
''Thei^e^'^at will do for the preseDtr Bai < l Heai^i^iie
< *lfye« att§ balled upon in a court of taw, you'll remembet
her lAH^gmetg^ Nelly t And take a good look at diat ceunte*
nance — she's near die'point which woulJ suit me. No, you're
hot At W be your ovm guardian, Isab^Ula how ; and I, being
your teg*l protector,, must retain you Ih my custody, however
diMa^teffol th^ obligation may be. Go up-stairs ; I have some^
thing «e Hay to Ellen l > eai^, in private. That's not the way-««
ttfhstairs, I tell you I Why rtils is the rotid upHstairs, child! "
H« Mz < ^d| and thrust. her from the room; and returned
fiiotfiering^
" I haips wft pify ! I have no pity ! The worms writhe, die
teore I yearn to crush out tiidlr etumils ! It is a moral^ tedth^
ing, lind 1 giitid w'ith greiater energy, in proportion to the in^
ereasA ef-ptl^'^ -
. , i < 1^ y < g| uftdiMMind ivhat'tte w^d ffJUf m^tsMV I saidi
134 WUTBEftING HEI43HTS.
hastening to resume my bonnets *^ Did you ever feel a touch
of it in yoiirlil'e ] "
" Put that down] " he interrupted, perceiving my intention
to depart. ** You are not gping^ yet. ■ Come here now, Nelly;
I mu^t either persuade or compell you to aid me in fulfilling
my determination to see Catheiine, and that without delay.
I swear that: X raeditalte no -harm ; I don't desire to cause any
disturbance, or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton; I only wish
to hear from herself how she is, and why she bas l > ^en ill.; and
to ask if any thing that I could do would be of Hse^ to her.
La^ night I was. in* the Orange garden six hours, and Til
return there to-night ; and every night 1*11 haunt the place, and
every day, till I fipd an oppc^unity of entering. If Edgar
Linton meets me^ I shall not hesitate to knock him. down, and
give him enough to ensure bis quiescence while! stay%. If his
servants oppose me, I shall threaten them off with th,ese pistols.
But wouldn't it be better to prevent-my coming in contact with
them, or their master ? And yoU could do it so easily !- I'd
warn you when I came, and then you might let me in unob-
served, as soon as she was alone, and.watch till I departed; —
your conscience quite calm, you would be hindering mischiefl "
I protested against playing that treacherous put in my em-
ployer's house ; and besides, I urged the cniolty and selfishness
of his destroying Mrs. Linton's tranquillity^ far his satis & ction.
" The* commonest pccuffence startles her painfully, " I said.
" She's fill nerves, and she couldn't beai* the surprise, I'm
positive. Don't persist, sir! or else, I shall be obliged to in-
^rm my master of your designs, and he'll take measured to
secure his house and its inmates fix > m any such unwarrantable'
intrusions! " > -
''In that case, I'll take measures to secure you, woman.! "
exclaim^ Heathdiff; " you shall not leave Wuthecing I{eights
till to-morrow morning. It is & foolish story to assert that
Catherine could not. bear to see^ nie ; and as to surprising her»
I don't desire it, yOu must prepare her — ask her if I may come..
You say she never, mentions ray name, and ths^t I woa never
mentioned to hen To whom should she mention me, if I am a
forbidden topic in the house? She thinks you -are all spies for
her husband. Oh, I've no doubt she's in hell among j^du! I
euess, by'her silence, as much as any thing, what sKd feels.
You say she is oflen restless, and anxious-looking*r-]^ that a
proof of tranquillity ? , You t^lk of b^ mind being uweuled 1
/
WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS. 185
— ^how the devil cduld it be otherwise, in her frightful isolation t
And that insipid, paltiy creature attending her from duty and
Tvumanity ! From pity and charity. He mi^ as well plant
an oak in a flower--pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he
can restore her to vigor in the soil of his shallow cai'es ! Let
us settle it at once ; will you stay here, aiid am I to fight my
way to Catherine over JLioton and his footmen % Or will you
be, my friend, as you have been hitherto, and do what I re-
quest 1 Decide 1 because th^re is no reason for ray lingering
another minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature. "
'Well, Mr. Lock wood, I argued, and complained, ahd flatly
refiised'him fifty times; but, in the long run, he forced me to
an^ agreement. I engaged to carry a letter from him to my
mistress ; and should she consent, I promised to let him have
intelligence of Linton's next absence from home, w4ien he
might come, and get in as he was abTe-«-I wouldn't be there,
and my fellow servants should be equally out of the way.
Was it right- or wrong J I fear it was vsrrong, though ex-
pedient. . I thought I prevented another explosion by my com-
pliance : and I thought too, it might create a favorable crisis in
Catherine's nciental illness : and then I remembered Mr. Edgar's
stem rebuke of my carrying talea ; and I tried to smooth away
all disquietude on the .subject, by affirming with frequent itera-
tion, that diis betrayal of trust, if it merited €0 haish an appella-
tion, should be die last
Notwithstanding, my journey homeward was sadder than mjr
journey thither ; and many misgivings I had ere I could prevail
on myself to put the missiyi6 into Mrs. Lintbn's band.
But here isKenneth— J*ll go down and teU him how much
better you are. My history is dt & Cj as we say, and will serve to
while away another morning.-—
Dree, and dreaiy ! I ejected as the good woman descended
to receive the doctor; and not exactly of the kind which I
should have chosen to amuse me ; but never mind ! 1*11 extract
wholesome medidnes from Mrs. Dean's bitter herbs ; and first-*
ly, let me beware of < ^ die fascination that kirks in Catheiine
Heathcliff's brilliant eyes. I should be in a curious taking, if I
Buirendered my heart to > that yoiing person, and the daughter
tamed out » second edition of the mother I . ^
CHAPTER XV. ^
Another week orer-^Aiid I am so inany^ayB nearer beaUh
and spriiiff i I havB now heard aU my fieigfabd'e kistoiy at dij^
ferent sittiiigB, as the housekeeper coiild- spare titne ficom more
important occupations. I'll continue it in her own words* only
a little condensed. She is» on die whole» a veiy fair narrator,
and I don't think I could improve her s|:yle.-* ~
In ttke eyening, she said« the. evening of my visit to the Heights^
I knew as well as if I saw him, that Mrr Heathcliff . was nhaiik
the place ; rad I shunned going out, bec & uae I still earned his
letter ib my pocket, and didn't want to be .threatened, or teased
any more. ■ , ,
1 had made up m^rmhid not to give it till my mafifter went
somewhere; as I could ncit guess how its ieceif > t would a£ & Ql
Catherine. The consequence was, that it did not reSieb her
before tiie lapse dP three days. The fourth was ^imday, and I
brought it into her room, a & erthe family were gone to church*
There was a man servant left to'k^p the house, with me, and
vre generally made a practice of locking the doors during the
hours of service ; but on that occasion die vreadier was so warm
and pleasant that I set them wide open; and to fhlfiU my en-
gagement, as I knew vAio would be comisg, I tdld my oom-
panion that the mistress wished tery much for si^me orangesy
and he mast run over to the villagiB tmd get a few, to be paid
for on the morrow* He departed, and I went upt^stairs, •
Mrs. Linton sat in a loose, white dress, with a light shawl
iv^t'hw sfaouldeiB, in the »eeess of the •open window^ as usual.
Her thick', long hair had been partly lemoved at the beginning
a hot illness; and now she wore it'simply combed over bee
temples and neck. Her appearance was aitered, as I had tcdd
Heathdiff, but when dhe was cakn, there seemed unearthly
beauty in the change.
- The flas^ 6f her eyes had been succeeded hj a dreamy and
melancholy softness : they no longer gave the imptessioir of
looking at the objects around her; they appeared always to
gaze beyond, and far beyond — you would have said out of this
world — ^then the paleness of her face, its haggard aspect having
mrurnnuina fffli«HT«. 137
▼anifllied us ebe reeotered -flesh, -aod tlie peculiar expression
azning from her ^oeotal'state, thoagh painfully suggestive of
their causes, added to the touching hiterest, which she wakened,
mxkd ivfuriabiy to iDe,'J ktH > w, and to anj person who saw her,
i should think, refuted more tan^hJe proofe of convalescence,
Jnd BtatBped her as one doomed -to decay.
A book lay spread or the sill before her, and the scarcely
-pero^^bie wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. I believe
Linton had laid it there, for she never endeavored to divert heiw
«^wi(ii leading, or occupation of any kind; and he would
)ipend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to some
•ttiijeet which had formerly been her amusement.
She was conscious of bis aim, and iu her better moods en-
dured h«r efforts placidly ; only showing their us^lessness by
wyW and -then suppressitig a weatied sigh, and checking him at
last with the saddest of smiles and kisses. At other times she
fMRould turn petidanlly away, and hide her face in her hands, or
even push him off angrily,-^ and then he took care to let her
fdone, for he was certain rfdoing no good.
& immerten) ohapel b^lls were still ringing; and the full, mel-
low flowof the beck in the vsdley, came soothingly on the ear.
It was e sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the
summer fbliage, which drowned that music about the Grange
^en the trees were in leaf. At Wuthenng Heights it always
•ounded e^n quiet days, following a great thaw, or a season of
iKeady rain— and of Wuthenng H^fats Catherine was think-
ing, as she listened; that is, if she thought or listened at all ;
tet she had the vagtie, distant look t mentioned before, which
expressed no recognition of material things either by ear or eye.
" There's a letter for yOu', Mi*s. Linton, " I said, gently insert-
ing it in one hand that rested on her knee. " You must read
it immediately, because it wants an answer. Shall I break the
neaH "
" Yes, " she answered, without altering the direction of her
%yes.
I Qpefned'it — ^ft was very short.
" Now, " I continued, " read it.^'
" She dtew away her hand, and let it fall. I replace < l it in
fcer lap, and stood waithig till it should please her to glance
down ; but that movement was so long delayed that at last I
resumed^—
'•Mu6tI*Qad it,ma'AiirT It is firbm Mr. HeathcIHi: "
138 WUTBBBINQ BBIGHTfl.
There was a start, and a troubled gleam of recollection,'and
a struggle to arrange her ideas. She li & ed the letter, and
seemed to peruse it ; and when she came to the signature she
sighed ; yet still I found she had not gathered its import ; for
upon my desiring to hear hjer reply, she merely pointed to the
name, and gazed at me with mournful and questioning eagerness.
" Well, he wishes to see you,^'said I, guessing her need of
an interpreter. " He's in. the garden by this time, and im*
patient to know what answer I shall bring. "
As I spoke, I observeid a large dog, lying on the siinny graBS
beneath, raise its ears, as if about to bark ; and then smoodiing
them back, announce by a wag of the tail that some one
approached whom it did not consider, a stranger.. ^
Mrs. Linton bent forward, and listened breathlessly. The
minute after a step traversed the hall; the open. house was too
tempting'for Heathcliff to resist walking in ; most likely be
supposed that I was .inclined to shirk my promise, and so
resolved to trust to his own audacity. i
With straining eagerness Catherine gazed toward the en^
trance of her chamber. He did not hit t^ right room directly ;
she iQotioned me to. admit him ; but he found it out ere I c < wild
reach the door, and iii a £itride or two was at her side, and had
her grasped in his arms.'.
He neitl^er spoke nor loosed his hold for some Bre minutes,
during which period he bestowed more kisses than^ever he
gave in his life before, I dare say ; but then my :mistreasi had
kissed him first, and I plainly saw that he could'hardly bear,
for downright agony, to look into her face ! The same con-
viction had stricken him as me, fix > m the instant he beheld her,
that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery there-*-6he was
fated, sure to die.
" Oh, Cathy ! Oh, my lifelhow^ can I bear itT'was the
first sentence lie uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise
his despair.
And now he stared at her so earnestly that I thought the
very intensity of his gaze would bring tears into his eyea^ but
they burned with anguish, they did not melt.
" What now ^ " said Catherine, leaning back, and returning
his look with a suddenly clouded brow-»-her humor was a mere
vane for constantly varying caprices. " " You and Edgar have
brpken my heart, Heathcliff! And you both come to bewail
the deed to me, as if you were the people to be pitied ! I ^all
^WI^TH BRING H EIGHTS; 189
p- „ - ^ , ■■ C
not pity you, not 1/ You have killed me-r-*and tbriven on it, I
thinks .^ow strong you are ! Qovir many years do you meau
to live after I am gone I "
Heatbcliff bad knelt on one knee to embrace her } he at-
tempted to rise^.but she seized bis hair, and kept him down.
*M wish i could hold you, " she continued, bittprly, " till we
were both dead ! I shouldn't care what you ftufiered. I care
nothing £ot your suflferingd. Why shouldn't you suffer 1^ I do !
.Will you ^rget me-r > will you be'happy when I am in tb6
earth ? Will you say, twenty years hence, * That's the grave of
Catherine Earnshaw. I Ipved her long ago, and was wretched
to lose her ; but it is past. I've loved many odiers since — ^my
children are dearer to me than sh^ was; and, at death, I shall
not rejoice that I am going io her, I shall be sorry that I must
leave them P Will you say so, Heathcliff 1 "
" Don't torture me till I'm as mad as youxself,''cried he,
wrenching bis bead free, and grinding his teeth.
The two, to a coo\ spectator, made a istrange and fearful
picture. Well might Catherine deem that Heaven would be a
land of exile to her, unless, with her mortal body, she cast
away her mortal character also. Her pre^nt countenance had
a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and bloodless lip and
scintillating eye ; and she retained in her -closed fingers a
portion of the locks she had been grasping. As to her com-
panion, while raising himself with one hand, he bad taken her
arm with the other ;. and so inadequate was his stock of gentle-
ness to the requirements of her condition, that on his letting go^
I saw £bur distinct impressions lefl blue in the colorless skin.
" Are you possessed with a devil, " he pursued, savagely, " to
talk in that manpier to. me, when you are dying ] Do you
reflect that all those words will be branded in my memory,
and eating deeper eternally, after you have left roe 1 ^You
know you He to say X have killed you^; and, Catherine, you
know diat I could as soon forget you as my existence I Is it
not sufficient for your infernal selfishness that while you are at
peace I shall writhe in the torments of hell ? "
/'I shall not be at peace, " moaned Catherine, recalled ta a
sense of physical weakness by the violent^ unequal throbbing
of her heart, wluch beat, visibly and audibly^ under this excess
of agitation.
She said nothing further till the paroxysm was over ; then
ahe continued^ more kindly— > \j
146 WTTTHJfiltlN.Q »SI.6HTff.
''■ ■ " ■'■'— r
** Fm not wishing yon gre & ter tornieDt thun I htbre, H^alb*
oliff 1 I only wish us nerar to be patted—- «nd should ^ word of
mine distress you hereafter, think I feel the same disteess un*
dergrottnd, and for nay own Bake/^rgire niel Come here
and kneel down again! You'never harmed me in your life«
Nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember than
tny liarsh words 1 Won't you come hwe again 1 Do \ "
Heathdiff went to the back of her chair^ and leaned over»
but not so & r as to let her see bis face, wlricb was livid with
«tnotion. She bent round to look at him ; be would not pei >
mit it; turning abruptly, be walked to tbe fireplace, wbeve ha
stood silent, with his bac^ towaid us, ^
Mi«. X/inton's glance followed him iMuspieioariy ; every move*
nent wOke a new sientiment iu her. After a pause, and a pro*
longed gaze, she resumed, addrendng me in accents, of indag > *
aant disappointment.
'* Oh, you see, Nelly I he would not relent « moment, to keep
«ne out of the grave I Tkat is how I'm loved I Well, never
«nind !'That is not my HeatbdiC t sbati love mine yet; and
take bim with me— 4ie's in ra/soul. And,''Added sbe^ musings
ly, < < the thing that irks me most » this shattet^d prison^ after
all. I'm tired, tired of being inclosed bere. I'm wearying to
escape into that gk)rious world, and to be always .there ; not
aeeing it dimly through tearB, and yearning for it throng the
walls of an tfching heart : but really with it, and in it. N^ly»
you (bink you ate better apd more fortunate dian I ; in fbll
bealth and 6trength-*you are sornr lor mo— ^ery soon diat
will be altered. I shall be sorry for fo», 1 shall be incomt-
parably beyond and'above you all. I itonder, he won't be near
me! " She went on to herself. ^'I thought he wished it^
Heathdiff, dear ! you should not be sullen nqw. Do come to
laQe,fHeatbcliff. "
In ber eagerness, she rose and supported herself on the arm
of the chftii*. At thfeit oamest iippea], he tumed^ to her, looking
absolutely desperate. His eyes wide, and wet at last, fiasbed
fiercely on her; his breath heaved convulsively. An instant
4hey held asunder; and then how they met I hardly saw, but
Catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they wer^
locked in an embrace from which I thought my mistress wotdd
never be released alive.- Iii fact, to my eyes, she seemed di < -
teotly insensible. He flung bimself into the nearest seat, and
on my approaching hurriedly to ascertain if iriie bad ftiatedi b^
WITT MAKING Bri^mnrm 141
gnftdbed «t me,. and ibfuned Hk & a mad dog, and gatiiM^ fier
to him- watl) greedy jealousy. - 1 did not £eel as. if 1 vvere in the
company of a creature of my owq species ;^ it appeared that he
wo«iid not understand, though I spoke to him ; ao I stood off
and held my tongue, in great perplexity. . .
A movero^it of Cathei-ine's relieved mo a little presently :
she put up her hand, to ckue^ his nook, and bring her cheek te
his, as he held her ; while he» in retum, cotering her with fran-
tic caressesi'said, wildly-^
^ You teadk mo* now how cruel you'ye been > -*oruel and
false^ Why did you despise me 1 Why did you betray your
own. h^ai^ Cathy 1 I Have not one word of comlbrt^«*you -de-
serve this. You have killed yourself Yes, you may kiss met
and cry^ and wring out my kisses and tearsk They'll blight
you — ^they'U damn^you. You loiwd- me— -diea what rigki had
you to leew me ? What righ & -*-aiiswer ra & — for the. poor fkn-
cy you felt for Linton ? Because misery^ and degradadon, and
death, and- nothing that < 7bd or Satan oould indict would have
parted us, ycm^ of yont own* will, did it. I have not brokcB
your heait-^oK baive broken itr— and in breaking it, yon have
broken mine. . So xaubh the worse £or me, that J am strong:
Do I want to live ] What kind of living will it be when you
i— Ob, God! WouH you live with yoiir soul in the gravel "
" Let me alone. Let .me alone, " sobbed* Catheribe. .^ > If Tve
done wi'QOig, I'm'dying Jbit iL It is enough ! . You left me too ;
but I won't upbraid you! I forgive you. Forgive me ! "
^ It is hard to foi^ve» and to look at those eyes, and feel
these wasted hands, " he answered.'^Kias me again; and
don't let me see your eyes ! I forgive what you have done to
me. I love my murderer— but yours fy How .can 1 1 "
They were- silent-— their & icea hid* against eaeh other, and
waidied by each other's tears; At least, I suppose the weofHng
was on both sides; as it seemed Heathdiff andd weep on a
great occasion lik6 this. ^
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon
wore £i8t away, the man whom I had sent off rotuzned from hia
ATand ; and I could distinguish, ]}y the shine of the westering
sun up the valley, a concourse thickening outnde Gdmmerton.
< & apel porch.
* > Service is over. My master will be here in half an hour.''
Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Catherine doser— ♦
flfae never aaoved;.
14S WUTRERING H E I « H T 0i
" Bre long I perceived a group of the servants passing up thct
road toward the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton was^ot far behind;
he opened the gate himself, and sauntered slowly up, probably
enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as .summer.
" Now he is here, " I exclaimed. " For Heaven's^ sake,
hurry down! You'll not meet any one on the front staixs.
Do be quick; and stay among (he trees till he is fairly in. "
" I must go, Cathy, " said Heathcliff, seeking U > extricate
himself from his companion's arms. ** Buti if I iive, I'll see
you again before you are asVeep* I won't stray five yards from
your window. "
" You must not go ! " she answered, holdirkg him as firmly as
her strength allowed. . " You «hall not, I tell you. "
** For one hour, " he pleaded, earnestly.
^ " Not for one minute, " she replied. - "
" I must — Linton will be up immediately, " penisted the
alarmed intruder.
He would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by die act-~
she clung fast, gasping ; there was mad resolution in her fyce.
" No ! " she shrieked. « Oh, don't, don't goL It is the last
time ! Edgar will not hurt us. Heatfacliff, I shall die ! I shall
die! "
" Damn the fool. There he is, " cried Heathcliff- sinking
back into his seat. ** Hush, my darling ! Hush, hush, Cathe-
rine! I'll stay. If he shot me so, I'd expire with a blessing
on my lips.''
And there they were fast again. I heard ^ my master mount-
ing the stairs — the cdld sweat ran fi*om my forehead ; I was
horrified.
" Afe you going to listen to her ravings i " I said passionately;
** She does not know what she says. Will you ruin her, be-
cause she has not wit to help herself? Get up ! you could
be free instantly. That is the most diabolical deed that ever
you did. We fire all done for — ^master, mistress, and servant. "
I wrung my hands, and cried out ; and Mr. Linton hastened
his step at the noise. In the midst of my agitation, I was^sin-
cerely glad to observe that Catherine's arms had fallea relaxed,
and her head hung down.
" She's fainted or dead, " I thought, " so much the better.
Far better that i^e should be dead, than lingering a burden
and a misery-maker to all around her.^'
Edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with attooidiT
WI7TB1BEIN6 BCIGHTS. 143
ment ancl rag«. What be meant to do, I can not tell ; hawever,
the other stopped all - demonsU'ations at once, by placing tb%
lifeless looking form in his arms.
^ Look tbere,'^ he said, " unless you be a fiend, help her first,
then you shalll speak to me !'*
He walked into the parlor, and sat down. Mr. Linton sum
moned me, and with great difficulty, and aft^r resorting to many
means, we managed to restore her to sensation ; but pho was all
bewildered ; she sighed and moaned and knew nobody. Edgar,
in his Anxiety ibr her forgot her hated friend. I did not. I
went, .at the earliest opportunity, and besdught him to depart,
affirming that Catherine wad better, and he should hear from me
in the morning, how she passed the night.
" I shall not refuse to go out of doors, " he answered, " but
I shall stay in the garden j and, Nelly, mind you keep your
word to-worrow. " I shall be under those larch trees, mmd ! or
I pay another vis^, whether Linton be in or not.V
He sent a rapid glance through the half-dpen door of the
chamber, and ascertaining, that what I stated was apparently
true, delivered the house of his luckless presence. -
CHAPTER XVL
Aboitt twelve o'clock that night, w*ls bom the Catherine you
saw at Wuthering Heights, a puny, seven months'child ; and
two hours afi:er, the mother died, having never recovered suffi
cient coBsciousness to miss HeathclifF, or know Edgar/-^
The latter*s distraction at his bereavement is a subject too
painfid to be dwelt on ; its afler effects showed how deep the
sorrow sunk*
A great addition, in my eyes, was his being left without an
heir. I bemoaned that, as I gazed on the feeble orphan ;* and
I mentally dibused old Linton for — what was only natural par-
tiality — ^the securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of
his son's.
An unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing ! It might have
vailed out of lHof and nobody cared a marsel during those fint
144 WVTBIBRINrO 0£i««T«f
hours oi existence. We redeemed the neglect aftexvrsKl ;
]Nit it's beginning was as friendless as its end is likely to he.
Next morning — hrigbt and cheerful out of doorsr^-^-stoie
softened in through jihe hlinds of the silent room, and suffused
the couch and its occupant ^ith a meHow, tender glow.
Edgar Linton had lus heild l«id on the pillow, a^ hi & eyes
shut. His young and fair features .were almost ae^^ deathlike as
those of thej^m beside. him,, and. almost as fixed; but ^- was
the hush of exhausted angut^, and hers of perfect peaoe. Her .
brow smooth, her lids desed, h & c Hps wearsa^ the es^resMon of
a smile:^ No bngel in beaYon could, be mens beautiful thaa ehe
appeared; «pd I pai*to < ^* of the kifinite e^id in which she lay.
My mind was never in a ho & r & ajDe than while I^ ga^ed ea
that uhtioubled^ image of divine sest. I instiotidvely eohoed
the words she had uttered a few hours before*'^ Ineorajlarably
beyond, and above us all ! Whether still .on eairtb or aow In
Heaven, her spirit is at home with < ^od \ "
I don't know i^ it be n peculiarity in im^ hut I am seldom
otherwise than happy whUe watching in the chamber (^ deaths
should no frensied or des^ainng mourner ^hare die duty with
me. I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break ; and
I feel an assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter—-
the eternity they have entered — where life is boundless in its
duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in its fullness. I
noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is even in a
love like Mr. Linton's, when he so regretted Ca & erine's blessed
release.
To be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward and
impatient existence she had led, whether ^he naerited a haVen
of peace at last. One^ might doubt, in seasons of cold reflectiooi
but not then, in the presence of her corpse. It asserted its own
tranquillity^, which^seemed a plf^dge of equal ^uiel to ite former
inhahitaiBt.
De you believe such people are happy in the other world^
sir ? I'd give a great deal to know.
I decHned. answering Mrs. Dean's quesliion, which stsuek me
as something heterodox. She pix»ceeded:—
Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have no
light to think she is ; but we'll leave her. with her Makei!^
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sunned
to qnit the room, and steal out to the pure» refreshing air. The
lervaiM thou|^ht me g^ne to shake off the 4»ow«inMs of otf
WVTtLttitVl a flEtGHTS. 145
DPdtraeted watch; in rcaKty my chief motive was seeing Mr.
Heathcliff. If he had remained among the larches all night he
^ould have heard nothing of the stir at the Grange, unless,
perhaps, he might catch the gallop of the messenger going to
i^iinmertofi. If he had come nearer he would, probably be
iware, from the lights Sitting to and fro, And the opening and
shutting of the outer doors, that all was not right within^
I wished, yet feared; to find him. I felt the terrible news
must be told, and 1 longed to get it over ; but how to do it I did
not know.
He Was there-^at least a few yards fiirther in the park, lean-
kig against'an old ash^re^ his hat off, and his hair soaked with
the dew that had glithered on the budded branches, and fell
| > attering round him. He had beeir standing a long time in
that position, for I saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing,
scstrcely three feet from him, btisy in bttilding their nest, and
regarding his proximity no more than that of a piece of tim-
ber. They flew off at my approach, and he raised his eyes and
spc^e:
" She'^ dead ! " he said j " Tre not waited for you to learn
ibat. Put your handkerchief awav-^dn't snivel before me.
] > amn you all !'Eh & wants none of*^ tfour tears P'
I was weeping as much for him as her : w^ do sometime^
pity creatures that have none of the feeling either for them-
selves or others ; and when I first looked into his face I'per-
ceived that he had got intelligence of the catastrophe ; and a
foolish notion struck me that his heart was quelled, and he
|!irayed, because his lips moved, and his gaze was bent on th6
ground.
" Yes, she's dead ! " I. answered, checking my sobs, and dry-
ing my cheeks. " Gone to heaven, I hope, where we may every
eiie join her if we take due warning, and leave our evil ways to
jfollow good. "
" Did sketBke due wtfcfnitt^g, then 1 " asked HeathclifT, attempt-
ing a sneer. " Did she die like a saint t'Come, give me a true
history of th < * event. How did— ^ — "
He endeavofed te t^tonouTice the name, but cotild not manage
it ; and, 6ompfedsiifgm$ mouth, he held a silent combat with his
iftward ag^ny, defj^ng, meanwhile, my sympathy vi^ith aii un-
iinehing, ferocious stare.
• " How'did Ae diet "'he i^umdd, at last, fain, fidtwitb-
standing his- hardihood, to have a support behind him, fdr aft^r
G
146 WUTHECINU HEIGHT 8.
the struggle, he trembled, in spite of himself, to his vety finger-
ends.
" Poor \yretch !'* I thought, " you have a heart and nerves, the
same as your brother men ! Wr^y should you be so anxious to
conceal them 1 Ypar pride can not blind Grod ! You tempt
Him to wring them, till He forces a cry of humiliation !**
" Quietly as a lamb ! " I anawered, aloud. " She drew a sigh,
and stretched hj^rself, like a child reviving, and sinking again to
sleep ; and five minutes after I felt one little pulse a|; her heart,
and nothing more, "
" And — emd did she ev^r mention taeV^he asked, hesitating,
as if he dreaded the answer to his question would introduce
details that he could not bear to hear.
" Her senses never returned-^she recognized nobody from
the time you lefl her, " I said. " She lies with a sweet, smile on.
her face, aild her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early
days. Her life closed in a gentle dream-^may she wake as
kindly in the'other world ! "
" May she \eake in torment ! " he cried, with, frightful vehe-
mence, stamping his foot, and groaning, in a sudden paroxysm
of ungovernable passion. " Why, §he's a liar to -the end*!'
Where is she 1 Not there^-not in heaven-r-not . perishedr—
where ? Oh, you said you cared nothing for my sufierings !
And I pray one prayer — I repeat it tiU my tongue stiffens—
Catherine Eamshaw, may you not rest as long as I am living I'
You said I killed you-— haunt me then ! T.he murdered do
haunt their murderers^^ I believe ; I know that ghosts have
wandered on earth. Be with one always — ^take any forna — drive
me mad [ only do not leave /me in this abyss where I can not
find ^ou ! Oh, God ! it is- unutterable ! I can not live without
my hfe ! I can not live without my soul ! " ,
He dashed his head against the knotted trunk ; and, lifting up
his eyes, bowled, not like a man, but like a savage beast getting
goaded to death with knives and spears.
I observed several splashes of ^blood about the bark of the
tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained; probably,
the scene I witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the
night. It hardly moved my compassion — it. appalled me ; still I
felt reluctant to quit him so. . But the moment he recollected
himself enough to notice me Watching, he thundered a command
for me to go, and I obeyed. He was beyond my skill ta quiet
or console I
Wt/TBBRING H SIGHTS. 147
Mts. Linton^a funeral was appointed to take place on the
Friday following her decease ; and till then her coffin remained
uncoyered, and strewn'with floweis and scented leaves, in the
great drawing-roona, Linton spent his days and nights there, a
sleepless gaardian; and-^-a circumstance concealed from all
but me — Heathcliff spent his nights, at least, outside, equally a
stranger to repose.
I held nocommunieation tvith him; stilll was conscious of
his design to enter, if he eould; and on the Tuesday, a little
afber dark, when my master, & 0m sheer fatigue, h^d been com-
pelled to retire a couple of hours, I went and opened one of the
windows, moved by his perseverance to give him a chance of
bestowing on the fading image of his idl > l one final adieii.
He did not omit to avail himself < ^ the opportunity, cautiously
and briefly ; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slight < -
est noise ; indeed, I Bhouldn't have discovered that he had l^n
there, except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the
corpse's face, and for observing on the^ floor a curl of light hair,
festened with a silver thread, which, on examination, I ascer-
tained to have been taken from a locket hung round Catherine's
neck. Heathclifl* bad opened the trinket, and cast out its con-
tents, replacing them by a black lock of his own. I twisted the
two, and enclosed them together^
Mr. Eamshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains
of his sister to the grave, and lie sent no excuse, but he never
came ; so that besides her husband, the mourners were wholly
composed of tenants and servants. Isabella was not asked.
The place of Catherine's interment, to the surprise of the
villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carved monument
of the Liqtons, nor yet by the tombs x)f her own relations, out-
side. It was dug on a greien slope, in a comer of the kirkyard,
where the wall is so low that heath and bilberry plants have
climbed over it from the moor; and peat mold almost buries^t.
Her husband lies in the same spot, now ; and they have each a
simple headstone above, and a plain gi'ay block at their feet, to
mark die graves.
CHAETER XVIL .
That Friday made the la^t of our fine days, for a qiontti;
lathe evening theweqither broke; the wind slufted.fro & i sbath
to northeast; und brought rain first, and thea sleet and snow.
On the morrow one could hardly imagine that there had been
three weeks of summer: the primroses and crocuses ^ were hid*
den under wintry drifts r the larks were silent, the young leaves
of the early trees smitten and blackened.«-^And dreary, and
chill, and dismal that morrow did creep over! My master kept
his room — I took possession of the lonely parlor, converting it
into a nursery ; and there I was sitting, with the moaning doU
of a child 4aid on my knee, rocking it to and fro; and watdiing,.
meanwhile, the still driving flakes build -up the uncurtained
window, when the door bpened, and some person entered, out
of breath and laughiilg.! -
. My jinger was greater than my astonishment fi > r a minute^ I
supposed it otie of the maids, and I died,
** Have done ! How dare you show your giddiness here i
What would Mr. Linton say if he heard you 1 "
** Excuse me 1 " answered a faftmhar voice, *'but I know Ed^-
gar is iix bed, and I can not stop myself/*
With that, the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and
holding her haud to her side.
^* I have run the whole yray from Wuthering H^^ts 1 " she
continued, after a pause.'* Except where I've flown^ I
couldn't count the number of falls I've had. Oh, I'm aching
aU over I Dou't b^ alarmed-Hthere shall be aii explanation as
Qoon as I can give itr-only just \i%Ye the goodness to step out,
and order the carriage to take me on to < ^mmerton, and.tell a
servant to seek up a few clothes in'my wardrobe. "
The intruder was Mrs. Heathcliff — she certainly^ seemed in.
no laughitjg predicament : her hair streamed on her shoulders,
dripping with snow and water ; she was dressed in the girlish
dress she commonly wore, befitting her age more than her po-
sition ; a low frock, with short sleeves, and nothing on eith^
head or neck. The frock was of light silk, and clung to her with
wet ; and her feet were protected, merely by thin slippers ; add
WVTHKllIKa U mi OUT 9. 149
''■ ^'''... , . I , < I .I—. .■■■ I I
to thia a deep cut under ooe ear, which only tha cold prevented
from bleeding profusely, a white face scratched and bruisedr^and
a frame hardly able Xq support itself through fisitigiue, and you
may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when I had
leisure, to examine herr
" My dear young lady, " I exclaimed ;'* I'll stir nowhere, and
hear nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothesy
and pot on dry things ; and certainly you shall not go to Oim-
merton to-night; soit is needless to oraer the carriage. "
" Oertainly I shall, " she said ] " walking or riding — ^yet I've
no objection to dress mys^f decently ; andr^h, see bow it flows
down my neck now ! the fire does make it smart " -
She insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would
let me touch her ; and not tiU after the coachman had been in-
.structed to get ready, and a maid sent to pack up some neces-
saiy . attire, did I obtain her consent for binding the wound, 4td
helping to change her garments.
** Now Ellen, " she said when my task was finished, and she
was seated in an easy chair on. the hearth, with a cup of tea be-
fore her, " You sit down opposite me, and put poor Catherine's
baby away— ^I don't like to see it ! You mustn't think I care
little for Catherine, because 1 behaved so foolishly on entering
— ^I've cried, too, bitterlyr^yes, more than any one else has
reason to cry— ^we parted unreconciled, you remember^ and I
shan't fingive myself. But for all that I was not going to sym-
pathize, with him-^the brute beast! O give me the poker ! this
js the last thing of hb I have about me* " she slipped the gold
ring fi'om her third finger, and threw it on the floor. *'I'll
«mashit! " she continued, striking with childish spite. " And
then I'll burn it 1 " and she took and dropped the misused arti-
cle among the coals. /* There ! he shall bu^ another if he gets
me back again. He'd be capable of coming to seek me, to
tease Edgar. I dare not stay, lest that notion should possess
bis w:icked head ! And besides, Edgar has not been kind, has
he ] ^ And I won't come suing fpr his assistance ; nor will I
bring him into more trouble.. Necessity compelled me to seek
shelter here ; though if I had not learned he was out of the way,
I'd haye halted at the kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself,
got you to bring what I wanted, and departed again to any
where out of the reach of my accursed — of that incarnate gob-
lin ! Ah, he was in such a fury— if he had caught me I It's a
pity Earnshaw is not his mati^ in sti^ngthr*-! wouldn't have
150 WUTHERINO HEIGHT fl.
run till I'd seen him aU but demolished, had Hiridley been able
to do it! "
•* Well, don't talk so fast, Miss, " I interrupted^ " you'll disor-
der the handkerchief I hate tied round your face, and make the
cut bleed again. Drink your tea, and take breath, and givd
over laughing. Laughter is sadly out of place ulider this roof^
and in your condition I " .
" An undeniable truth, " she replied, " Listen to that ctiiic ! it
maintains a constant wail — send it out of. my hearing, for an
hour; I shan't stay any longer. "
I rang the bell, and committed itr to'a servant's care; and
then I inquired What had urged her to escape from Wuthering
Heights in such an unlikely plight — and wher(g she nieant to go,
sa she refused remaining with us^.'
" I ought, and I wish to remain, " answered she; " to cheer
Kdgar, and take care of the baby, for two things, and because
the Grange is my right home — ^but I'tell you, he- wouldn't let
roe ! Do you think be could bear to see me grow fat, and
merry ; and could bear to think that we were tranquil, and not
resolve on poisoning oiir copafort 1 Now I have the satisfaction
of beine sure that he detests me to to the point of its annoying
him senously to have me within ear-shot or eye-sight. I notice
when I enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are
involuntarily distorted into an expression 6f hatred ; paitly aris-
ing from his knowledge of the good catises I have- to feel that
sentiment for him, an^ partly from original aversion. It is strong
enough to make me feel pretty certain that'be would not chase
me over England, supposing I contrived a clear escape; and
therefore I niust get quite away. I've recovered from my first
diesire to be killed by him : I'd rather he'd kill himself! He
has extinguished my love effectually, and so I'm at my ease. I
can recoHeet yet how I loved him ; and can dimly imagine that
I Qould still be loving him, if— no, no ! Even, if he had doted
on me, the devilish nature would have'revealed its existence
somehow. Catherine had s^n awfully perverted taste to esteem
him so dearly, knowing him so well. Monster! would that he
could be blotted put of creation, and out of iny memory ! "
" Hush, hush ! he's " a human being, " I said. " Be more
charitable ; there are worse men than he is, yet ! "
" He's not a human being, " she retorted ; " and he has no
claim on my charity. I gave him my heart, and he took and
pinched it to death ; and nung it back to me-— people ieel with
WUTETBRINO HEIGHTS. 151
tbeir hearts, EUen^-and siiice he has destroyed mine, I bare
not pow^r to feel for him ; and I would not, though he groaned
from this to his dying day; and wept tears of. blood for Cathe-
rine ! No^ indeed, indeed, I wouldn't! " And here Isabella be-
. gan to ciy ;^ but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes,
she recommenced,
" You asked what has driven me to flight at lastl I was
compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded in rousing his
rage a pitch above his malignity. Pulling out the nerves with
red hot pincers requires more coolness than knocking on the
head. He vras worked up to forget the ffendish prudence he
boasted of, and proceeded to murderous violence. I experi-
enced pleasure in being able to exasperate him : the sense of
pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation ; so I fairly broke
free, and if evet I come into his hands again he is welcome to
a signal revenge.
" Yesterday, you know, Mr. Eamshaw should have been at
the fbneral. He kept himself sober for the purpose— tolerably
sober; not going to bed mad at six o'clock, and getting up
drunk at twelve. Consequently he rose, in suicidal low spirits ;
as fit'for the church as for a dance ; and instead, he sat down
by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls.
** Heathcliff — I shudder to name him ! has been a stranger in
the house from last Sunday till to-day. Whether the angels
have fed him, or his kin beneath^ I can not tell ; but he has not
eaten a meal with us for pearly a week. He l^d just come
home at dawn, and gone up-stairs to his chamber ; locking him-
self in — as if any body dreamed of coveting his company ! There
he continuied, prating like a Methodist; only the deity he im-
plored is senseless dust and ashes ; and Grod, when addressed,
was curiously confounded with his own black father ! After
concluding these precious orisons— and they lasted generally till
he grew hoarse, and his voice was strangled in his throat — ^he
would be off again; always straight down to the Grange! I
wonder Ed^ar did not send for a constable, and give him into
custody ! For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it was im-
possible to avoid regarding this season of deliverance from de-
grading oppression as a holiday*
" I recovered spirits sufficient to hear Joseph's etenial lectures
without weeping; and. to move up and down the house less
with the foot of a frigiitened thief than formerly. Ydu. wouldn't
think that I should cry at any thing Joseph could say, but he
152 WUJHBRING HEIGHT «.
and Hareton are detestable copap^nioQS. I'd rather sit with
Hindley, and hear bis awful talk) than with < t- little maister,^
and bis staunch supporteri that cMiious old man !..
'* When Heathclin is in, I'm oflten obliged to i^ek the kitchen
and their society, or starve among the damp^ uninhabited cham-
bers ; when he is not, as was the case this we,ek, I establish ^
table and chair, at one porner of the hoi;is.e-fire} and never mind
how Mr. Eamshaw may occupy himself ; and be does not inter-
fere with my arrangements : he is quieter now than be used to
be, if no one provokes him ; more sullen and depressed, and less
furious. Joseph affirms he's sure be's an altered man ; that the
Lord has touched his heart, and hp is saved - so as by fire.'I'm .
puzzled to detect signs of the favorable ohangp, but it is not my
business.
" Yester-evening, I sat in my nook, reading eonie old books,
till late on toward twelve. It seemed so dismal to go up-staii's,
with the wild snpw blowing outside, and my thoq-ghts contin-
ually reverting to the kirkyard > and the'new jn^de grave ! I
dared hardly lift my eyes from the page before me, tbs^t melau-
cboly scene so instantly usurped its pjace^
" Hindley sat opposite, his head leaned on his band, perhaps
meditating on the same subject. He -had ceased ^drinking at a
point below iri-atioiiality, and had neither stirred nor. spoken
during two or three hours. There was no sound through the
house, but the moaning virind which shpok the vsrindows every
now and then ; the faint crackling of the coals ^ and the click
of my snuffers as I removed at intervals the lopg wick of the
candle. Hareton and Joseph were probably fast $sleep in bed.
It was very, very sad, and while I read I sighed, for it seemed
as if all joy had vanished from the world, never to be restored.
The doleful silence was broken, at length, by the sound of
the kitchen latch. HeathcW had returned from his watch
earlier than usual, owing, I suppose, to the sudden storm.-
'♦That entrance was fastened; and we heai-d him coming
round to get in by the other. I rose with an irrepressible ex-
pression of what I felt on my lips, which induced my companion,
who had been staring toward the door, to turn and look at me.
" I'll keep him out five minutes, " he exclaimed ; ** you won't
object V
" No, you may keep him out the whole night, for me, " I aw-
swered. " Do ! put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts. "
Earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached die front;
IVUTRE. RING Hfiie-MTGk IM
he then came and brought his chair to the other nde of my table ;
leaning over, it^ and aearching in my eyep a sympathy with the
bm*ning hate that gleaimed from hia : as he both looked and felt
like mi assasain, he couldn't exactly find that ; but he discovered
enough to encourage him ta speak.
" * You, and t,'he said,'haye each a great debt to settle with
the man. out yonder 1 If we were ni^kher of us cowards w«
might combine to discharge it. Are you as soft as'your brother 1
Are you willing to endure to the last» and not oQ.ce attempt a
repayments
'''I'm weary pf enduring now^'I replied,'and I'd be glad
of a retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself; but treacbery
and violence are spean pointed at b > oth ends-*4hey wound thosa
whjo resort to them worse than their enemies/
'^'Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and
violence P cried Hindley.'Mrs. Heathcliff, I'll ask you to do
nothing but sit still and bo dumb. Tell me now, can you 1 I'm
sure you. would have as much pleasure as I in witnessing the
conclusion of the fiend's existence. He'll be your death unless
you overreach him — and he'll be my ruin. Damn the hellish
yiUain ! He knocks at the dbor as if he vrere master bore al-
ready I Promise to hold your tongue, and l^fore that clock
strikes — ^it wants three minutes of .one— you're a free wotnan !'
'" He took the implements which I described to you in my
letter fix > m his breast, and would have turned down the candle .
I snatched it away, however, and seised his arm.
"'I'll not hold my tongue !'I said.'You mustn't touch him.
Let the doov remain shut, and be quiet !'
"'No ! I've f < Mined my resolution, and by God I'll execute
it!'cried the desperate being;'.I'll do you a kindness, in spite
of yourself^ and Hareton justice ! And you needn't trouble your
head to screen me. Catherine is gone-^nobody alive would re*
gret me, or be ashamed thougb I cut my throat this minute—
and it's time to mak^ an end P
" I might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with
a lunatic. The only resource, left me was to run. to a lattice,
apd warn his intended victim of the fate which awaited him.
"'You'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night l'I ex*
claimed in a rather triumphant tone.'Mr. Barnahaw has a
mind to shoot you, if you persist in endeavoring to enter.'
•*'You'd better open the door, you ^ ho answered, ad <
dressing me by scmie elegant term that I don't care to repeat .
154 WUTHERING HEIGHT iS.
^ * I shall not meddle in the matter,- 1 retorted again. * Come
in and get shot, if you please. IVe done my duty.'
" With that j shut the window, and returned to my place by
the fire, having too spiall a stock of hypocrisy at my command
to pretend any anxiety for the danger thfct menaced him.
" Earnshaw swore passionately at me, affirming that I loved
the villain yet, and calling me all sorts of names for the base
spirit I evinced. And I, in my secret heart (and conscience never
reproached me), thought what a blessi^ig it WouldT bevfbr^m
should HeathcliflT put him out of misery, and what a blessing for
me should he send Heathcliff to his right abode \ As I sat
nursing these refi|ectioTis» the casement behind the was banged
upon the ^oor by a blow from the laitt^- individual, and his
black countenance looked blightingly through. The stanchions
stood too close to suffer his shoulders to follow, and I ismiled,
exulting in my fancied security. His hair and clothes, were
whitened with snow, aiid his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed by
cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.
"'Isabella, let me in, or I'll make you repent V he * gimed,'
as Joseph calls it.
" * I can not comnait murder !*'I replied. * Mr. Hindley standa
sentinel, with a knife and loaded pistol.'
"'Let me in by the kitchen door,'he said.
** * Hindley will be there before me,'I answered. * And that's
a poor love of yours, that can not bear a shower of snow! W©
were lefl at peace in our beds as long as. the sutnraer moon
shone, but the moment k blast of winter returns you must run
for shelter ! Heathcliff, if I were you I'd go stretch myself over
her grave, and die like a faithful dog. The world is surely not
worth living in now, is it ] You had distinctly impressed on me
the idea that Catherine was the whole joy of your life. I tan't
imagine how you think of surviving her loss.'
**'He's there, is he ]'exclaimed my companion, lushing to the
gap. * If I can get my arm out I can hit him.'
" I'm afraid,'Ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked ; but
you don't know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't have aided or
abetted an attempt on even his life, for any thing. Wish that
he were dead I must ; and therefore I was fearfully disappointed,
and unnerved by terror for the consequences of my taunting
speeQh, when he flung himself on Eamshaw's weapon and
wrenched it from his grasp. The charge exploded, and the
knife, in springing back, closed into its owner's wrist. Heath-
WUTHElLING HEIGHTS. 155
cliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the flesh as it pass-
ed on, and thrast it dripping into his pocket. He then took a
stone, struck -down the division between two windows, and
sprung in. His adversary had fallen senseless with excessive
pain, and the flow of blood that gushed from an artery or a large
vein.^
" The ruflian kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his
head repeatedly against the flags, holding me with one hand,
meantime, to prevent me summoning Joseph. He exerted pre-
terhuman self-denial in abstaifcng from finishing him completely ;
but, getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged the
apparently^inanimate body to the settle. There he tore off the
sleeve of Eamshaw's coat^ and bound up the wound with brutal
roughness, spitting and cursing during the operation as energeti-
cally as he hud kicked before. . Being at liberty, I lost no time
in seeking the old'servant, who, Jiaving gathered by degrees the
purport of my hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as he descended
the steps, |two at once.
; " * Whet is thur tub do, nah ? whet is thut tub do, nah V
'•'*** There's this to do,'thundered Heathcliff,'that your mas-
ter's mad, and, should he last another month, I'll have him to an
asylum. And how the devil did you come to fasteti me out, you
toothless hound ? Don't stand muttenng and mumbling there.
Come, I'm not going to nurse him. Wash that stuff away — and
mind the sparks of yoiir candle — ^it is niore than half brandy]'
" Und sba, yiah been murthering on him ]'exclaimed Joseph,
lifting bis hands and eyes in horror.'If iver aw seed a seeght
loike thift ! May the Lord —'
** Heathcliff gave him a push upon his knees, in the middle
of the blood ; and flung a towel to him ; but instead of proceed-
ing to dry it up, he joined bis hands, and began a prayer which
excited my laughter from its odd phraseology. I was in the
condition of mind to be shocked at nothing ; in fact, I was as
luckless as some malefactors show themselves at the foot of the
gallows.
" * Oh, I forgot you,'said the tyrant, * you shall do that.
Down with you. And you conspire with him against me, do
you, viper ] There, that is work fit for you !'-
" He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside
Joseph, who steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose,
vowing he would set off'for the Grange directly. Mr., Linton
was a magbtrate, and tliough he had fifty wives dead, he should
]50 WUTQEHINa BEIQUTff
inquire into this. He w^s so obstinate in, his resolution that
Heathcliff deemed i^ expedient to compel from my lips a re*^
capitulation of what had taken place ; standing over me,, heav-
ing with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the account in
answer to his questions. It required a great deal of labor to
satisfy the old man that he was not the aggressor ; especially
with my hardly? wrung replies. However, Mr. E amah aw soon
convinced him that he was alive sfill ; he hastened to administer
a dose of spirits, and by their succor his master presently regain-
ed motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aware that he wa^
ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called hino^
deliriously intoxicated ; and ^aid he should not notice his atrc^
cious conduct further ; but; advised him to get to bed. To my
joy, he left us after giving this judicious counsel, apdHindley
stretched himself on the hearth- stone. I departed to my owu
room, marveling that I had escaped so easily. .
" This morning, when I came down, about h^lf ^n hour before
noon, Mr. Eamshaw, was sitting by the fire, deadly sick { hi%
evil genius, almost as gaunt and ghastly, leai^ed. against the diim-
ney. Neither appeared inclined to dine; and having waited
till a*ll was cold on the table, I commenced'alope. Nothing
hindered me from eating heaitily ; and I experienced a certaiu
sense of satisfacticm and superiority, as, at intervals, I cast a
look toward my silent companions, and felt tlie ^qomfort of a
quiet conjjcience within me. . ^ .
" After I had done, I ventured on the unusual liberty of
drawing near the fire ; going round EamshaW's^ seat, .and'
kneeling in the corner beside him, Heathcliff did not glance
my way, and I gazed up > and contemplated his features, almost
as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. His fore-
head, that J once thought so m^nly, and that I now thiilk sa
diabolical, was 8hade4 with a heavy cloud ; his basilisk eyeft
were nearly quenched by sleeplessness-- > *and. weeping, perhaps,
for the lashes were wet then; his lips devoid of their < & rocioua
sneer, and sealed in an expression of^unspeakable sadness. Had
it been. another, I would have povered my face, in the presence
of such grief. In hU case, I was gratified : and ignoble as it
seems to insult a fallen enemy, I couldn't miss this chance of
sticking in a dart ; his weakness was the only time when I could
taste the delight of paying wrong for vsrong.
" Fie, fie. Miss ! " I intennipted. " One mig)}t suppose you
had never opened a Bible in your life. If God afflict your
WUTH9ll|N«, HEIGHT*. 157
enendes, surely that ought to ouffice you. It is both mfiBU and
presumptuous to add your.torture to hi* I "
'* Id general, V}1 allow that it would be, Ellen/'she continued.
" But y\rhat misery laid OQ H^thcliff could content me, unless
I have a hand in it? I'd rather he suffered Zei^^if I might
cause his sufferings, and he might kn < nff that. I was the cause.
Oh, I owe him so much. On pSy one condition ,can I hQpe to
forgive him. It is, if I may take an eye for an oye^ a tootn for
a tooth, for eyeyy wrench of agony, return a wrench, reduce
him to my level. As he was the first to injure, make hii^n the
first to implore pardon ; ^nd then*-*-why then, £jlon» I might
show you some genero > ^ity. But it is utterly impossible I
can ever be revenged, and therefere I can not forgive him*
Hindley wanted some water, and I handed, him. a glass, and
asked him how he was, "
" * Nqt as ill as I wish,* he replied. *3ut leaving out my
arm, every inck of me is as sore as if I had been fighting with a
legion of imps!*'.
"'Yes, no wonder,'was my next remark. * C)a.therine used to
boast that she stpod between you and bodily harm* < -sh|9 meant
that certain persons would not hurt you, for^fear of offending
her. It's well people don't rea/Zy rise from. the grave, or, last
night, she might have witnessed a repulsive scene 1 Are not
you bruised and cut over your chest and shoulders 1'
" *I can't say,'he answered; * but what do you meant
Did he dare to strike me when I was down?'
" * He trampled on, and kicked you, and dashed you on the
ground,'I whispered.'And his mouth watered to. tear you
with his teeth; because) he's only half a man^-not so much*'
*'Mr, Earnsha\^ looked up, like me, to the countenance of
our mutual foe; who« absorb^ in his anguish, seemed in-*
sensible, to any thing around him ; the longer he stood, the
5)lainer his reflections revealed their blackness through his
eat^res;
" * Oh, if God would but giv^ me strength to strangle him in
my Ifisit agony, I'd go tp hell with jov,'gi'oaned the impatient
man, writhing to rise > and sinking back in despair, convinced of
his inadequacy for the struggle,
" * Nay, it's enough that he has murdered qc\o of you,* I ob-
served aloud.'At the Grange, every one knows your sister
would have been living now had it not been for Mr. Heatbclitt
^fter all, it is preferable to be bated than loved by him. When
158 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
I tecoUect how happy we were — ^how happy Catherine waa be-
fone he came — I'm fit to curse the day/
" Most likely, Heathdiflf noticed more the truth of what was
said, than the spirit of the person who said it. . Hia attention
was roused, I saw, for his eyes rained down tears among the
ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sighs. I stared full
at him, and laughed scornfully. The clouded windows of hell
flashed a moment toward me; the fiend which usually looked
out, however, -was so dimmed axid drowned that I did not fear
to hazard another sound of derision.
"'Get up, and begone out of my sight,'said the mourner.
" I guessed he uttered those words, at Jeast, though his voice
was hardly intelligible. ^ /
" * 1 beg your pardon,'I replied. * But I loved Catherine
too ; and her brother requires attendance which, for her sake, I
shall supply. Now that she's dead, I see her in Hindley. Hind-
ley has exactly her eyes, if you had not tried to gouge them out,
and made them black and red, and her —'
" * Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death !'he
cried, making a movement that caused me to make one also.
" * But then,'I continued, holding myself ready to flee ; * if
poor Catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous,
contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff, she would soon
have presented a similar picture ! She wouldn't have borne
your abominable behayiol* quietly ; her detestation and disgust
must have found voice.
** The back of the settle, and Eamshaw's person interposed
between me and him ; so, instead of endeavoring to reacn me,
he snatched a dinner knife from the table, and flung it at my
head. It struck beneath my ear, and stopped the sentetlce 1
was uttering; but pulling it out, I sprang to the door, and
delivered another which I hope went a little deeper than his
missile.
" The last glimpse I caught of him was a furious rush, on his
part, checked by the embrace of his host ; and both fell locked
together on the hearth. In my flight through the kitchen I bid
Joseph speed to his master ; I knocked over Hareton, who was
hanging a litter of puppies fl*om a chair-back in Xfae doorway ;
and, blest as a soul escaped from purgatory, I bounded, leaped,
and flew down the steep road : then, quitting iti9 windings, shot
direct across the moor, rolling over banks, and wading through
marshes; precipitating m^lf, in & ct, toward the beacon light
WUTHBHING HEIGHTS. 159
of the Grange. And far rather wouldF I be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions, than even for one
night abide beneath the roof of Wuthering. Heights again. "
Isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea ; then she
rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet, and a g^eat shawl I
had brought, and turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to
remain another hour, she stepped upcm a chair, kissed Edgar's
and Catherine's portraits, bestowed a similar salute on nie, and
descended to the carriage, accompanied by Fanny, who yelped
wild with joy at recovering her mistress. She was driven away,
never to rerisit this neighborhood; but a regular correspondence
was established between her and my master, when things were
more settled.
1 believe her new abode was in the south, n^r London; there
she had a son bom, a few months subsequent to her escape. He
was christened Linton, and, from the first, she i*eportea him to
be an ailing, peevish creature. Mr, Heathcliff, meeting me one
day in the village, inquired where she lived. . I refused to tell.
He remaiiced that it was not of any moment, only she ihust be-
ware of coming to her brother ; she should not be with him, if
he had to keep her himself.
- Though I WQuld give no information, he discovered, through
Bome of the other servants, both her plape of residence, and the
existence of the child. Still he didn't molest her; for which
forbearance she might thank his aversion, I suppose. He often
asked about -the infant when he saw me ; and on hearing its
name, smiled giimly, and observed :
" They wish me to hate it too, do they V
" I don't think they wish. you to know any thing about it, " I
answered.
" But I'll have it, " he said, " when I want it. .They may
reckon on that ! "
Fortunately, its rmother died before the time arrived, some
thirteen years after the decease of Catherine, when Linton was
twelve,'or a little niore.
On the day succeeding Isabella's unexpected visit, I had no
opportunity of speaking to my master : he shunned conversation,
and was fit for discussing nothing. When I could get him to
listen, I saw it pleased him that his sister had lefl her husband,
whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildness of his
nature would scarcely seem to allow. So deep and sensitive
was his ayersion, that he refi^ned from going ariy where where
](S0 WUTHERINQ HEIGHT*.
be wa3 likely to see or hear of Heatbcliff. Grief aad that to«
gether transformed him inta a complete hermit : he threw up
his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend ehurdh, avoided
the village on aU .occasions, and spent a. life of entire seclusion
within the limits of his park and grounds : only varied by soli-
tary rambles on the moors, and visits to the grave t)f his wife,
mostly at evening, or early morning, before other wanderers
were abroad.
But -he was too good tcx be thoroughly unhappy long. JE &
didn't pray for Catherine's soul to haunt him. .Time brought
resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than common joy. He
recalled her memory wiflu. ardent, tender love, and hopeful
aspiring to the better world, where, he doubted not she was gone.
And he had earthly consolation and affections also. For a
few day», I said^ he seemed regardless of the puny successor to
the departed : that coldness, melted as fast as snow in April,
and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a^step, it
wielded a despot's scepter in hia heart It was named Oath^
erine, but he never called it the name in full, as he had never
called the fipst Cathei^ine short, probably because HeathclifT^
had a habit of doing so. The little one was always Cathy, Ui
formed to hinpi a distinction £:om the^ mother, and yet, a oon-
pectiou with her ^ and his a.ttachment sprang from its relation to
her, far more than from its being h\ & owo.
I used to draw a cpmpajrison between him and. Hindley
£arnshaw» and peiplex myself to explain satisfactorily why
their conduct was so opposite in similar cu'cUm'stanceo. They
had both been fond husbands, and were both attached to their
children ; and I could not see how they shouldn't both have
taken the same road, for good or evil. But, I thought in my
mind, Hindley with apparently the stronger head, iias shown
himself sadly the worse and the weaker man. When his^ship
struck, the captain abandoned his po^ ; and the crew, instead
pf trying to save her, ruj»bed into riot and confusion, leaving no
hope for their luckless vessel. Linton, on the contrary, dis-
played the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul : he trusted
Grod^r-and God comdkirted him. One hoped, and tjjp othec
despaired : they chose their own lots, and were riighteously
doomed to endure them. —
But you'll not want to hear my moralizing, Mr. Lockwood :
you'll judge as well as I can, aU these things ; at ledst, yoa'U
diink you will, and tl^at'a the same.— ^ ^
WXJTUERIN6 HEIGHT • > 1Q»
The end of £amshaw was what might have been expected!
It followed fast ob his sister's ; therq was scarcely six moutha
between them. We, at the Grange, never got a very succioot
account of hia. state preceding it ; all that I did learp, was on
occasion of going to aid in the preparations for the funeral. Mr.
Kenneth came ta^iinpuQce the^event to my maater.
" liVell, Nelly, " said he, riding inio the yard one morning, too
early not to alarm me with an inftant preaentimetit of bad news,
V It's^ your and my tuiii to go into mourning at present. Who's
given, us the slip now, do you thipk ] " , >
" Who ] " I asked in a flurry. ^
. ** Why, guess T'he returned, dismounting, and slinging hia
bridle on a hook by the door. " And nip up the corner of your
apron ; I'm certain you'll need it. "
" Not Mr. HeathcUff, surely ] I exclaimed. "
" What ! would you have tears for biyn V* said the doctor.
No, IjEeathcliff's a tough young fellow ; h^ looks blooming :to-
day-T^rve just seen him. He's rapidly regabing flesh since he
lost his better half. ^
" Who is it then, Mr. Kenneth V* I repeated impatiently.
" Hiudley Kamsbaw I Your old friend Hii)dley, " be replied.
** And my wicked gossip ; though be's been too wild for me this
long while. There I I said we should draw water. But eheer
upl He died true to his character, dru^k aa a lord, JPoor
lad. I'm soFry too^ Que can't help miasing an old companion ;
though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man imagiaed;
and has done me^many a rascally turn. He's barely twenty*
seven, it seems } that'is your own age ; who would have thought
you were bom in one year ! "
J confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of Mrs.
Linton's death : ancient aasociatiouB lingered round my heart ;
I sat down in the porch, and wept as for a blood relation,
desiritig Kenneth to get another seiTant to introduce him to the
master. I could not hinder myself irom pondering on the
question— " Had he had fair play ] " Whatever I did, that
idea would bother me : it was so tireaomely pertinacioua that I
resolved on requesting leave Jo go to Wuthering Heights, and
assist in the last duties to the dead. Mr. Linton was extremely
reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless
condition In which be4ay ; und I said my old master and foster
brother had a claim on my services as strong as his own. Be-
sidea, I i»min < }ed him that th# child, Haretv^n^ was his wife's
162 \;VUTHER1N6 HEIGHTS.
nephew ) and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to act as
its guardian ; and he Ought to and niust incjuire how the prop-
erty was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.
He was unfit for attending to such matters theii, but he bid
me speak to his lawyer ;'and at length permitted me to go
His lawyer had been Eamshaw's also : I called at the village,
and asked him to accompany me. He shook his head^ and
advised that Heathcliff should be let alone ; affirming, if the
truth were known, Hareton would bb found little else than a
beggar. ]'
''His father died in debt; " hd said, " the'whole property is
mortgaged, and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow
him an opportunity of creating some interest in the creditor's
heart, that he may be inclined to deal leniently toward hiin. "
When I i-eached the Heights, I explained that I had eome to
see every thing carried on decently, and Joseph, who appeared
in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence.
Mr. Heathcliff said he did not perceive that I was wanted, but
I might stay and order the an-angements for the funeral, if I
chose.
** Con*ectly, " he remaiked, " that fool's body should be buried
at the cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I happened
to leave him ten minutes, yesterday afternoon, and, in that in-
terval, he fastened the two doors of the house against me, and
he has spent the night in drinking himself to death deliberately !
We broke in this morning, for we heard him snorting like a
horse; and there he was, laid over the settle— flaying and
scalping would not have wakened him. I sent fbr Kenneth,
and he came | but not till th^ beast had changed into carrion —
he was both dpad, and cold, and stark ; and so you'll allow, it
was useless making more stir about him !*'.
The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttiBred,
*'Awd rather he'd goan hisseln fur t'doctorl Aw sud uh
taen tent uh t'maister better nur him — ^un he wam't deead when
aw left, nowt uh t'soait ! "
I insisted on the funeral being rei^ectable. Mr. Heathcliff
said I might have my own way there, too ; only, he desired me
to remember, that the money for the whole affiiir came out of
his pocket.
He maintained a hard, careless deportment, indicative of
neither joy nor sorrow ; if any thing, it ex| > reesed a flinty grat-
ification at a piece of difficult work, successfully executed. I
WUTHEBINO H EIGHTS. 188
observed once, iudeed, something like exultation in his aspect
It Was just when the people were bearing the coffin from the
house ; he had the hypociisy to represent a mourner ; and pre-
yious to following with Ha^eton he lifted the unfortunate child
upon the'table, and muttered with peculiar gusto,
'* Now my bonny lad you are mifte ! . And we'U see if one
ti*ee won't grow as crooked as another, with the same wind to
twist it! " _
The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this speech ; he played
with Heath < :liff's whiskers, and stroked his cheek, but I diviued
its meaning, and observed tartly,
•* That boy must go back with me to Thrushcross Grange, sir.
There is nothing in the world less yours than he is ! "
" Does Lintojn say so'J " he demanded.
" Of course-^he has ordered me to take him, " I replied.
" Well, " said the scoundrel, " we'll not argue the subject now ;
but I have a'fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so
intimate to your master, that I must supply the place of this
with my own, if he attempt to remove it j . I don't engage to let
Hareton go, undisputed ; but I'll be pretty sure to make the
other come ! remember to tell him.'*
This hint was enough to bind our hands.'I repeated its sub-
stance, on my return, and Edgar Linton, jittle interested at the
commencement, spoke no more of interfering. I'm not aware
that he could have done it to any purpose had he'been ever so
willing. ^
The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights : he
held firm possession, and proved to " the attorney, who, in his
turn, proved it to Mr. Linton, that Barnshaw had niortgaged
every yard of land he owned for cash t;o supply hife mania for
gaming : and he, Heathcliff, was the mortgagee.
In that manner, Hafeton, who should now be the first gentle-
m.an in the neighborhood, was reduced to a state of complete
dependence on his father's inveterate enemy ; and lives in his
owu^ house as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages, and
quite unable to right himself, because of his fiiendlesaness, and
hiis ignorance that he has been wrongiedk
CHAPTISR'XVIIL
The twelve yeats > — condnued Mrs. Dean,-T-foliowing that
dismal period, were the happiest of my life: my greatest
troubles, in their passage, rose from our little lady's trifling ill-
nesses, which she had to experience in common with all chil-
dren, rifch and poor.
For the rest, after the ficst sixidpnths, she grew li^e a larch :
and could walk and talk^too, in her own way, beiore the heath
blossolhed a second time ovef Mrs. Lintou's dust. She watf
the most winning^hing that ever brought sunshine into a deso-
late house — a real beauty in face — with the Eamshaws'hand-
some dark ^yes, but the Lin tons'fair skin, and small features^
and yellow curling hair. Her spirit was high, though not rough,
and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its af-
fections. That capacity for intense attachments reminded roe
of her mother ; still she did not resemble her ; for she could be
soft and mild as a dove, and she had & gentle voip^, and pensive
expression : her anger wafl never furious ; her love never fierce ;
it was deep and tender.
However, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her
gifts. A propensity to be saucy was one ; and a perverse will
that indulged children invariably acquite, whether they be good
tempered or cross. If ^ servant chanced to vex her, it was al-
ways, " I shall tell papa ! " And if he reproved her, even by a
look, you would haye thought it a heart:breaking business ; I
don't believe he ever did speak a harsh word to her.
He took her education entirely on himself and made it an
amusement ; fortunately, curiosity and a quick intellect urged
her into an apt scholar ; she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did
honor to his teaching. Till she reached the age of thirteen, she
had not opce been beyond the l*ange of the park by herselC
Mr. Linton would take her with him, a mile or so outside, o«
rare occasions ; but he trusted her to no one else.'Gimmerton
was an unsubstantial name in her ears ; the chapel the only
building she had approached or entered, except her own home;
Wuthering Heights and Mr. Heathcliff did not exist for her;
she was a perfect recluse, and, apparently, perfectly contented.
WtTTHEElNO HBKIHT9. 165
Sometimes, indeed, while surveying the ccmntiy from her nurs-
ery -window,^ she would obsenre^—
" Ellcto, how Idfigfwill it be before I cah walk to the top of
those hilk 1 I wonder what lies on the other side-^is it tiie
seal''
" No, Miss Cathy, " I'would answer, " it is hills again, just
Ike these. " .
" And what are those golden rocks like« when you stand
under them V* she once asked.
The abrupt descent of Fenistone Cr^igs particularly attracted
her notice, especially when the setting 6un shone on it, and the
topmost heightsi ; and the whole extent of IsindscHpe besides
lay in shadow. I explained that they w6re bare masses of
stone, with hardly enough eardi in thdir cfefts to nourish a stunt^
ed tree. -
" And why are they bright so long After it is erenhig here V*
she pursued.^
" Because they are a great deal higher up than we are, " re-
plied I j " you could not climb them— they are too high and
steep. In ivtntet the frost is always there before it comes to us ;
And, deep into summer, I hare found snow under that black hol-
low on the northeast side. "
" Oh, you have been on them ! " she cried, gleefully. " Then
I can go, too, when I am a woman. Has papa been, Ellen V*
** Papa wotfld tell you, miss, " I answered, hastily, " that they
are not worth the trouble of visiting. The moors, where you
ramble with him, are much nicer ; and Thrushci-osa park is the
finest place in the world.'*
" But I know the park, and I don't know thdse, " she mur-
mured to herself. " And I should delight to look round me,
from the brow of that tallest poibt. . My little pony, Mimiy, shall
take itie some time. "
One of the maids mentioning the feiry cave, quitfe turned
her head with a desire to fulfill this project*, she teased Mr.
Linton about it, and he promised she should have the journey
when she got c^der ; but Miss Catherine measui^ her age by
months, and*-
" Now, am I old enough to go td Penistone Crags T'was the
constant question in her mouth..
Tie road thither wound close by Wuthering Heights. Ed-
gar had -not the heart to pass it; so she received as constantly
tfaei
166 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
^'Not yet, love, not yet. "
I said Mi's. Heathcliff lived about a dozen years after quitting;
her husband. Her family v^ere of a delicate constitution ; she
and Edgar both lacked the ruddy health. that you will generally
meet in these paits. What her last illness was, I am not cer-
tain ; I conjecture they died of the same thing, a kind of fever,
slow at its commencement, but incurable, and rapidly consuming
life toward the close. ^
She wrote to inform her brother of the probable conclusion
of a four months'indisposition under which, she had suffered ;
and entreated him to com^ to her, if possible, for she had much
to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, and deliver Linton
safely into her hands. Her hope wasj that Linton might be left
with him, as he had been with her ; his father, she would fain
convince herself, had no desire to assume the burden of his
maintenance or education.
My master hesitated not la moment in complying with her re-
quest; reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls, he
flew to answer this ; commending^ Catherine to my peculiar vig-
ilance in his absence, with reiterated orders that she must not
wander out a£ the park, even under my escort ; he did not cal-
culate on her going unaccompanied.
He was awjay three weeks. The first day or two my charge
sat in a comer of the library, too sad fo^ either reading or play-
ing ; in that quiet state she caused me little trouble ; but it was
succeeded by an interval of impatient, fretful weariness : and,
being too busy and too old then to run up and down amusing
her, 1 hit on a method by which she might enteitain hei-self.
. I used to spnd her on her travels rou^d the grounds — -now on
foot, and now on a pony; indulging her with a patient audience
of all her real and imaginary adventures, when she re-
turned.
The summer shone in full prime ; and she took such a taste
fofthis solitary rfimbling that she of^en contrived to remain out
from breakfast till tea ; and then the evenings were spent in
recounting her fanciful tales. I did not fear her breaking
bounds, because the gates were generally locked, and I thought
she would scarcely venture foith alone, if they had stood wide
open. Unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced. Catherine
came to me, one morning at eight o'clock, and said she was
that day an Arabian merdiant, going to cross the desert with
his caravan ; and I must give her plenty of provisions for her-
WUTB£RIN6 HEIGHTS. 167
self and beasts, a horse^ and three camels, personated by a
large bound and a couple of pointers.
I gQjt together good store of dainties, and slung them in a
basket on one side of the saddle ; and she sprang up as gay as
a fairy, sheltered by her wi3e-brinuned hat and gauze veil from
the July san» and trotted off with a merry laugh,, mocking my
cautious counsel to avoid galloping, and come back early.
The naughty thing never made her appearance at tea. One
traveler, the hound, being an old dog, and fond of its ease,
returned ; but neither Cathy^ nor the pony, nor the two pointei-s
were visible .in any direction ; and I dispatched emissaries
down this path, and that path, and„ at last, went wandering in
search of her myself.
There wtls a laborer working at a fence round a plantation,
on the horde i-s of the grounds, I inquired of hini if he had
seen our young lady 1 *
" I saw her at morn, " - he replied, " she would have me to cut
her a hazel switch; ^nd then she leaped her galloway over
the hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and galloped out ol
flight. "
You may guess how I felt at hearing this news. It struck
xne directly she must have started for Peuistone Crags.
" What will become of her V* 1 ejaculated,, pushing through
a gap which the man was repairing, and making stri^ight to the
high road. I walked as if for a wager, mile after mile, till a
turn brought me in view of the Heights, but no Catherine could
I detect, far or near.
The Crags lie about a mile and a half beyond Mr.'Heath-
cliff's place, and thai; is four from the Grange, sol began to
fear night would. fall ere I could reach them.
" And what if she should have slipped in clambering among
them, " I reflected, " and been killed, or broken some of her
bones 1 " V'
My suspense was truly painful ; and, at first, it gave me
delightful relief to obsei-ve, in hurrying by the farm-house,
Charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window,
with swelled head and bleeding ear. I opened the wicket,
and ran to the door, l^nocking vehemently for admittance. A
woman whom I kne^v, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton,
answered — she h,ad been servant there since the deexh of Mr.
Eamshaw. ,
" Ah, " said she, ^* you are come a seeking your little mifi-
IM WCtftCftlNG HEIGHT §.
tress ! don't be frigbtened. Sbe's bere safe-^ot Fin glad ie
isn't tbe master. "
" He is not at home then, is be V I panted, quit^ breathless
with quick walking and alarm.
" No, no, " she replied, ** both be and Joseph are off, and
I think they won't return this hoiir or more. Step in and rest
you a bit. "
I entered, and beheld my stray lamb, heated on the hearth,
rocking herself in a little chair that bad been her mother's,
when a child. Her hat was hung a^inst the wall, and she
deemed perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the best
spirits imaginable^ to Hareton, now a great, strong lad of
eighteen, who stared at her with considerable curiosity and
astonishment; comprehending pi^cious little of the fluent suc-
cession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased
pouring forth. . .
" Very well, Missf, " I exclaimed, concealing my joy under an
angry Countenance. " This is your last ride till papa comes
back. *• I'll not trust you over the threshold again, you naughty,
naughty girl. "
" Aha, Ellen f she cried, gayly, juniping up and running to
my side*. *'1 shall have a pretty story to tell to-night — and so
you've found me out. Have you ever been here in your life
Wore? "
" Put that hat on, andhome at otrce, " said I. " I'm dread-
folly grieved at you. Miss Cathy — you've done extremely wrong !
It's no use pouting and ciying; that won't repay the ti'ouble
I've had, scouring'the country after you. 1*0 think how Mr.
Linton charged me to keep you in, and you stealing off ^o; it
dhows you are a cunning little fbx, and nobody will put faith in
you any more. "
" What have rdone 1 " sobbed she, instantly checked. " Papa
charged me nothing — ^he'll not scold tne, Ellen — ^he's nevef cross,
like you ! "
^ " Come, wjme !*'I repeated, t* nt tie the ribbon*. Now let
us have no petulance. Oh, for shame. Vou thirteen yeans
old, and suth a baby J " " ^
This exclamation was caused by hef pushing the hat firom
her head, and retreating to the chimney, out of my reach.
" Nay, " said the servant, " don*t be bard on the bonny lass,
Mrs. Dean. We made her stop^ she'd fain have ridden for-
ward, afeard you should bd uneasy. But Hareton offered to
go i«tth h«r,aB4rI thddghthe shMId; It^6 ai^ldroad overthe
hiUs. "
Haretx > D^ dllitfig^ the'tHdcussicm, f^tood T < rith hia bands ih his
pockets, too awkward tor sj^ki thoogh he looked aa if he did
not relish my; itttttifiion.
" How long am I to waitT'I cOntimied, difliriBgtfrding the
womcm^ inte^renoe. " It will b^ dark io ten mttitites. Where
is the pony, Miss Cathy 1 And whiere itf Phoenix t I shall
llMiVe yoti^ ufileiBK'yoti be qtiick^r-sb please youwelC "
" Tho ponyifl'iii th^ yard, " sfeo replied] " «aid-Ph < 3 & rfic is shnt
in tbe«9. lift's biet^h^ atid s« iff Cbarlief. I was'going to tell
you all about it, but you are in a bad temper, and don't deserve
to hwrar. " -
I picked up btirhttt^ ahd appro^^ed'td reinstAtiB it; but per-
oeMngf that tbo pelbple of the hous^ took^ her parti sh^ com-
menced capering round the room ; and, on my giving chase, ran
like a mou$e, ovef and utt^^f and beftiiid tb^ furniture, render-
ing it ridiculous fbr in6 to purstte. Hareton and the woman
laughed^ and i^he joitfed themi and vv^6d more impertinent still,
tali I cried, in gt«at initationi
" Well, Miss Cathy, if yottWetie aware whose house this is.
you'd bo glad enough to get out. "
" It's y^r fathor's'idn't iti " said she, turning to Haretoii.
" Nay, " he replied, looking dowtt, and bhishing bastrfuHy;
He could not st^d^a st^a^ gftze from her eyes,- though they
were just his own.
" Whose then— your mastfet's? " she asked.
He colored deepet, witlr a difler^nt feeling, muttered an oath,
and turned away.
" Who is his master 1 " continued the tiresome girl, appealing
to me. " He talked about'our house,* and * our iblfc'-^I thought
tee bad'been the owner's sonv And he never said- Miss ; he
sItfouM ha^ done, shouldn't he, if hte's^asen'tostl^^
Hareton grew " black ais a thunder-cIoud^ at this childish speech.
Iisilently shook niy questioner; aiidat last succeeded in equip-
ping her for departure.
" Now get= my horse, " she said, addressitig her unknown kins-
man as & he would one of the stable-boys at the Grange. " And
you may come with me. I. want to see where the goblin hun-
ter rises in the- marsh, and to hear about ths fairishes, as you
call tbem-*-but make'hiatite ! What's the ntotterl Get mv
hoiBei^^Lsay. "
H
170 )KrUTH BEING BBIGHTtti
^'I'll see thee damned, before I be thp tervant V* growled th«
lad. .
" You'll see merwhat T'asked Oatbeiine in smprise.
" Damned,'thou saucy witch ! " bff replied.
" There, Miss Gathy ! you see you have got into pretty com-
pany, " I interposed. - " Nice words to be used to a young lady !
!rray don't begui to dispute with him. Gome, let us seek for
Minny ourselves, and be gone. " . . \
" But, Ellen, " cried she, staring, fixed in astonishment. " How
dare he speak so to me 1 Mustn't he be made to do as I ask
him 1 ypu wicked creature, I shall tell papa, what you said.
Now then! "
Hareton did not appear to feel this threat ^ so the tears sprung
iiito her eye^B with indignation. . " You bring the pony, " sh^ te-
claimed, turning to the woman,'^and let my dog^free this mo*
ipentr - .
" Softly, Miss,'* ansvirer^d th^ addressed. " You'll lose nothr
hag by being civil. Though JMr. Hareton^ there, be not the mas-
ter's son, he's your cousin ;. apd 1 was never hired to serve you. "
" He my cousin ! " cried Gathy, with a scornful laugh.
" Yes, indeed, " responded her reprover.
" Oh, Ellen] don't let them say such things, " she puraued in
great trouble. Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from London —
my cousin is a gentleman's son. That my — " she stopped and
wept outright, upset fit the bare notion of relationship with such
a clown.
** Hush, hush ! " I whispez^,''people cjin haye many cousins,
and of all sorts. Miss Gathy, without being any the worse for it ;
only they needn't keep their company, if they be disagreeable
and bad. " . :
** Hfi's^not, he's not nay cousin, Ellen ! " sh^r went on, gather-
ing fresh grief from rejection,. and flinging herself into my arms
for refuge from the idea. I was much vexed at her and tjie.
servant for their mutual revelations}, having no doubt of Lin
ton's approaching arrival, communicated by the former, beitfg
reported to Mr. Heathcliff; and feeling as < confident that Gath-
erine's first thought, on her father's retum, would be to seek'.
an explanation of the latter!s assertion concerning her rude--
bred kindred.
Hareton^ recovering from his disgust at being taken for a
servant, seemed moved by her distress ; and, having fetched the
pony round to the door, he took, to propitiate . her. ^ fiAe^
WUTHBEIN6 REIORTfl.'171
0Tooked-4egged terrier whelp from the kennel; acndrptttting it
into her hand, bid her wisht, for he meant naught. Pausing in
her lamentations, she surveyed him with a glanee of awe and
horror, then burst forth anew. ^'
I could scarcely re & ain from smiling at this antipathy t6 the
poor fellow, who was a well made,, athletic youth, good-looking
m features, and stout and healthy, but attired in garments be-
fitting his daily occupations of working on ^ farm, and lounging
among the moors aner rabbits'and game. . StiH, 1 thought I
could detect in his physiognomy a mind > owning b^ter qualities
than his father ever possessed. Good things lost amid a wilder-
ness of weeds, to be sure, -whose rankness far overtopped their
neglected ^owth ; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy
BoiT that might yi^ld luxuriant, crops, under other and'favorable
circumstances. Mr. HeathclifiF, I,believe» had not treated him
physically ill, thanks to his fearless nature which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression; it had none of the
timid susceptibility that would have .given zest to ill-treatment
in Heathcliff's judgmenti He appeared to have bent his male-'
volence on m^ing him a--brute ; he was never taught toTead or
write ; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy hicr
keeper; never led a single step toward virtue, or guarded by a
single precept against. viclB. - And from what I heard, Joseph
contributed much to his deteriotation by a narrow-minded par-
tiality, which prompted him to flatter and pet him as a boy,
because he was the head of the old family. And as he had-
been in the habit of accusing Catherine Eamshaw and Heath-
clifl^ when children, of putting the master past his patience,
and -compelling him to seek solace in drink, by what he termed,
their " offalld ways, " so at pi'esenfr„he laid the whole burden
of Hareton's faults on the shoulders of the usurper of his prop-
erty.
If the lad sWore, he would'nt correct him, nor however cul-
pably he behaved. It gave Joseph satisfaction, apparently, to
watch him go the worst lengths. He allowed that he was
mined, that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then he
reflected that HeathcHff must answer for it. . Hareton's blood
would be required at his hands ; and there lay immense con-
solation in that thought. Joseph had instilled into him a pride
of nsirae, and of his lineage ; he would,- had he dared, have
fostered hate between him and the present owner of the
Heights, but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition i
X72: wiTTBsmrNo BBKrH^Tra
and he confined his feelings/regardihg fairn: to« muttered innen-
does and pnvaCe cemminations.
I don't pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode of
living customary in those days at Wuthering Haghts. I only
speak from hearsay ; for I saw little. The Tillagers affirmed
Mr. Heathelifir was »ear, and. a cixtel, hard landlord to hisT
tenants; but the house inside had regained its ancient aspect
of comfo!rt under female maaagemeat ; and the scenes of riot:
common in Hindley's time, were not: now endoted within ita^
walls. The master was too gloomy to seek companionship witb)
any people, good or bad) and he is yet.
This, however, is not midcing ^itogresa wt & my story .-^Missft
Cathy rejected the peace^ecing of the teirieiviaiid demandedi
her own doga, Charlie and Fhoeniac They csarae, limping and;
hanging their heads ; . and we^set out. out for. hame« sadly out ot
sorts; every one of us.
I could not wring from my little lady how she had spent the «
day; except that, as I atipposed, the gosl of her pilgrimage*
was Peniatooe Craj^; and sher arrived wi^nH adventure to^
the • gate of the faradioase^ when Hareton: happened to issuer
fdxthi attended by some canine Mloweia who attacked her
tzain^ They- had a smart battle be£bi« their* owners coaldl
aepaiate them ; that formed an introduction, Catherine told^
Hareton who she -was, and: wbere she was going; and- asked)
him to show her the way.; finally beguiling mm to accompany*
her.
He opened the mysterieia of the fairy cave, and twenty other
queer places; but being in disgrace, I was not favored with a'
deae ripti o n of the intereatiag (Ejects she saw. I could gather,
however, that her: guide had bera. a. favorite, till she hmt }f»*
feelings by addseflaiitg him as a -servant, and HeatholifiT's house- •
keeper hurt hers, by calling him her cousin. Then the Ian*-
gnagehe had held. to her rankled in her heart; she'who wafi
always- " love^ " and.'* darling, " and.'-^ queen, " aad'* angel, " *
with every body at the Gsange* to bio ioaalted so ehockindy by*
fr stranger 1 She did not^ c^Moptehend it, and hard work J had::
to obtain a proBuse. that she;. would not lay the grievaobe before'
her father.
I OKplained how he objected to the wliole houaeheld at the^
H^ghtSf and how sorry her would be to fiiid she had been'
there; btttl insisted most on the feet, tbat if she revealed my
neg^genorof Uiotdfca^he^would^peiitaparbe so angry that I-
4¥u,THBR < i NG HsrcaT*. .T7S3
ehouM'bavB toileave; ami CaJikj couldn't beat that prospaeir,
ahe pledged her word» and kept it, ibr my aaibd. AB»r all, ;^
was .a. aweet little gifL
CHAPTEE XIX.
A LET'tBB edged with hl & ck annouaced the dofiximf^
ter's return. Isabella was dead ; and Jie ¥rrote,to bid Bie get
.mourning for bis daughter^ and airange a room,. and ^fa«r a < ^
jcommodations, for bis youthful nephew. Gati^tine ran wili
with joy aitbe idea of welcomin^her father baok^ ond indulged
most sanguine anticipations of the innumey^ble^exeeUencies of
her " real " cousin.
^ The eveniDg of their expectisd arrival came.'Since early
morning she hsbd been busy, ordering her own small affaixB ; and
now, attired in her new black frook — poor thing! ber aunt's
death impressed her with no definite «iorrew-*-^be oblijged me,
by . constant worrying, to walk with her^ down tbrougli lb*
.grounds to meet them.
'* Linton is^ just six months younger than I am, " she chattenedi
as we strollied Jeisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy
tuif, under shadow of the trees^ " How delightful it will be ta
haye bim £br a playfellow! Aunt Isabella sent papa a beautifu]
lock of his hair ; it was lighter than mine^-^more fisxen^ alid
quite as $ne. I have it carefully preserved in a little glass box ;
> and I've often thought what pleasure it would be to see its
owner. Oh ! I am happy — and pa^pa, dea^, dear papal conm
Ellen, let us run ! come run 1 " .
She ran, and returned and ran again many times, before my
isober footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on
the grassy bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently,^
" but that was impossible ; sh^ couldn't be still a minute.
'* How long they are ! " she exclaimed. ** Ah, I jsee some
dust on the road — they are coming 1 No J When will they b*
here 1 May we not go a little way — ^half a mile, Ellen, only
just half a mile ] Do say yes-* > to that clump of birches at the
turn! "
I refused stanchly : and, at le^gth^ her suspense was ended a
174 WUTHERINO H1BIOHTS.
the traveling carriage rolled in ^ sight Miss Cathy shrined,
:and stretched out her arms, as soon ais she caught her father's
face looking from the window. He descended » nearly^ As eager
as herself; and a considerable interval elapsed, ere they had a
thought to spare for any but themselves.
While they exchanged caresses, I took a peep in to see afler
Linton. He was asleep in a comer, wrapped in a Warm, fur-
lined .cloak, as if it had been winter. A pale, delicate, effemi-
nate boy, who might have been taken for my iQftster's younger
brother, so strong was the resemblance; but there, was a sickly
peevishness in his aspect, that Edgar Lintoo liever had.
The latter saw me looking; and having shaken hands, ad-
vised me to close the door arid leave him ujidisturbed ; f6r the
journey had fatigued him. Cathy would fain h^Ve taken one
glauce ; btit her father told her to come on, and they walked
together mp the park, while I hasteped before to prepare the
servants.
" Now, darliugj'" said Mr. Linton, addressing his daughter, as
they halted at the bottom of the front s^eps. " Your cousin is
not so strong, or so merry as you an?^ and he has lost his
mother, remember, a very short time since; therefore, don't ex-
pect him to play, and run. about with you directly. And don't
harass him much by talking — let him be quiet this evening, at
least, will you T'
" Yes, yes, papa,''answered Catherine ; •* but I do want to
see him ; and lie hasn't once looked out. "
The carriage stopped; and the sleeper, being roused, was
lifted to the ground by his uncle.
" This is your cousiii Cathy, Linton, " he said, putting their
little hands together. " She's fond of you already : and mind
you don't grieve her by ci-ying to-night. Tiy to be cheerfiil
now ; the traveling is at an. end, and you have nothing to do
but rest and an^use yourself as you plexise. "
** Let me go to bed then, " answered the boy, shrinking from
Catherine's salute; and he put his fingers to his eyes to remove
incipient t^ars.
" Come, come, there's a good child, " I whispered, leading
him in. You'll m^ke her weep too— see how sorry she is for
you I "
I do not know whether it were sorrow for him, but his cousin
put- on as sad a countenance as himself, and returned to her
fiither. All three entered, and mounted to the library, where
WUT & EEINO BBIGHTB. 175
tea was laid ready. I proceeded to remove Linton's cap and
mantle, and placed him on a chair by the table; but he was no
sooner seated than he began to'ciy afresh. My master inquired
what was the matter.
" I can't sit on a chair, " sobbed the boy.
" Go to the sofa then ; and Elleii shall bring you some tea, "
answered his uncle, patiently.
He had been gi-eatly tried during the journey, I felt convinced,
by his fretful, ailing charge.
Linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down. Gathy car-
ried a footstool and her cup to his side.- At first he sat silent ;
but that could not last; she had resolved to make a pet of her
little cousin, as she would have him to be ; and she commenced
stroking his curls, and kissing hii cheek, and offering him tea in
,her saucer, like a baby. This pleased him, fpr. he was not
much better ; he dried his !eyes, and lightened into a, faint smile.
" Oh, h^'ll do very well, " said the master to me, af^er watch-
ing them a minute. ^* Very well, if we can keep him, Ellen.
The company of -a child of his own age wiU instill new spirit
into him soon ; and by wishing for strength he*H gain it. "
Aye, if we can keep hint! I mused to myself; and sore mis-
givings came over me that there was slight hope of that. And
then, I thought, how will that weakling ever live at Wuthering
Heights, between his father and Hareton t whai playmates and
instnictors they'll be. •
Our 4oubts were presently decided ; even earlier than I ex-
pected. . I had just taken the children up-stairs, after left was
finished ; and seen Linton asleej^ — ^e would not suffer me to
leave him, till that was the case. I had come down, and was
standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for
Mr. Edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen, and in-
formed me that Mr. Heathcliff's servant, Joseph was at the
door, and wished to speak with the master..
" I shall ask him what he wants first, " I said, in considerable
trepidation. " A very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and
the instant they have returned from a long journey. I don't
think the master can see him. "
Joseph had advanced through the kitchen, as I uttered these
words, and now presented himself in the hall. He was donned
in his Sunday garments, with his most sanctimonious and sour-
est face ;. and. holding his hat in one hand, and his stick in the
other, he proceeded to clean his shoes on the mat.
17(5 W U T H 9 R I H H E J 6 B T.S.
" Good ^evening, Joseph, " I eaW, coldly. ** What business
brings you here to-night V*
''It's Maister Lintou ay^.iniin spake tull/'he answered wav <
ing me disdainfully ieiside.
" Mr. Linton is going to bed ; unless you havesomerfiing par-
ticular to say, I'm sure he wont hear it now/'I controued«
" You had better sit down there and intrust your.message to me. "
" Which is his xahm ] " pursUied the ifellow, surveying the
range of closed doors.
I. perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation; »o, very
reluctantly, I went up to the librpry, and announced the unsea-
sonable visitor; advising that he should be dismissed tiH next
day. Mr. Linton had no time to .empowcH* ine to ,do so, for he
mounted close at my heels, and pushing into the Apartment,
planted himself at the far side oi the .table, with his two fists
clapped on the bead of his Sticky and began, in jboi elevated tone,
as if he anticipated opp9sition,
" Heathcliff has sent me fqr .bis lad, im aWmun'o^t goa back
'bahthim. " ^ ;';'
Edgar Linton was silent a mmute ; an expression of exceed-
ing sorrow ovei:cast his features ; he would haye pitied the child
on his own account ; but, recalling Isabella's hopes and fears,
and anxious wishes for her son, and ber commendations of him
to his care^ he grieved bitterly at the prospect of yielding him
up, ditia searched in his heart how it might be avoided- No
plan offered itself; the very exhibition of, any desire to keep
aim vvoiild have rendered the claimant more p€{remptory ; there
was nothing left but to resign him. However, he was not
going to rousJ9 him from his sleep.
" Tell Mr. HeathcKff, " he answered, calmly, " that his son
shall come tp Wuthering Heights to-morrow. He is in bed,
and too tired to go the distance now. Tou may also tell him
that the mother of Linton desared him to remain under my
guai'dianship.; and, a^ present, his health is very precarious. "
" Noa ! " said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the
floor^ and assuining an authoritative aii*. " Noa! that manes
nowt — Heathclifif maks noa ^cahnt uh t'mother, ntir yah norther
— ^bud he'll hev his lad; und aw mun tak him— -aoa nah yah
knaw ! "
" You shall not to-night ! " answered . Linton, decisively.
" Walk down stairs at once, and repeat to your master what I
have said. Eljen, show him down. Go —'*
:Aiid, aiding tkeindiga apt elder witii a lift hy tiie amv he rid
the. room of him and closed the door.
**VaiTah weel!*'shouted Joe^h, as he «!owly drew off
< < Tuh mom, he's come ysseln, un'tiurust kim aht, if yah ^arr } "
CHAPTER XX.
To 6b\TLB,te the danger of this threat heiog folfiiled, Mr
Linton ^son^issiooed me to ttike the boy home early, on
Catherine's pony, and, said he —
''As we shall how have no influence over his destiny, ^^ood
or bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my
daughter ; she can nut associate with htm hereafter ; and it is
better for her to femain in jgnorance of his proximity, lest she
should be restless,, and anxious to visit the Heights— nuerely tell
her,'his father sent for him suddenly, and he & as been obliged
to leavQ us. "
Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his b^ at five ,
o'tslock, and astonished to be informed that he m«8t prepaid for
further traveling : but I softened off the matter by stating that
he was going to spend some tijne with his & ther, Mr. Heath*
clifi^ who wished to see him so much, he did not like to d^r
the pleasure till he^should recover frooii his late journey.
" My fal^e^*'i** he cried, in st|:ah«^ perplexity.'* Mamma
never, told me I had a father.. Where does he live ? I'd
^ rather stay with uncle. "
V He lived a little distance from the Grange/'I replied, •just
beyond those bUls — not so far but you may walk over here,
when you get hearty. And you shonld be glad to go home^
and to see him. You must try io love him» as you did your
mother, and then he will love you. "
" But why have 1 not heard of him before V* asked Linton ;
*'why didn't mamma and he live together as other people do ] "
*'He hieid business to keep him in the north, " I answered ;
** and your mother's health reqnii^d her to reside in the
south. "
" And why didn't mamma speak to me about him V*'perse-
vered the child. " She often ticked of uncK a'^ ^ leaned to
176 WUTH'ERING HEIGHTS,
love him long ago. How am I to love papa ? I don't know
him. "
" Oh, all children love their parents, " I said. " Your mother,
perhaps, thought you would want to be with him, if she meu-
tionpa him often to you. Let us make haste. An early ride
on s.uch a beautiful moriiing is much preferable to an houi-'s
more sleep. " ,
" is she to go with usl " he demanded. " The little jprl I
saw yesterday ] "
" Not now, " replied I.
" Is uncle V\ he continued.
** No, I sh^ll be your companion there,*^'I said.
Linton sank back on his pillow, and fell into a brown study.
" I won't go without uncl^; " he cried at length: " I can't
tell where you mean to takp me. "
I attempted to persuadie him of the naughtiness of showing
reluctance to m«et his father : stiH he obstinately resisted any
progress toward dressing ; and I had to call for my master's
assistance in coaxing him out of bed. The poor thing was
finally got off with several delusive assurances ^at his absence
should be short ; that Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit him ;
and other promises, equally ill*founded, which I invented and
reiterated, at intervals, throughout the way.
The pure heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the
gentle canter of Minny, relieved his despondency a^r a while.
He began to put questions concerning his new home, and its in-
habitants, with greater interest and liveliness.
'* Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross
Grange? " he inquired, turning to take a last glance into the
valley, whence a light mist mounted, and formed fleecy^ clouds,
on the skirts of the blue. .
*'It is not so buried in trees, " I replied, " and it is not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully, all round ; and the
air is healthier for you — ifresher and dryer. You will, perhaps^
think the building old and dark, at first — ^thou?h it is a respect-
able house, the next best in the neighborhood. And you will
have such nice rambles on the moors ! Hareton Earnshaw— ^
that is Miss Cathy's other cousin, and so yours in a manner —
will show you all the sweetest spots ; and you can bring a book
in fine weather, and make a green iiollow your study ; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk ; he does
frequently waUc out on the hills. "
WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS. 170
'* And what ia my father like Y* he asked* " Is he as young
and handsome as uncle 1 "
" He's as young/'said I, **^but he has black hair and eyes,
and. looks sterner; and he is tallei'and bigger altogether.
He'll not'seem to you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps,
because it is not his way ; still, mind you be frank ana cordial
With him, and, naturally^ he'll be fonder of you than any uncle,
ibr you are his own. "
" Black hair and eyes ! " mused Linton. " I can't fancy him.
Then I am not like him, am 1 1 "
" Not much, " I answered. " Not a morsel, " I thought;
surveying with regret the white complexion and slim frame
of my companion, and his large languid eyes — his mother's
eyes, save that;, unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a
moment, they: had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit
" How strange that he'should ndver come to see mamma
and-me, " he murmured. " Has he ever seen me T If he have,
I must have been a baby — I remember not a single thing about
him! "
" Why, Master Linton, " said I, " three hundred miles is a
great distance; and ten-years seem very different in length to
^ grovra up person, compared with what they do to you. It
is probable Mr. HeathcliflT proposed going, from summer to
summer, but never found a convenient opportunity ; and now
it is too late. Don't troubfe him with questiotos on the subject ;
it will disturb him for bo good. "
The boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the
remainder of thp ride, till we halted before the farmhouse gar-
den gate. I watched to catch his impressions in his counte-
nance. He surveyed the caiTed front, and low-browed lattices,
the straggling gooseberry bushes, and crooked firs, witt solemn
intentness, and then shook his head ; his private feelings entire-
ly disapproved of the exterior of his new abode ; but he had
sense to postpone complaining—'there might be compensation
within.
Before he dismounted, I went and opened the door. It was
half-past six ; the family had just finished breakfast ; the servant
was clearing and wiping down the table ; Joseph stood by hfs
master's chair telling some tale concerning a lame honse; and
Hareton was preparing for the hay-fiel < J.
" Hallo, Nelly ! " cried Mr. Heathcliff, when he saw me.
^ I feared 1 should have to come down and fetch my property
180 WUTHBRIlfO fi^IABTS.
myself. You've brought it, have youl Let us see what we
can make of it. "
He got up and strode to the door: Hareton and Joseph fol-
lowed in gaping curiosity. Poor jL*intoo ran a Mghteoed eye
over the faces of the three.
" Sm*e-ly,^ said Joseph, after a ^^ve inspection, ^,he'«
swopped wi* ye, maister, an'yen's his lass I " -^
HeathclifT having stared his son into an ague of coDfosion, u|;«
terred a scornful laugh. .
" God ! what a beauty ! what a lovely, charming thing ! " he
exclaimed^ ^'I{aven't they reared it on spails and sour milk,
Nelly 1 Oh, damn my aoul I but that^s^ worse than I expected
-—and the devil knows I was not sanguine ! "
I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down and en^
ter. He did not thoroughly cumpreh^id the meatiing of his fa ,
tber's speech, or whether it wer^ intended £br him: indited, he
was not -yet certain that the grim, sneering etranger was his
father ; but he clun^ to me with growing tre|Hdation ; and on
Mr. Heathcliflfs takmg a seat, and bidding him " come hither/*
be hid his face on my shouldei', and wept.
" Tut, tut l " said Heathcliff, stretcbiug out 4 hand and drag,
ging him roughly between his knees, and thep, holding up bis
head by the chin. " None of that nonsense ! we're not going
to hurt thee, Linton— ^isn't that, thy namel Thou ait thy
mother's child, entirely ! Where is my share in thee, puling
chicken 1 "
He took off the boy's cap and brushed back bis t^k Aaicen
curls, felt his slender arms, and his small fingers ; during whlcH
examination, Lintpn ceased crying, and lifted hi^ great b}uft
eyes to inspept the inspector.
*'D6 you knpw meV'asked HeathcliC having sa^sfied himr
self that the limbs were all equally ft^ail and feebl'a.
" No ! " said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear,
" You've l^eard of me^ I dare say 1 "
" No, " he replied again.
" No 1 What a shame of your ipQther, never to wal^en your
filial regard for me ! You are my son, then, I'll tell you ; and
your mother was a wicked slut to leave you in igsorance of the
sort of father you possessed. Now, don't wince and color up I
though it is something to see yoq have not white blood. Be %
good lad; and 1*11 do for you. Nelly, if you be tired, you may
sit dovnJi ff ^Pt, jet hom^ tgain, f gves* you'U report whai
. WVTVERIIfa HBI€HTfl. 181
■
you hear and see, to the cipher at the Grange; and this thing
won't be settled while you linger about it. "
" Well, " replied I, " I hope you'll be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliff, or you'll not keep him long, and he's all you have
akin in the'wide world that you will ever know— remember/*
" I'll ^ istry kind to him ; you needn't fear ! " he said, laugh-
ing. ** Only -nobody e)se must be kind to him. I'm jealous of
monopolizing his a & < :tion. And,4o begin my kindness, Joseph,
bring the lad some 4)reakfast. H^reton, you infernal calf, be-
gone to your work. Yes,. Nell,'* he added when they were de-
parted,''my son is prospective MDwner of your place, and I should
not wish him to die till I was certain of being his successor.
Be^ide8, he's fwfste^ and I waot die triumph of seeing my de-
scendant fairly lord of their estates-r— my child hiring their chil-
dren to tHl jdieir fathers'lands for wages* That is the sole con-
sideration which can make me endure the wbelp--*I desmse him
for himself, and hate him for the memories he, revives ! Bnt that
consideration is sufficient ;. he's as safe with me, and shall be
tended as cai^eifHlly as your me^er tends his own. I have a
room np-stairs, furnished'fi > r him in handsome style; I've en-
gaged a twtor, also, to come three. times a week from twenty " ^
miles distance, > to teach him what he pleases to learn. I've or-
dered Hareton to obey him ; and; in fact, I've arranged every
thing witii a view to preserve the saperior and the gentleman in
him above his associates. I do regret, however, that he so little
deserves the trouble. If I wished any blessing in the worid, it
was to find him a worthy object of pride^ and I'm bitterly disap-
pointed with the whey-faced, whining wretch ! "
While he was Speaking, Joseph returned, bearing a basin of
milk-porridge, and placed it bel^re Linton. He stirred round
the homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed he could
not eat it. I saw the old man-servant shared largely in his mas-
ter's scorn of the child, though he was compelled to retain the
sentiment in his heart, because Heathcliff plainly meant his^ un-
derlings to. hold him in honor. •'
■ >'^ Ganhut ate iti " repeated be, peering iii Linton's face, and
subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard.
^'But Maister Hareton nivir ate nowt eke when he wer a little
nn ; und what wer gooid eneugh fur him'19 gooid eneugh fur yah,
aw's rayther think ! "
''I AwikH eat it ! " answered Limon, snappishly. ** Take H
182 WIJTHERIN6 HEI«BT & .'
Joseph snatched up the food indigaantly, and brought it
to us.
" Is there owt ails th'victuals V* he asked^ thrusting the tray
under Heathdiff's nose.
** What should ail them V* he said.
" Wah ! " answered Joseph, " yon dainty chap says he cannut
ate'em. Bud aw gue^ it's raight. His mother wer^just sost—
we wer a'moBt too mucky tuh sow th'com fur, makking her
breead, "
'* Don't mention his mother to me, " said the master, angrily.
** Get him something that he can eat, that's alL What is .hi»
usual food, Nelly 1 " . .
I suggested boiled milk or tea, .and the housekeeper received
instructions to prepare some.
" Come, " I reflected, " his father's selfishness may contribute
to his comfort. He perceives his delicate coB^tution^ and the
necessity of treating him tolerably. I'll console Mr. Edgar by
acquainting him ivith the turn Heathcljif's humor has taken. "
Havmg no excuse'for lingering longer, I slipped out, while
Linton was engaged in timidly jebuffing the advances of a friend-
ly sheep-dog. But he was too muph on the alert to be cheated :
as I Tslosedl^e ^oor I he^d a cry, and afinetntic repetition of the
words —
" Dont leave me ! I'll not stay here ! I'll not stay here !**
Then the latch was raised and fell-^they did not suiler hitai
to come forth. I mounted. Minny, and urged her. to a trot, and
00* my brief guardianship endedi
CHAPTER XXI.
We had sad work with little Cathy that day : she rose in
high glee, eager to join her cousin; and. such passionate tears
and lamentations followed the news of his departure, that Edgapr^
himself was obliged to soothe her by affirming he should come
back soon ; he added, however, " if I can get him, " and there
were no hopes of that. This promise poorty pacified her ; but
time was moi-e potent ; ,and though still at intervals she inquii*ed
of her father when Linton would tetum, before she did see him
^ W V THttRINO HBXOBtt. 188
again his features bad waxed so dim in her memory that she did
not recognize him.-
When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering
Heights, in paying business visits to Gimmerton, I used to ask
how the young master got on ; for he lived almost as secluded
as Catherine herseli^ and was never to be seen. I could gather
from her that he continued in weak nealth, and was a tiresome
inniate. She said Mr. Heathcliff seemed to dislike him ever
longer and'worse, though he took some trouble to conceal it.
He had an -antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do
at^H with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes
together. There seldom passed much talk between them ; Lin*
ton learned his lessons, and spent his evenings in a small apart-
ment they called the parlor ^ or else lay in bed all day ; for ha
vTas constantly getttng^cbughs, and colds, and aches, and pains
of some sort.
" And I never knew such a faint-hearted creature, " added the
woman ; " nor one so careful of hisseln. He toill go on, if I
leave the window ojpen a bit late in the evening. Oh ! it's killing,
a breath of night air! And he must have a fire in the middle
of summer ; and Joseph's'bacca pipe is poison ; and he must
always have sweets and dainties, and always milk, milk for ever
— ^heeding naught how the rest of us are {inched in winter-^and
there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak, in his chair by the
fire, and some toast and water, or other slop, on the hob to sip
at ; and if Haretbn, for pity, comes to amuse him— Haretoh is
not bad-natured, though he's rough-^they're sure to part, one
swearing, and die other ciying.^ I believe the master would
relish Eamshaw's thrashing him to a mummy, if he were not
his son : and, I'm certain, he would be fit to turn him out of
doors, if he knew half the nursing he giver hisseln« • But then,
he won't go into, dfinger of temptation; he never enters the
parlor, and should Linton show those ways in the house where
he is, he sends him up stairs directly.-''
I divined, from this account, that uttor lack of .sympathy had
rendered young Heathdiff selfish and disagreeable, if he were
not so originally ; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed ;
though still I was moved with a sense of grief at his lot, and a
wish that he had b^n lefb with us.
Mr. Edgar encouraged me to gain information ; he thought a
great deal about him, I fancy, and would have run some risk to
see him ; and he told me once to ask the housekeeper whether
184 WtJTSBBIIffO HEIGHTS.
mm I — . .-I ■ I .1 ..I . . "'-■ " / "''■'" " II
ba ever came into the village 1 Sbe said be bad only been
twice, on borseback, accompanying bis fatber ; ^nd both times
be pretended to be quite knocked up for tbree or four dayg
afterward. Tbe bouaekeeper left, if I recollect rigbtly, two
years after be came ; and anotber, wbom I did not know, was
ber successor; sbe lives tbere still^^ ^ . . ^
Time wore on at tbe Grange in ks former pleasant way, till
Mias Catby reacbed sixteen. On tbe anniversary of her bdrtk
we never manifested fmy signs of rejoicing, because it was also
the anniversary of my late mistress's deatb. Her father invari-
ably spent that'day > alone in the libraiy ; and walked, at dusk*
as far as Gimmerton kirk yard, where be would frequeaithf
prolong bis stay beyond midnight Therefore Cadimne was
thrown oo her own resource^ for amusement.
This twentieth of March was a beautiful spting day, and wben
ber father had retired, my young lady came down, dressed for
going out, and said ^he bad asked to* have aTamble en the e^ge
of tbe moors with me ; snd Mf« Linton had given ber leave, if
we went only a ^hoct distance, and were back within the. hour*
'* So make baste, Ellen ! " she cried. ** I know where I wish
^ g < f ; where a colony of moor game are settled ; I want to sed
whether they have made their nests yet "
** That must be a good distance tip,''I answered ;''they
don't breed on the edge of tbe moor. "
" No, it's riot, " she said. " I've gone very near with papa.'*
I put on my bonnet, and sallied out ; thinking nothing more
of the matter^ She bounded before me, and returned to my
side, and. was off again like a young grayhound; and, at first, I
£ > und plenty of entertainment in listening to the larks singine
far and ni^ar; and enjoying the sweet, vrarm sunshine; and
Vfratcbing her, my pet and my delight, with ber golden ringlets
flying loose behind, and ber ^ight cheek, as soft and pure ill its
bloom as a wild rose, and ber eyes radiant with cloudlesss pleas-
ure. She was a happy cieature, and an angel,, in those days.
It's a pity she could not be content.
*^ Well, " said I, ^ where are your moor game. Miss Catby ?
We should be at them— < -the Grange park-fence is a great way
off now. "
" Oh, a little further — only a little farther, Ellen, " was her
answer, continually. " Climb to that hillock, pass that bank,
and by the time you reach the other side, I shall have raised the
birds, "
^ " 0^ H B It I ir > « THBIlQlBfT.^. 185
JII.JI.| I W < —W— fii q iiii ] ■iii»i..ii-. .'i,.! ■ M l .11 . ,,11^11. II ..11 J
But tbere were so many hillocks aad'ba^s.to dimb and paa8»
tbaty at length, I began to be weary, and told her we must halt,
.and retrace our steps. I shouted to her, as.^be had outstripped
.me a Jong way; ene either did not, hear, or did not regtod, for
Khe still sprang on, and I was coiripelled to follow. Finally, she
^ved into a hollow,; and before I came in sight of her again,
.nhe -was two miles nearer Wutbmng Heights than her own
.home ;'and I beheld a -couple of persons atrest her, one-of wh'om
J ^felt coi^Yinced was Mr. Heathcliff him^lf.
'Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least,
jiuntiBg out theDQStsx)f the grouse. The Heights were Heath-
^s^flfs .laad,;andthe was reproving the poacher.
" Uve neither taken any nor found any, " she said, as L toiled
to them, expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement.
*'I didif't mean to lake them ; but papa told me thefe were
quantities ^up.here, end I wished X6 see'the eg^gs.*^
Heathcliff glanced at me vrith an ill-meaning smile, expiese-
j^ rhisacquamtance with the party, and, eonseqaently, his ma-
levolence toward'it, and demanded !iVho ** papa " was ?
" Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Grrange, " she replied.''I thought
you did not .kno\^ me, or you wouldn't have spOken in that
way. "
^''You suppose papa is highly esteettied and respected tfaen^*
he said, sarcastically.
''And what are you 1 " inquired Catherine, gazing curiously
on the speaker.'* That man I've seen before. Is he your son V*
She pointed to Hareton, the other individual ; who had gained
nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two
years to his age : he seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
'" Miss Cathy, " I interrupted, " it wUl be three hours instead
of one, that we are out, presently. We really must go back. "
*'NO) that man is not liiy son, " answered Heafbcliff, pushing
«De aside. ■ " iBut I have one, and you have s^en him befoi«
too ; and, though your nurse is in a hvfny, I think both you and
she would be the better for a little rei^t. Will you just turn thb
nab of heath, and walk into my house ? YouUl get honra earlier
fi > r the ease ; and you shall receive a kind welcome. "
I whispered Catherine that she mustn't, on any account, ac-
cede to the proposal ; it was ehtirely out ^f the question.
•'Why 1 " she asked aloud. " I'tai tired of running, end the
ground is dewy — ^I can't sit here. Let us go, Ellen I Besides,
he says I have > seen his son. He's mistaken, I think ; biit I
186 WUTflSBINO B1I6HT«.
..I'. " ■ ■ - I* .
. gueaa wbere he lives — at the farmhouse I visited in coining from
Penistone Crags. Don't you V*'
" I do. Come, Nelly^ hold your ton^e^t vnll be a treat
for her to look, in on us. JIareton, get forward with the lasSi.
You shall walk with me, NeUy. "
" No, she's not going to any such place, " I cried, struggling
ID release my arm which he had seized ; but she was almost at
tfad door-stones already, scampering round the brow at full speed.
Her appointed companion did net pretend to escort her; he
shyed'off by the roadside, and vanished.
" Mr. Heatbclifi^ it's very wrong, " I continued,'^you know
you mean no good ; and there she^U see Linton, and, all vnll be
told as soon as ever wei^tum, and I shall have the blame. "
** I want'her to see Linton, " he answered : ^he's looking bet >
ter these few days ; it's not oflen he's fit to be seen. And we'H
soon persuade her .to keep the visit secret— -where is ike han^i
of it? "
" The harm of k is, that her father would hate mdf if he found
I suffered her to enter your hoUse ; and 1 am convinced you
have a bad design in encouraging her to do so, " -I replied.
** My design is as honest as possible. I'll inform you of its
whole scope, " he said. " . That the two cousins may & J1 in love
and get.marned. I'm acting generously to your master; his
young chit has no expectations; and should she second my
vrishes, she'll be provided for at OQce as joint successor .with
Linton. "
" If Linton died, " I answered, " and his life is quite uncer-
tain, Catherine, would be the heir. "
**. No -she would not, " he said ;''there is no clause in the will
to secure it so i his property would, go to me ; but» to prevent
disputes, I desire their unioq, and am resolved to bring it about. "
, ** And I'm resolved she shall never i^proach your house with
me again, " I returned, as we reached the . gate, wh^» Miss
Cathy waited our coming,
Heathcliff bid me be quiet ; and, preceding us up the path,
hastened to -open the door. My young lady gave him^ several
looks, as if she coi^ld.not exactly make up her mind what to
think of him ; but now he smiled when he met her eye^ and
softened his voice in addressing her, and I was foolish enough
to imagine the memory of her mother mije^ht disarm him from
desiring her injury.
Linton stood on the hearth. H^ad been out walking in tha
•Wt7THSft'INCr HBIGHT0. 18T
fields, far his cap was on, and he was calling to Joseph to bring
him dry shoes. He had gi'own tall of his age, still wanting
some months of sixteen. - His features were pretty yet, and his
eye and complexion brighter than I remembered them^ thodgfa
with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air
and genial sul^.
. < * Now, who is that V* asked Mr. HeatbclifT, turning to Cathy.
" Can you tell V
** Your son 1 " she said, having doubtfully surveyed first one
and then the other.
" Yes, yes, " answered he; " but is this the only time you
have beheld himi Think! Ah! you have a short memory.
• Linton, don't you recall your cousin, that you used to tease us
60 with wishing to see 1 "
" What, Linton! " cried Cathy, kindling into joyful surprise
at the name. " Is that little -Linton ? He's taller than I am !
Are you Lintoii ? " -
The youth stepped forward and acknowledged himself: she
kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wonder, at the change
time had wrought in the appearance of each.
Catherine had reached her full height ; her figure was both
-plump and slender, elastic'as steel, and her whole aspect spark-
ling with health apd spirits. Linton's looks and movements
were very languid^ and his fbiTo extremely slight f but there
was a grace in his manner that mitigated these defects, and
rendered l^im not unpleasing. . ,
Af^er exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
cousin went to Mr. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door, divid*
ing his attention between the objects inside; and those that lay
without, pretending^ that is, to observe the latter, and really
noting the fermer alone.
" And you tfre my uncle, then !-'she cried, reaching up to
salute him. " I thought I liked you, though you were cross at
first. Why don't you visit at the. Grange with Linton 1 To
live all these years such close neighbors, and never see us, is
odd ; what have you > done so for 1 "
" I visited it once or twice too often before you were bom, "
he answered. " There— damn it ! If you have any'kisses t6
spare, give them to Linton — ^they are thrown away on me, "
" Naughty Ellen ! " exclaimed Catherine, flying^ to aUack me
next with her lavish caresses. " Wicked Ellen ! to try to hinder
me from entering. But I'll take this walk every morning in
168 wxrr-M rsn v^o tHB re^Tii.
future — ^may I, Uncle— and sometimes bring papa % Won't y oa
be glad to see us r* ^
" Of course I''replied the uncle, with a hardly suppvessed
^mace, resulting from his deep avexsion to both the proposed
ivisitors. " But stay, " be continued, turning toward the young
lady. " Now I think of it, I'd better tell you. Mr. Linton faai
.a prejudice against me; we quarreled at one time of our Hves
with unchristian ferocity ; and, if you mention coming here to
Jiim, he'll put aveto oh. your visits altogether. Thereibre, yoq
roUst not mention it, unless you be careless of seeing your
fcousin hereafter — you may come, if you will, biXt you .must'not
.mention it. "
''Why did you quarrel V asked Catherine, oonsiderabty crest-
fallen.
*'He tbou^t me too poor to wed bossiater, " answered Heath-
.cliff; ^ and was grieved that I gdt her-^his pri^e was hurt, xsd
he'll never forgive it. "
** lliat'^ wrong 1 " said the young lady: < < sometime III tell
him so; but Linton and I have no share in your-quarrel. I'll
not come here, then, he shall come to the Grange. "
'^ It will be too far for me, " murmured her cousin, " to walk
four miles would kill ^me. No^ come here. Miss Catherine, now
and then, not every morning, but once or twice a week. "
The father launched tbward his son a glance of bitter cod-
:tempt
" I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labor, " he muttered :tD
nie. ** Miss Catherine, a^ the ninny calls her, vrill discover his
value, and send him to the devil. . Now, if it had been Hareton
—do you know fiutt^ twenty times a day, I covet Hareton, vrilii
«all bis degradation 1 Pd have loved the lad had he been some
one else« But I think he's safe from ^er love. I'll pit him
against that paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly. We
calculate it will scarcely last tiH it is eighteen. Ctti, confound
the vapid thing. He's . absorbed in drying his feet, and never
looks at her — Linton 1 "
" Yes, father, " ^answered the boy.
" Have you nothing to show yonr cousin, any where about ;
not even a rabbit, or a weasel's nest ) Take lier into the gar-
den, before you change your shoes; and into the stable to see
your horse "
« Wouldn't you radier sit here 1 " asked Liuton, addressiDp
Cathy in a tone which espreesed seluctanee to mov^ again.
wuth. & rinot H.E.i«Kra» IW
" I doa-t know,'^ < ^ replied* ousting a loDgiiig Ipok to tha
door, and evidently eager to be active.
£Le kept his seat^ and ftbrank closer to tbefire. Heatbcliff
ro8#, and went into the kitchen,, and from tbenee to the yard^.
callings out for Hareton» HaretcHi responded, and presently the
two r^-entered. The yoang man had been washing himself, as-
was. visible by; the glow on his cb^ks, and bis wetted hair^
" Oh, 1*11 ask yOUy imde^''cried Miss Cathy,, recollecting the
hons^Eeeper's asaertiim, " That's not my cousin^ ia helV
" Yed, " be replied, ^'your mother's nephew* . Don't you like*
bimr
. Catherine looked queer.
. " Is be^ not a handsome lad 1 " he continued.
The uncivil little thing stoo4 on tiptoe^ and whiq > ered At
senteaoe'in Heathcliff -s ean .
He iaoghed^ Hareton darkened ; I perceived he was very*
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a ditn notion of
his iaferierity* But bis master or guai*dian •diased^ the iirown:
by exclaiming —
" You'll be the favorite among nA, Hai^ton! She. says you^
are a — ^what was it 1 Well, something very flattering. Here !
ypu go wlthh^* round tho'^ famn And behaye like a gentle-
man, mind! Don't ^se any-bad words ; and don't stare when
the young lady is not looking at you, and be* ready to hide your
face when i^e.is; and, vvhen you speak,, say your worda slowly,
and keep yeur -hands x > ut of your pockets^ Beofi) and entertain
her as nicely as you can;'^ .
He watched the .couple walking past the window. Eamshaw-
had his countenance completely averted frcm bis tx > mpanio & .
He seemed studying the familiar landscape with a strapger's,
and an artist's intere^. Catherine took a sly look at him, ex-
pressing small admiration; She then turned her al^ntion to
seeking out objects of amieement for herself, and tripped, mer-
xiiy OQ« lilting a tune to. supply the lack of ccHiversaticm,
" I've tied his tongue, " observed Heathcliff^ ** He'll net.
tenture a single syllable all the time ! Nelly, you recollect
me at his age— -nay, some years younrer. Did I ever look so
stupid, so'gaumless,'as Joseph calls it 1 "
" Worse/'I replied, " because more sullen with it. "
" I've a pleasure in him ! " he continued, reflecting aleud^
** He faaasatisiied my expectations. If be were -a bom fool I
should not enjoy it lMdf;SO muchi But he's, no fijol ; and X^ eatt
190 WUtBE & ING H & I«tIT9;
■ ■ ■ .11 . .'I'- ■■ ■ ) I I .M II I I ■ II ir
sympatbi^e with all his feelings, having felt them myself. I
know what he sufiers now, for instance, exactly — ^it is merely a'
begitming of what he shall suffer, though. And he'll never be
able to emerge from- his bathos of coarseness and ignorance/
I've got him faster than his scoundrel of a father secured me,
and lower ; for he takes > a pride in his brutidhness* I've taught
him to scorn every thing extra-animal, a & silly and weak.
Don*t you think Hindley would be proud of his son, if be
could see him ] almost as proud as I am of mine.^ But there's
this difference, one is gold put to the use of paving stones;
and the other is tin polished to ape a service of silver. Mine
has nothing valuable about it ; yet I shall have the merit of
making it go as & .r as such, poor stuff can go. J9m had first-
rate qualities, and they are lost — rendered worse than unavail-
ing. I have nothing to regret ; he would have more than any'
but I are awai« cl£ And the best of it is, Hareton is damnably
fond of me ! You'll own that I've oat-matched'Hindley there.
If the dead villain could lise from his ^rave to abuse'me for
^is offspring's wrongs, I should bavetthe fun of seeing the said
offspring fight him bade again, indignant that he should dare to
rail at the one friend he has in the world !*''
Heathcliff chuckled'a fiendish laugh ait the idea ;^I made no
xeply, because I saw that be expected none.
Meantime, our -young companion, who sat too removed from
us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms of uneasi-
ness : probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat
of Catherine's society; for feat* of a little fatigue. His father
remarked the restless glances wandering to the windaw, and
the hand irresolutely extended toward hiB cap.-
•* Qret up, you idle boy ! " he exclaimed with assumed hearti-
ness. " Away after them — ^they are just at the corner, by the
stand of hives. "
. Linton gathered his energies, and lefb the hearth. The
lattice was open, and, as he stepped out, I heard Cathy in-
quiring of her unsociable attendant, what was that inscription
over the door!'^
Hareton litared up, and scratched his head like a true
clown.'
" It's some damnable vmting f'he answered. " I can not
read it. " -
** < :)an't read it 1 " cried Catheiine, " I can read it--it's En-*
glish-^but I want to know Why it is there. "'* I
WUT0BB1NO HBZOHT8.'191
Lintoo giggled^— the finst appearance of mirth he had te-
ULfaited.
''He does not know his letters, " he said to his cousin. " Could
you believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce V
.** Is he all as he should be 1 " asked Miss Cathy seriously,
*'or iis he simple — ^not right 1 " I've questioned him twice now»
and each time he looked so stupid, I think he does not ander-
Btand me ; I can hardly understand him I'm sure.
Linton repeated hi$ . laugh, and glanced at Qareton taunt-
ingly, who -certainly, did not seefu quite clear of comprehension
at that moment. * . ^
" There's nothing the matter but laziness, is there, Earn-
shaw v. he said. " My cousin fancies you are an idiot. There
you experience. the consequence of scorning'book laming,'as
you would say* Huve you. noticed, Catherine, his frightful
Yorkshire pronunciiaion V*^
N " Why, where the devil is the use on'tIV growled Hareton,
more ready in^ answering his daily companion. He was about
tp enlarge further, but the two youngsters broke into a noisy fit
of merriment ; ray giddy Miss being delighted to discover that
she might turn his strange talk to matter of amusement.
" Where is the use of'the devil'in that sentence 1 " tittered
Linton,'f Papa told you not to say any bad words, and^you'
can't open your mouth without one. Do try to behave like a
gentleman, now do 1 "
" If thou'wem't. more a lass than a lad, I'd fell thee this
minute, I /would ; pitiful lath of a crater ! " retorted the angry
boor retreating, while his face burned with mingled rage and
mortifica^tipn ; fi > r he. was conscious of being insulted, sind em*
barrassed how to resent it.
Mr. Heathclifif, having overheard the conversation, as well as
I, smiled when he saw him go, but immediately afterward cast:
a look of singular aversion on the flippant pair, who remained
chattering in the door-way. The boy finding animation enough
while discussiug Hareton's faults and deficiencies, and relating
anecdotes of his goings, on ; and the girl relishing- his pert. and
^iteful payings, without considering the ill-nature they evinced :
mit I began to dislike, more than to compassionate, Linton,
and to excuse his father, in some measure, for holding him cheap.
We stayed till afternoon ; 1 could npt tear Miss Cathy ^way
before ; but, happily, my master had not quitted his apfl^ment,
and remained ignorant of our prolonged absence.
102'W > VirBV! B FN O H B la'HTS;
As we walked home, I would fain faaive eiiHg^e« > ed my
charge on the characters of. the people we had quitted; but
she got'it into her head that I was prejudiced a^rinst them.
" Aha ! " sher cried, ** you take papa's side, SUen— ^you^ at«'
partial^ I know, or else you wouldn't have cheated me so many
years, intp the notion that Linton lived a long way from here,
Vm really extremely angry, only, I'm so pleased, I can't show
it ! But you must hold your tongue about my unelte-— he's m^
uncle, remember, and TU scold papa for quarreling'with him; "
And so she ran on, till I,dn^)p^ endeavoring to oonvifice her
of her mistake. She did not mention the visit that night, bek
cause she did Hot see Mr. Linton. N4nct day it all caipse out,
sadly to my chagrin; and atill, I was not altogether sorry : I
thought the burden of directing and warning wo^ld be radre-
efficiently borne by him than me, but he was too timid in ^viitg
satisfactory reasons for his wish that she would shun coiaiecticHi
with the household of the Heights, and Catherine Uked good
i^asoBs for^ every restraint that luktassed her petted will.
" Papa! " she. -exclaimed after the morning's salutations, -
'••guess whom I saw .yesterday, in my walk on the mocrrs.
Ah, papa, you started ! youVe not doiie right, have yod, nowt
I'saw. But listen; and you shall hear how I found you out,
and Ellen, who is in league with you, and yet pretended to pity-
me BO, when I kept hoping, and was always disappointed about
Linton's coming back ! "
She gave a faithful account of her eitcurBlon and its conse-
quences; aiid my master, though he cast more thati one r^
?roachful look at me, said nothing, till she^had concluded,
'hen he drew her to him, and asked if she knew vrhy he had
concealed Linton's near neighborhood from herl Could she'
think it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly
etijoy ] .
** It wai» beefiiuse you 4i8Hked Mr. Heathcltfi^ " sh6 aiSsw^red^
" Therf ybu believe I care move iqr my own feelings than-
yours, Cathyl " ^ he said. ** No, it was not because I disliked Mr;
HeathclijQT; but because Mr. Heathcliff dislikes tike; and is a*
most diabolical man, delighting to wrong and ruin those he
bates, if they give him the, sligfiest opportunity, I knew that'
you could not keep up an acquaintance- with your coiisifif, with-
out being brought into > contact with him ; and I knew he would
datest you, on my account i so, for your owii good, and nothing
else, I took precautions that you 6houJ|d.not see Linlonh again/
WVTVKBINQ ««|a4T4b . 193
I meant to explain tbla^ iBome time, as you grew olde]:, and I'm
aoiTy I delayed it T'
'* But Heathcliff waa quite cwdial, papa,^'obsenred Catherine^
not at all con\'inced ; " and he didn't object to our seeing, eacfai
other :. he said I migbi come to bis bouse wben I pleased, only
I must not tell you, because you bad quarreled witb bim, and
would'not forgive hiip Ibr roarryinff'aunt Isabella; At^d you
won't — yw, are tbe oue to be blainea — be 18 willing to lot tc^ be
friends, at leas^ ; Linton and I — ^and you are not. "
My master, perceiving tbat she would not take bis wor4 ioc
her unde-in-law's evil rdisposkion^ gave a hasty sketch of hia
conduct to Isabella, and the manner iu whidi Wutbering^
Heights becanie his property. He could not bear to discourse
long upon the topic, for tbou^ be spoke little of it, he still fblt
the same hotror^ ^nd detealation of bis- aucient enemy that had
occupied bi4 heai't evej sincQ Mrs. Liuton'^ dearth. " She cught
have been living yet, if it bad not be^H for bim i " was. his, gou-
stant, bitter rel^ctidn; and, in bis eyi^St Heathcliff seemed a
murderer. . ^
Miss Cathy, convetisant with aq'bad deeds e & cept her own
slight acts of disobedience^ inju0ti < ie* and pasnop, rising from hot
temper, and thoughtlessuess» and refiiOeted of jxo the day ^ey
were oommiued, waa amazed, at the blackness of spirit that
could brood on, and cover revenge for y^rs ; apd deuberately
prosecute its plans, without a visitalio^i of reraorserf She ap-
peared so deeply impressed and shocked at tlua newr view of
human nature— excluded from aH her studies and all her ideas
till now — ^that Mr. Edgar deemed it unnece^ary to pursue the
subject. He merely added, ■'/ ■
'* YwL will know hereafter, darling, \vhy I wish you to avoid
his house and fannly — ^now, return to your ojid employments and.
amusements, and think no more about them ! " .
Catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her
lessons for a couple of hours, according to custom: then. she
accompanied him iot0 the grounds, and the i^bbla day passed
as usual: but in the evening, when she had retired to her looin,
and I went to > help her to undress, I found her crying, on her
knees by the bedside.
•* Oh,^ fie, silly child ! " I exclaimed. *• If you had any real
griefs, you'd be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contra-
riety. You never had one shadow of aubstantiaJ sarrow. Miss
Datberine. Suppoff, for a mimit < u lfe«l n*i»ft*i^ ^ I ^«»^ dead,

IM WUTHEElNO HBI0HT8.
and you were by youiBclf in the world — hovr would you feel
then ? Compare the present occasion with such an fiction as
that, and be thiinkful tor the friends you have, instead of covet-
ing more. "
'I'm not crying^for myself, Elleta/'she answered, " it's for
'\ and then he'll
shan't come ! "
has thought, as
much of you as you have of him 1 llasn't he Hareton for a
companion? Not one ih a hundred'would weep at losing a
reladon they had just seen twice, for two afternoons. Lintoti
will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself no further about
you. "
" But may I not write a note to tell him. why, I can not
cornel she asked rising to her feet. " And just send those
books I promised to lend him. His books are not as nice as
mine, and he. wanted to have them extremely, when I told him
how interestinff they were. May I not, Ellen V'
" No, indeed, no indeed ! " replied I with decisioiS. " Then
he would write to you, and there'd never be an end of it. No,
Miss Catherine, the acquaintance must be dropped entirely—-
so your papa expects, and I shall see that it is done ! "
" But how can one little note — " she recommenced, putting
on an imploring countenance.
" Silence ! " I interrupted. " We'll not begin with your little
notes. Get into bed! " *
She threVir at me a very haughty look, so natighty that I
would not kiss her good-nightat first : I covered her up, and
shut her door, in great displeasure— but, repenting half-way, I
returned softly, and lo ! there was Miss, standing at the table
with a bit of blank paper before her, and a pencil ill her hand,
which she guiltily slipped out of sight, on my re-entrancfe.
" You'll get nobody to take that, Catherine, " I said, " if you
write it ; and at present I shall put out your candle. "
I set the extinguisher on the ftatne, receiving as I did so, a
•lap on the hand, tod a petulant " cross thing !*'I then quitted
her again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst, niost
peevish humors.
The letter was finished, and forwarded to its destination by a
milk-fetcher who came from the village^ but that I didn't learn
tiD aome time afl^rwwrds. Weeks passed. on, and Cathy recov-
ered h«r temper, though she grew wondrous fond of stealing off
WUTBERIN6 HEIOBT0. ID5
to eomerB by herseli) aiid often, if. I came near her teddenly
while reading, she would start, and bend over die book, evidently
desirous to hide it ; and I detected edges of loose paper stickr
ing out beyond the leaves.
She also got a trick of coming down early in the mornings
and lingering about the kitchen, as if. she were expecting the
arrival of something ; and she had a small drawer m a cabinet
in the library which she would trifle over for hours, and i^diose
key she took special care to remove when she left it.
One day, as she inspected this'draweii, I observed diat the
playthings and trinkets which recently formed its contents,
were tratitfm'uted into bits Of folded paper.
My curiosity and suspicions were roused ; I determined to
takia a peep at her mysterious treasures ;, so, at night, as soon
as she and my master were safe upstairs, I seardied and
readily found anu > ng my house keys, one that would fit the
Jock. Having opened, I emptied the whole contents into my
apron, and took them with me to examine at leisure in my owa
chamber.
'Though I could not but suspect, I was still surprised to dis-
cover that they were a mass of correspondence, daily almost, it
must have been, from Linton Heathchff, answers to documents
forwarded by her. The earlier dated were embarrassed and
short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious love
letters, foolish as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet
with touches;, here and there, which I thought were borrowed
firom a more experienced source.
Some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds of
ardor and flatness ; commencing in strong feeling, and conclud*
nng in the affected, wordy way that a school-boy might use to a
fancied, incorporeal sweetheart: Whether they satisfied Cathy,
1 don't know, but they appeared very worthless trash to me.
After turning over as many as I thought proper, 1 tied them in
a handkerchief; and set them aside, re-lockinj; the vacant drawer.
Following her habit, my young lady descended early, and
visited the kitchen : I watched her go to the door, on the itrrival
of a certain little boy ; and, while die dairy maid filled his can,
she tucked something into his jacket pocket, and plucked some-
. thing out. I went round by die garden, and lard wait for the
messenger ; who fought valorously to defend his trust, and wo
spilled the milk between us; but I succeeded in abstracting the
epistle ; and threatening serious consequences if he did not look
190 WUTUEK,IN« H.EI«ilt9 >
vharp^ home, I retnaineii under the wall > ft^d p6fttse4^ Mm
Catky^B affectionate composkkm. j[t vvra» more simp^ and
mece eloquent than her cousin's, t^ pretty a^ very sUly. X
shook my head, and went meditating into the house^
The day^ being weu she tould not divert herself wi|h ram .
bling about the park ; so, at the conclusion of her momiiig
studies, she resorted to the solace, of the draw^» mer father
sal reading at the table ; and I, en purpose, had sought a bid of
work in some unripped fringes of the wi^idov OMiriain,^ keeping
my. ey© st^dily fixed .on her pjro,oeeding».
Never did any bird flying back to a plundered nesib which it
had left brimful of. chilling young 09oa > expr^sfr move coior
nlete despair io its anguished cries and fluttenngs, th^n she by
W single <'0h! " and the ehange ^t transfigured W Hte
h & pmr countenance. Mr. Linton lodked up*
" What is the n^iatter, love T Have you hurl ye^trselfl " h^
said.
His U > ne and look assozed her he had not b«en the discoverer
of the hoard. •
^ No papa—* " she ganped. -'^ Ellen ! EQeiP I come up-«l^ir8
-^rmsickr
I obeyed her summons, aaad acoompanied her out.
^Oh, Ellen! you have got them,''she commenoed imi^er
diately, dropping on her knees, whei^Ave weie^ iuQlesed alone.
^Oh, give tnem to me, and I'll never never do so again ! Don't
tell papa. You have not told papa, EUen,. say you have not \
I've been'exceedingly naughty, but I wpn'l do it any m^^el "
With a grave severity in my manner, I bid her stand up.
" So,'^ I exclaimed, " Miss Catherine, you are tolerably & r
on, it aeemBf*^you may well be ashamed of them! A fine bun-
dle of trash you study in your leisure horn's, to be sure. Wkj
it's good enough to be printed ! Ai:id wha|: do you suppose ^h^
master will think, when I display it before himl X hi^ven't
thowii it yet, but you needn't imagine I shall keiep your i^idicu-
kffB secrets. For shame ! And ycra must h & ve led the^ way in
wittiw such absorditiee; he would not hav^ thought of begin-
ning, Vm certain.*'
« " I didn't! I didn't ! " sobbed Cathy, ifit |o biefOc h«r hei^n.
^ I didn't once, think of loving him till*^ "
'* Lonimg / " cried I, aa scomfuUy as I could utt^r tbQ wo¥4 < *
''Lmring / Pid any body oyer hear the. like ! I inight just as
wall talk of loving the miller who oomes once a year to buy .our
'^'* " "'*'" — - .-....,-. — ---^. ...
corn. Pretty lo^iiog, ^ad^ed, and both times together yoa ha^
-seeB Linton hardly four hours, in your life \ Nottr here » thd
babyish trash. I'm going with it to th6 library ; and we'll see
'what your father says to such loving "
Sho sprang at her precious epistles, but I held them above my
head ; and then she poured out further frantic entreaties that I
would bum them-^o any thing rather than show them. And
being really fully as inclined to laugh as scold, for I esteemed
it all girlish vanity, I at lengthy relented in a measure, and
asked,
. " If I consent to bam them, . will you promise feitbfully,
neither to send, nor receive a letter again, nor a book'— for I
perceive you haTo sekit him bookV- > -nor locks of hahr, nor ringi,
nor play^ings ! "
<'We don't send playthings 1 " cried Gatherii^e, her pride over
coming her shame. < •
" Nor any lihing at all, Aen, my lady !^'I said. " Unless ytwi
will, hcf© I go. " .
" I promise, Ellen ! " she cried, catching my^dresS. " Oh, put
them in the fire, do, do ! "
.But when I proceeded to opien the place With the poker, ihe
aaorifice was too painful to be borne. She earnestly supplicated
that I would «pare her one ot. two.
" One or two, Ellen, to keep fm: Linton'b aake 1 "
I unknotted the handkerchief, and oommenciad dropping them
in from an angle, and the flame citrled up the chimney.
^* I win have one, you cruel wretch ! " she screamed, darting
her hand into the fire, and drawing forth some haIf«con8amed
fragments, at the expense of her fingers.
" Very wel > -— and I will have some to exhibit to papa ! " I
answered,. shaking back the rest into tlie bundle, and turning
anew to the door.
She emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, atid mo* >
tioned me to finish the immolation. It was done ; I stirred up
the ashes, and interred them under a shovelful of coals; and
sh^ mutely^ and with a eense of intense injury, retired to her
private apartment. I descended to itell my master that the
young lady^s qualm of eickoen was almost gone, but I judged
it best for her to lie down a while.
She Wouldn't dine ; but she. re-appeared at tea, pale and red
about the eyes, and marvelbusly subdued m t > tttvvard aspect.
NeKt.BiorQi«g I lalMwered the letter by a slip-of paper in-
19S WUTUERING flEianTl.
icribed* *'Master HeathclifFls ruquiested to send no more notes
to Miss LintoQt as slio will not.i-ecoivo them.''And, thenee^
forth the little boy came with vacant pockets.
CHAPTER XXIL
Summer drew to an end, and early autumn; it was past
Michaelmas, but ^e harvest was late that year, and a few of
our, fields were still uncleared^ Mr. Linton and his daughter
would firequently walk out among the reapers ; at the carrying
of the last sheavesi they stayed^ till dusk/ and the evening hap*
pening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad cold, that,
settling obstinately ob his lungs, confined him indoors through-
out the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission. >
Poor Cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been
Considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and her
& ther insisted on ber reading less, and taking more exercise.
She had his companionship no longer ; I esteemed it a duty to
supply its lack, as much as possible, with mine — an inefiicient
substitute, for I could only spare two or three hours, from my
numerous diurnal occupations, to follow bor footsteps, and then
my society was obviously less desirable than hisi
Oil an a & emoon in October, or the beginning of November,
a fresh watery afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling
with moist, withered leaves, and the cold, blue sky was half
hidden by clouds, dark gray streamers, rapidly mounting from
the west, and bodii^ abundant rain, I requested my young lady
to forego her ramble, because I was certain of showers. She
refused, and I unwillingly donned a Cloak, and took my um-
brella to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park-^-
a formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited ; and
that she invariably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse than
ordinary—^ thing never known from his confession, but guessed
both by her and me from his increased silence, and the melan-
choly of his countenance.
She ^went sadly- on; there was no running or bounding now,
thotigh the'chill v^nd might well have tempted her to a race.
And often^ firom the side of my eye, I oould detect her reising a
WUT & fi.RINO HEIGHTS* 199
hand, and brusIuDg vometfaiQg ofFlier cheek. I gazed loand
for a means of diverting her thoughts; On one side of the road
rose a high, rough bank^ where hazels and stunted oaks, with
their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure ; the soil was
tpo loose for the latter, and strong winds had blown some nearly
horizontal. In sumnaer, Miss C atherine delightedto climb along
these trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above
the grquBd; and I, pleased with her dgibty, and her light,
childish heart, still considered it proper to scold every time I
caught her at such an elevation, but so that she knew there
was no necessity for descending. From dinuer to tea she would
)ie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing except singing
old SQpgs — my nursery lore— to herseHj^ or watching the birds,
joint tenants, feed and entice their youns'ones to fly, or nestling
with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming, happier than
words can express.
" Look, miss ! " I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the
roots of one twisted ti-ee ; ^'winter is not here yet. There's a
little flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of blue-
bells that: clouded those turf steps in July with a lilac mist.
Will you clamber up, and pluck it -to show to papa 1 " >
Cathy sta^d a long time at the lonely blossom trerablinff in
its earthy sheltei', and replied at length —
. " No, rU not touch it; but it looks melancholy, does it not|
Ellen r
.''Yes, " I obsenfed,/'about as starved and sackless as you—
your cheeks are blooidless ; let us tak^ hold^ of hands and run.
You're so slow, I dare say I shall keep up with you. "
** No, " she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at
intervals to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass,
or a fuhgus spreading its bright orapge among the heaps of
brown foliage ; and, ever and anoir, her hand was lifted to her
averted face. * .
" Catherine, why are you crying, love V* I asked, approach-
ing and putting my arm over her shoulder.''You must'nt
cry because papa has a cold; be thankful that it is nothing
worse. "
She now put no further x^traint on her tears ; her breath
was stifled by- sobs. *
" Oh, it tcill be something worse, " she said, " And what shall
I do when papa and you leave me, and I am by myself 1 I
can't forget your woxds, EUeii, they are always in my ear.

200 W U T ff E R.I N Q H E.I C B T J.
How Iffe will be changed, howidreaiy the wdtld will be, when
papa and yoa are dead ! "
*« Nonei can teH whether you won't die before us, " I replied,
" It's wrong to anticipate evil — we'll hope there are years and
years to come before any -of ub go ; master is young, and I ani
fltrong, and hardly foity^fiTe. My mother Kved till eighty, a
canty dame to the last. And suppose Mr. Linton were spaiX'd
tin he saw sixty, that would be more years than you have
counted, miss. And would it not be ^lish to mourn a cakraity
above twenty years beforehand V* ^'
''But aunt Isabella was younger than papa, " she remarked,
gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation.
" Aunt Isabella had not^ you and me to nurse her, " I replied.
" She wasn't as happy as master ; she hadn't as much to live
for. AH you need do is to wait well on your father, and cheer
him by letting him see you cheerful ; and avoid giving him anx-
iety on any subject — mind that, Cathy! I'll not dis^ise but
you might kill him, if you were wild ^cnd reckless, and cherish-
ed a foolish, fanciful affection foj: the son of a person Who would
be glad to have him in his grave, and allowed him to discover
that you fretted over the separation he had judged it expedient
to make. " •
** 1 fret about nothing on «aith except papa*s illness, " answer-
ed my companion.''I care for nothing in comparison with
papa. Ana I'll never — ^never — Oh, never, while I have my
senses, do an act, or say a word to vex him. I love him better
than myself, Ellen; and I know it by this — I pray every night
that I may live afber him ; because I would rather be miserable
than that he should be — ^that proves I lo\^ hint better than my-
self. " .
''Grood words, " I replied. ** But deeds must proVe it also ;
and after he is well, remember you don't forget resolutions
formed in the hour of foar. "
As we talked, we Beared a dobr that opened on the road ; and
my young lady, lightening into Stinshine again, climbed up, and
seared herself on the top of the wall, reaching over to gather
some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the
wild rose trees, shadowing tho highway side; the lower fruit
had disappeared, but only birds'could touch the upper, except
from Cathy's present station.
In stretciiing to puH them, her hat fell off; and as the door
was locked, she proposed scrdmbling down to recover it. I bid
Wu^'HSRIKro B BIGHTS. 201
„_. , > ^
^er b6 cftutiouB lest, she j^ot a'foil, and she nimbly disap-
" peared. ,
. But tbe retuin was no su^h easy matter; the stones were
amobth and heavily cemented, and the rosebushes and blackbeiny
stragglers < io4i)d yield no leussisfanice in re-ascending. I, like a
%ol, didn't recollect that dll I heard iier laughmg, and exclaim-
ing— /
** BUen ! yon'll have to fetch the kciy, or else I must run roand
to the porter's lodge. I can't scale the ramparts on this side ! "
" Stay Where you are, " I answered ;'* I have my buncHe of
k^s in my pocket; perhaps I may manage to open it; if not,
•111 go. "
Catherine amused hetself " wHh dandng to and fto before the
door, while I'tiied all the^ large keys in sucoesdon; I had ap-
plied ^he last, and fbtmd that none would do; so, #epeatiii|f my
desire that she would remain tlfere, I was abotit td hnfty home
lis hibi as I could, when an approaching soimd a^rrested me. ft
Wto the trot of a horse ; Cathy^s dance st(^^ > ed, and i & a n^utto
•^ horse stopped also.
** Who is that V* I whispe*^.
" Ellen, I Wish you could open the do < *,*'whtepwed badk my
companion, anxiously:
" Ho, Miss Linton ] " crted a deep voice (the rider's). " I'm
glad to meet you.'Don't be in haste t^ enter, for I have an ex-
planation to ask and obtain. "
** I shan't speak to you, Mr. HeatfacliftTP'answered Oatfaidrine.
" Papa says you ate a wicked main, and you hate both him and
me; and EUto says the same. "
" That is nothing to the purpose, " said HeathcliiT. (He it
Was.) " I don't hate my sdn, I suppose, and it is concerning
him that I demand your attention. Yds! you have'cause to
blush. Two or three months since, were you not in the habk
of writing to Linton 1— ^making love in play, eh V Ydu deserved,
both of you, flog^ng for that! You especially, the elder, and
less sensitive, as it turns out. I've got your letteia, and if yoa
•give me any peitness, I'll send them to your father. I presume
YOU grew weary of the amusement, and dropped it, didn't yoat
Well, you dropped Linton with it, into a Slough of Despond.
He was in earnest — ^in love — really. As true as I live, he'll
dying for you — ^breaking his heart at your fickleness, not-figura
lively, but actually. Though Hareton has made him a standinfir
jest for aix weeks, and I have used mor^ s^iiMM measnrtti, and
I*
20!i WUTHEftlNO HEIGHT fl.
attetnpted to iiighteii him out of his idiocy, he gets worse daily,
and he-Il be under the sod before summer, unless you restore
himr
" How can ybu lie. so glaringly to the poor child ! " ^ I called
from the inside.'/ Fray ride on 1 v " How can you deliberately
get up such paltry falsehoods 1 Miss Cathy, I'll knock the lock
off with a stone. Yon won't believe that vile nonsense. Y09
,qan feel in yourself, it is im{)OB & ible^that a person should die for
love of a stranger. " ^
'''X y?a$ nof; awa^e thieve were eaves-drppper^, " muttered the
det^fiited yiUaiii. ** Worthy M[rs. Dean, I li^ you, but I don't
like your double dealing, " he added, aloiid. " How could you
lie so glaringly as to affirm I hated the'poor child V And in-
vent bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-stoneaf Cath-
erine Linton (the very name warms me), my bontfy lass, I shall
be frcmi home all this week-^-go and see if I have not spoken
truth; do— there's a darling I Just imagine your father m my
place > and Linton in yours; dien think how you would value
your careless lover, if he refused to stir a step to comfort, you,
when your father himself entreated him ; and don't, from pure
stupidity, fall into the same error. I swear, on ,my sa,lvation,
he's going to his grave, and none but you can save him !''
The lock gave way, and I issued out. .
" I swear Linton is dying, " repeated Heathcliff, looking hard
at me. " And grief and disappointment are hastening hi & death.
Nelly, if you wpn't let her go, you can walk over^ourself. But
J shall not return till this time next week ; and I think your
master himself would scarcely object tp her visiting her cousin ! "
" Come in, " said I taking Cathy by the aim, and half forcmg
her to re-enter, for she lingered, viewing, with troubled eyes,
the features of the speaker^ too .stern to express his inward
deceit , .
He pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed —
r " Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have little patience
with Linton, and Hareton and Joseph have less. I'll own that
he's with a harsh set He pines for kindness as well i as. love,
and a kind word from you would be his best medicine. Don't
mind Mrs. Dean's cruel cautions, but be generous, and contrive
to see him. He dreams of you day and night, and can not be
pei'Buaded that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor
45all. " ...
I closed the door, and rolled a stone to asnst the loosened lock
WUTHSmiNO H BIGHTS.
in holding, it; and spreading my unbiella* I drew my charge
underneath, for the rain begsm. to drive through the moaning
branches of the trees,, and wanied us to avoid delay^ ,
pur hurry prevented any comment on the encounter with
Heathcliflf^as we stretched toward home ; but I divined instinct-
ively; that Catherine's heart was clouded now in double dark-
ness.. Her features were so sad, they did not seem hers : she
evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.
The master had retired to rest before we came in. Cathy
stole to his room to inquire how he was; he had fallen asleep.
She i-eturned, and asked roe to sit with her in the library. We
took our tea together ; and afterward she lay down on the rug,
and told me not to talk, for she was weary*
I got a book, and pretended to read. As soon as she sup-
posed me absorbed m my occupation, she recommenced her
silent weeping : it appeared, at present, her favorite diversion.
I suffered her to enioy it a while ; theii J expostulated, deriding
and ridiculing all Mr. Heathcliff's assertions about his son, as
if I ^ere certain she would coincide. Alas 1 I hadn't skill to
counteract the effect his account had produced— -it was just what
he intended.
" You may be right,.Ellen,''she answered ; " but I shall never
feel at ease till I know— and I must tell Linton it is not my fault
that I don't write, and convince him that I shall not change. "
What use were anger and protestations'against her silly cre«
dulity 1 We parted that night beetle ; but next day beheld me
on the road to .Wuthering- Heights; by the side of my willful
yoUng mistress's pony, I couldn't bear to witness her sorrow
— ^to see her pale, dejected countenance and heavy eyes — and I
yielded in the faint hope that Linton himself mi^ht prove, by
his reception of us, how liule ckf the tale^as founded on fact.
CHAPTER XXIIL
The rainy night had ushered in a misty morning — half frost,
half drizzle— and temporary brooks crososd our path, gurgling
from the uplands. My feet were thoroughly wetted; I was
cross and low, exactly the humor suited for making the most of
these dita^eeable things. We entered the farmhouse by the
2M .WUTB BRING HSItQBTi.
kitchen way, to asceitaiii whether Mr. Heathcliff were really
absent, because I put slight faith in his bWn tifiirmation.
Joseph seemed sitting alone, in a sort of elysium, bedide a
xtmring fire, a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with
large pieces of toasted oat cake, and his black, short pipe in his
mouth. Catherine ran to the hearth to wartti herself. I asked
if the master were in? My question remained so kmg unan-
swered, that I thought the old man had grown deaf, and I re-
peated it louder.
" Na— ray ! " he -snarled, or rather screamed through bis nose.
** Na— -ay ! yah muh goa back whear yah coomfroueh. "
" Joseph,*'cried a peevish voice, simulraneouaTy-with ine, from
the inner room,''how often am 1 to call you ? There are only
a few *red aidies now. Joseph ! come this moment. "
.Vigorous pufis, and a resolute stare into the ^grate declared
he had no ear for this appeal. The housekeeper ttnd Hareton
wisiio invisible— one gone on an erratid, and the othcHr tct his
work, probably. " We knew Lintoti's tones, and entered.
'* < Mi, I hope you^n die in a garret, starved to death Y* said
the boy, inistaking our approach for that of his negHgeht at-
tendant.
He stopped on observing his ert'or ; his cousin itew to him.
** Is that you. Miss Linton V lie said, raising bis head from
the arm of the great chair in which he lectined. ** No— don't
kiss me. It takes my breath — dear me ! Papa said you would
call, " continued he, after recovering a little from Catheiine's
embrace, while she stood by, looking very contrite. " WiH
you shut the door, if you please 1 — ^you left it open, and those —
those detestable creatures won't brincr eoab to the fire. It's so
cold! " ; . ^
I stirred Up the cindm, and fetched a scuttleful myself. The
invalid complained of bejne covered Vfith ashes ; but he had a
tiresome cough, and looked feverish and ill, so I did not rebuke
his temper.
" Well, Linton, " murmured Catherine, when his corrugated
brow relaxed. " Are you glad to see me ] Qan I do you any
good] "
" Why didn't you come before 1 " he said. " You should have
come, instead of writing. It tired me dreadiuUy waiting .those
long letters. I'd far rather have talked to you. Now, I can
neither bear to talk, nor any thing efee. I wonder where Zillah
IS I Will ypu (looking at me) st^p into the kitchen and see V*
.WUTflBSIKG BBIGH T-H.
I bad receiTed na thanks for my other service ; and b^ing ub-
willing to run to and fro at his behest, I replied-^
" Nobody, is out there but Joseph. "
.''I want to drink, " he exclahned, fretfully turning awaj.
** ZiUah is oonstandy. gadding oiF to GiinBierKm sinee'papa Went.
It's miserftbre ! And I'm obliged'to come down here— Hhey
resolved never to hear me up stairs. "
< < Is your father atlsemive. to yon, Master Heatheliffi " I a*ed»
perceiving Catherine to be checked in her tfrietadly advances.
*'Attentive ? He makes them a httle more attentive, at least, "
he cried. " The vrretches I Do you know, Miss Linton, that
brute Haretbn laughs at me I I hate hiffl-^ndeed > I hate them
'all-^they a:re odious beings. "
Cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on ti
liitdher in the dresser, fflad a tumbler, and brondit it.- He bid
her add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ; and, hat-
«Dg swallowed ti smaK portion, appeared more tranquil, and said
'she was very kind, -
*'And are you glad to seis tne1 " asked ^e, reiterating her
%rmer question, and pleased to detect tbe fiiint dawn of a smile.
" Yes, 1 am. It's something new to hear a voice like yours! "
he replied,. ** but I have been vexed, because you v^ouldn't come.
Afed papa swore it Was owing to me ; he called me tr pitiful,
shuffling, woithless thing, and said you demised me; «nd if he
had been in my place be would be more the master of the
Grange than your father by'this time. But you don^t despise
me, do. you Miss — "
" I wish you vvould say Catherine, or Cathy! " idternipted my
young lady. *♦ Despise you ] No !^ Next to papa, and Ellen,
I love you better than any body living. I don't love Mr. Heaith-
cliff, though ; and I dare not come when he returns ; will be stay
-away m$iny days 1 " ^ .'■''■
" Not many :** answered Linton, but he goes to the moors
frequently, since the shooting season commenced, and you might
spend an houi^or two with me in his alisenoe. Do^ say you will !
I tiiink I should not be peevish with yon ; you'iJ tiot provoke
me, and yon'^d a,lwayB be ready to help lae, wouldn't you 1 "
''Yes, " said CatheriiiiB, stroking his long, sofi hair ; ** if I couTd
only get papa's eon^ent, I'd spend half my time With you. Pretty
Linton! I wish you were cmy brother!'^
" And then you would like nie as well dis yotir faitherl " ob-
eeirved heiiMnre cheerfiilly., " But papa *iiys you womld love mo
200 WUTHEEINS HBIGHTA.
better than bim at^d all the world, if you were my wife-— hio I'd
rather you were that! " - ^
.''No ! I should never love «ny body better than papa, " she
returned gravely. " And people hate their wives, sometimes ;
but not their listers and brothers, and if you were the latter, you
would live with us, and papa would be as fond of you, as he is
of me. " ■ . -''-
Linton denied t}iat people ever hated their wives ; but Cathy
affirmed they did, and in h^r wisdom, instanced his own fkt^er^
aversion to her aunt. I endeavored to stop her thoughtless
tongue. I couldn't succeed, till every thing she knew was out.
Ma^ter Heathcliff, much irritated, asserted her reillition was & ls6.
** Papa told me ; and papa does not teU falsehoods ! " ahe an-
swered, pertly.
-*'Mj/ papa scorns yours I " cried Linton. ** He calls him «k
sneaking fool! " -
''Yours is a wicked man, " retorted Catlierine,''and -you are.
very naughty to dare to repeat what he says. Be must be
wicked, to have made aunt Isabella leave him as she did I "
" She didn't leave him, " isaid the boy, " You shan't contra-
dict me ! "'
" She did I " cried my young lady.
" Well. I'll tell you Something ! " said Linton..'« Your mother
hated your father; now then. " •
" Oh ! " exclaitned Catherine, too enraged to continue.
** And she loved nune ( " . added he.
" You little liar! I hate you now, " she panted, and her face
grew red with passion.
" She did ! she did ! " sang Linton, sinking Into the recess of
his chair, and leaning back Ins head to e^oy the Agitation of the
otbei'disputant, who stood behind.
" Hush, Master Heathcliff! " I said, . " that's your father's tale
too, I suppose. " ^ -
" It isn't — ^you.hold ypiir tongue! " he answered, " she did,
she did, Catherine, she did, she did ! " * . * ^
Cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and
caused him tp fall against one arm. .He was immediately seized
by a stifTocating cough, that soon ended his triumph. It lasted
so long tha^ it lightened even me. As to bis cousin, she wept
with all her might, aghast at the mischief she had. done, though
she said nothing. I held him-till the fit exhausted itself. ~ Then
he thrust me away, and- leaned his head down, silently. Catbe-
WUTB BRING HEXGUTt* 207
tine quelled her lamentations abo, took a seat opposite, and
looked solemnly into the fire. .
" How ^o you feel now, Master Heathdiff/'i inquired, after
waiting ten minutes,
V I Yfiahrshe felt as I do, " he relied, " spiteful, cruel thing !
Hareton .never touches me, he never struck me in his life. And
I was better to-day — and there " — his voice died in a whimper.
^ V /didn't Btiike you! " muttered Cathy, chewing her lip to
prevent another burst of emotion.
He sighed and moaned like one .under great suffering ; and
kept it up. for a quarter of cm hour, on purpose to disti'ess his
coufiinf apparently, for whenever he caught a stifled sob & om
her, he put renewed .pain and pathos into the inflections of his
voice.
'Tm sorry I hurt you, Linton! " she said at length, racked
beyond endurance. " But I couldn't hav6 been hurt by that
little push; and I had no idea that you could, either^— you're
not much, are you, Linton? Don't let me go hoqoe, thinking
I've doiie you^l & hn! answer, speak to me.^'
''I can't speak to you,''he murmured, .'^ you've hurt me so
that I shall lie awake all night, choking with itas cough. If you
had it you'd know what it was — ^but yim'U be comfortably
asleep, while I'm in -agony-;— and nobody near me! I wonder
hovv you would like to pass those fearful nights ! " And he be-
gan, to wail aloud for very pity o? himsel£
''^ Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights, " I
said, " it won't be Misa who spoils ^our ease; you'd be the
same, had she never come. However, she shall not disturb you
again — and perhaps you'U get quieter when we leave you. "
" Must I go V* asked Catherine dolefully, bending over him.
" Do you want me to go, Linton ] "
V You can't alter what you've done ] " he replied pettishly,
shiinking from her, " unless you alter it for the worse, by teas-
ing me into a fever ! " ,
" Well, then I must go ] " she repeated. •
" Let me alone, at least, " said he ; " I can't bear- you^ talk
ing! " •
She lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure, a
tiresome while, but as he neither looked tip nor spoke, she
finally made a movement to the. door, and I followed. We
were recalled by a scream. Linton had slid from his seat upoa
the hearthstone, and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an
208 WUTHEKIN^G HEIGHTS.
indulged plague of a child, determined to be as grievous and
harassing as it can. I thoroughly gauged his disposition 6^001
his behavior, aiid saw at once it^vould be folly to attempt hu-
moring him. Not so my companion, she ran back in terror,
knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till he ^rew
quiet from lack of breath, by no riienm from compunofeioB at
distressing her.
" 1 shaa lift him upon the settle, " I said, *'and he majr toll
about as he pleases ; w€ can't -stdp to watch him. I hope you
are satisfied, miss Cathy, that ^^•si'e not the person to benefit
him, and that his conditiOB of health is tiat ^occasioned by at "
tachment to you. Now tb^, there he is! Come away; as
soon as he knows there is nobody by to care for his nonsense,
he'll be glad to Ke still ! " . .. .
She placed a cushion under his head, atid oflfered him some
water, he rejected the latter, vnd tossed uneai^ly on the former;
as if It were a stone, or « block of wo6d. She tried to put it
more comfortably.
" I can't do with that, " he said, **it*s not higtl enough !*'
Catherine broufi^bt another to lay above it.
" That's too high ! " murmtired the provoking thing. .
*'How must I arrange it, thetil " she'asked,- despairingly..
He twined himself up to her, as she half knek by the 8et^«
and converted her shoulder into a support.
" No, that won't do ! " I said. " You'll be cotttcfwt with the
cushion, Maister Heathcliff! Miss has wasted too much time
on yon already ; we can not remain five ^birattes Ic^ger^ "
" Yes,, yes, we can ! " replied Cathy. ♦* He's good and pa»
tient, now. He's beginning Cothit^k I shall have far greater
misery than he will, to-night, if I believe he Is the worse for my
visit ; and then I da^e not come a^aiii. Tell the truth about it,
Linton — ^for I mustn't come if I have hurt you. " \
" You must come to cure me, " he answered. " You ought
to come because you have hurt me. You know you have^ ex-
tremely [ I was not as iU when yoii entered as I am at present
—was 1 ?'
" But you've made yourself ill by ciying, and being in a pasi*
sion. "
" I didn't do it all, " said his Cousin.; " However, weil b^
friends now. And you want me — ^you would wish to see me
HometinMs, really V*
" I told you I did !'^ he replied impatiWtlyi ** Sit on Che net'-
WUTHEft^NO HEIGHTS. S09^
tie, and- let me les^n oii your knee. That's as mamma used to
do^ whole afternoons together. Sit qtiite still, and don't talk,
but you may am^ a song if you can sing, or you may say a nice
long interesting ballad-.— One of thbse you promised to teach
me, or a stpry — I'd rather have a ballad though ; begin. "
Catherine repeated the longest she could remember. The
cJmployment pleased both mightily. Linton would have another,
and after that another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections ;.
and'so thoy went on until the cloigk struck twelve, awd Ave heard
Hareton in the court, retpniing for his dinner.
" And to-morrow, Catherine ; will yoa be here to-morrow 1 "
asked young Heathdil!) holditig her frock, as she rose reluc-
tantly.
" No ! " I ansvyered, " nor next day neither. " She, however,
gave a different response, evidently, for his forehead cleared, as
she stooped, and whispered in his ear.
" You won*t go to-morrow, recollect, Missf I conmoenced,
when we were out of the bouse. " You are not dreaming of it,
are you 1 " ,
She smiled.
" Ob, I'H take good carel " I continued, " I'll have that lock
mended, and you can escape by tjo way else. "
" I can get over the wall,** she sard, laughing. " The Grange
is not a prison, ^llen, and you are not my jailer. And besides,
I'm almost seventeen. I'm a woman — and. I'm. certain Linton
would recover quickly if be had me to look after him. I'm
older than he is, vou know, and wiser, less childish, am I not ?
And he*n soon do as " I direct him, with some slight coaxing.
He's a pretty little darling when he's good. I*d make such a
pet of him, ii he were mine. We should never quarrel, should
we, after we were used to each other 1 Don't you like him,
Ellen 1 "
" Like him 1 " 1 exclaimed. " The worst tempered bit of a
sickly slip that ever struggled into its teens! Happily,, as Mr.
He a thcliflT conjectured, he'll not win twenty ! 1 doubt whether
he^ll see spring, indeed-^and small loss to his family, whenever
he drops off; and* lucky it is for us that his fatber took him.
The kinder he was treated, the more tedious and selfish he'd
be 1 . I'm glad you have no chance of having him fbr a husband
Miss Catherine r'
My companion waxed serious at hearing. this speech. To
speak of his death so regardlessly wounded her feehngs.
210 WUTtf£RING HSI6HTB.
" He's younger than I/'she answered^ after a protracusd
pause of meditation, *'and h^ ought to Hyo the longest, he will-^
ne must live as long as I do. He's as strong now as when he
first came into the north, I'm positive of that ! It's only a cold
that ails himt the same as papa has. You say papa will get
better, and why shouldn't he ? "
** Well, well, " I cried, " after all, we needn't trouble our-
selves; for listeu, Miss, and mind, I'll keep my word. If you
attempt goine to Wutbering Heights again, with, or without
me, I shall imorra Mr. Linton, and unless he allow it, the inti-
macy with your cousin must not be revived. "
" It has been revived ! " muttered Cathy, sulkily.
" Must not be continued, then ] " I said.
« We'll see ! " was her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leav-
ing me to toil in the rear. ■ /
Wo both reached hoqie before our dinnerrtime ; my mas-
ter supposed we had been wandering through the, pai'k, and
therefore he demanded no explanation of our absence. As
soon as I entered, I hastened to change my soaked shoes and
stockings ; but sitting such a while at the Height^, had done
the mischief. On the succeeding morning I was laid up ; and
during three weeks I remained incapacitated for attending to
my duties— a calamity never experienced prior to that period,
and never, I am thankful to say, since. „ .
My little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to. wait
on me, and cheer my solitude ; the confinement brought me
exceedingly low. It is wearisome to a stirring active body —
but few have slighter reasons for complaint than I had. The
moment Catherine left Mr. Linton's room, she appeared at my
bedside. Her day was divided between us; no amusement
usurped a minute ; she neglected her meals, her studies, and
her play ; and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched ;
she must have had a warm heart, when she loved her & .ther
so, to give so much to me i I said her days were divided be-
tween us ; but the master retired early, and I geherally needed
nothing after six o'clock, thus h6r evening was her own.
Poor thing, I fkever considered what she d;d with herself
after tea. And though frequently, when she looked in to bid
me good night I remarked a fresh color in her cheeks, and a
pinkness over her slender fingers ; instead of fancying the hue
Dorroytred from a cold ride aci-oss the moors, I laid it to thii
charge of a hot fire in the library.
CHAPTER XXIV.
At the close of three .weeks, I was able to quit ipy chamber,
and. move about the housjs. And on the first occasion of my sit-
ting up in the evening, I asked Catherine to read to me, because
my eyes were weak. We were in the library,, the master
having gone to bed ; she consented, rather unwillingly, I fan^.
cied; and imagining, my sort of books did not suit her, I bid
her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
She fiielected one of her own favorites, and got forward stead-
ily about an hour ; then came frequent questions.
" Ellen, are you not tired 1'Hadn't you better lie down now t
You'll be sick, keeping up so long, Ellen. "
" No, no, dear, I*m not tired, " I returned, continually.
Perceiving me immovable,, she essayed another zpethod of
showin? her disrelish for her occupation. It changed to yawn-
ing, and stretching, and^—^-
" Ellen, Fm tired. " , . ^
" Give over then, and talk, " I answered.
That was worse ; she fretted and sighed, and looked at lier
watch till eight ; and finally went to her room, completely over-
done with sleep, judging 1)y her peevish, heavy look, and the
constant rubbing she inflicted on her eyes.
The following night she seemed more impatient «ti]l ; and on
the third she complained of a head-ache, and left me. I thought
her conduct odd ; and having remained alone a long while, I
resolved on going and inquiring whether she were better, and
asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of up-^airs, in
the dark.
No Catherine could I jiliscover up-stairs, and none_below.
The servants afHiined they had not seen her. I listened at Mv^
Edgar*s door — all was silence. I returned to her apartment,
extinguished my candle, and seated myself in the window.
The moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the
ground, and I reflected that she might, possibly, hav^ taken it
into her head to walk about the garden, for refreshments I did
detect a figure creeping along the^ inner, fence of the park ; but
it Was not my young mistress ; on its emerging into the lights I
212 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
recognized one of the grooms. He ^tood a considerable period
viewing the carriage road through the groands ; then started
off at a brisk pace, as if he had detected spmethitig, and reap-
peared, presently, leading Miss's pony ; and there sbe was, just
dismounted, and walking by its side.
The man took his charee stealthily across the grass toward
the stable. - Cathy entered by the casement window of the draw-
ing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where I awaited her.
She put the door gently to, slipped oflf her snowy shoes, untied
her hat, atid was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage, to
lay aside her mantle, when I suddenly rose, and revealed my-:
self^ The surprise petrified her an instant; sl^e uttered an in-
articulate exclamation, and stootl fixed.
" My dear Miss Catherine, " I began, too vividly impressed
by her recent kindness to break into a scold, " Vhefe have you
been ndrne at this hour 1 And now why should you try to de-
ceive me, by telling a tale. Where have you been 1 Speak !'*
" To the bottom of the'park, " she stammered. " I didn't tell
a tale. "
" And nowhelro else 1 " I demanded.
" No, " was the muttered reply.
• " Oh, Catherine, " I cried sorrowfiiUy. " You know you have
been doing wrong, or you wouldn't be driven to uttering an un-
truth to me. l^hat does grieve me. I'd rather be three months
xH, than hear you frame a deliberate lie.*'
She sprang forward, and bursting into tears,^threw lier armiv
round my neck. ;
" Well Ellen, Vm so afraid of your being angry, " she said.
" Promise not to be angry, and you shall know the very truth,
I hate to hide. "
We sat down in the window-seat ; I assured her I would not
9cold, whatever her secret might be, and t guessed it, of course ;
so she commenced —
" I've been to Wuthering Heights, Ell6n, and I've never
raiised going a day since you fell ill, except thrice before, and
twice after you left your room. I give Michael books and pic-
tures to prepa!re Minny every evening, and to put her bacK in
the stable ; you mustn't scold him either, mind. I was at the
Heights by balf-padt six, and generally stayed till h & lfrpast
eiglrt, and then galloped hon». It Ivas not to amuse myself
that I went; I was often wretched all the time. Now lEiiid then,
1 was happy, ^noe in ii^ " week perhapd. At fint, I expected
ihere would ba a & d work persuading you to let me keep my
word to Linton, for I had engaged to call again. next day, when
we quitted him ; but, as you staid up-stairs on the mono w, I
efloaped that trouble; and while Michael waa refastening the
lock of the park door in the afternoon, I got possession of
the key,jtnd told him how my cousin'jvished me to visit him»
because he was sick, and couldn't come to the Grange; and
how jpapa would object to my goine. And then I negotiated
with aim about the pony. He is fond of reading^, and he thinks
of leaving soon to eet married, so he offered, if iwould lend him
books out of the library, to do what I wished ; but I preferred
giving him my own, and that satisfied him better,
^'On my second visit, Linton seemed in lively spirits ^ and
ZUlah, that is their housekeeper, made us a clean room > and a
ffood fire, ai|d told ua that as Joseph was out at a prayer-meet-
ing,, aqd Hareton was off with his dogs, robbing our woods of
pheasants, aa I iieard afterward, we. might do what we liked.
" She brought me some warm wine and gingerbread ; and ap*
peared exceedingly good-natured ; and Linton sat in the arm-
chair, and I in the little rocking chair, on the hearthstone, and
we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say ;
we {banned where we would go, and what > we would do in
summer. I needn't repeat that, because you would call it silly.
" One time, however, we were near quarreling. He said
^ pleasaatest manner c^ spending a hot July 4 & y was lyinff
from morning till evening on a bank of beath in the middle of
the moors, with the bees humming dreamily about among the
bloom, and the larks singring high up over head, and the blue
sky, and bright sun shining steadily and cjoudlessly. That was
his most perfect idea of heaven's happiness — ^mine was rocking
in. a rustlmg green .ti^ee, with a west wind bio win gi and bright,
white clouds flit^ng rapidly above ; and not only larks, but
throstles, and blackbirds, and linnets,, and cuckoos pouring out
music on every side, and the moors seen at a distance, broken
into cool dusky dells ; but close by great swells of long grass
undulati^ in waves to the breeze ; . and woo4s and sounding
water, and the whole world awake and wild with joy. Ho
wanted all to fie in an ecstacy^ of peace ; I wanted all to aparkle,
and dance in a glorious jubilee.
** I said his heaven would be only half alive, and he sai^ mine
would be drunk ; I said I should fall asleep in bis, and he said
he could not breathe in mine, an4 began to grow very siiappish.
214 WUtHEftlNO KEISHTB.
At last, we agreed to try botb, as .soon as the right weather
came ; and then we kissed ea^ch other and were friends. After
sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room with its smooth,
uncarpeted floor; and thought how nice it would be to play in,
if we removed the table ; and I asked Linton to call Zillah in to
help us — and we'd have a game at blind -man's buff— she -should
try to catch us*— you used to, you know, Ellen. He wouldn't;
there " was rio pleasure in it, he said; but he condent^d to play
at ball with me. , We found two, in a Cupboard, aitiong a heap
of old toys; tops, and hoops, and battledoors, and i^uttlecocka.
One was marked O., and the other IJ.; I wished to have the
C, because that stood for Catherine, and the H. might be for
Heathcliff^ his name ; but the bran came out of H., and Linton
didn't like it. .
" I beat him constantly ; -and he got cross-again, and coughed,
and returned to his chair: that night, though, he easily recov-
ered his good humor ; he was charmed with two or three pretty
songs— y(7ur songs, Ellen ; and when I was obliged to go, he
begged and entreated me to come the following evening, and I
promised.
" Minny and I v^nt flying home, as light as airr and. I
dreamed of Wutheripg Heights, and my sweet, darling cOuiin,
till morning. .
" On the morrow I was sad ; partly because you were poorly,
and partly that I wished my fkthier knew- and approved of my
excursions : but it was beautiful moonlight ftfler tea ; and, as I
rode on, the gloom cleared.
" I shall have another happy evening, I thought to myselfy
and what delights me more, my pretty Linton wiU.
•*I trotted up " their garden, and was turning round to the
back, when that felloW EamshaW met me, took my bridle, and
bid me go in by the front entrance. He patted Minny's neck,
and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted
me to speak to him. t only told him to leave my horse alone,
or else It would kick him. He answered in his vulgar accent. ,
** *It wouldn't do mitch hurt if it did;'and^ surveyed its legs
with a smile.''.
** I was half inclined to make it try ; however, he moved off
to open the door, and, as he raised the latch, he looked up to
the inscription above, and said, with a stupid mixture of awk-
wardness and elation i
•• < Miss Catherine ! I can read yon, nah.*
WUTH6SIN6 HEIGHTS. 215
•** Wonderful,* I exclaiided. * Pfay let us hear you— you
ore grown clever !'
" He spelled, and drawled over by syllables, the name-
" • Hareton Batnphaw/
**'And the figures V I cried, eitcoura^ngiiy, perceiving that
be came to a dead halt. *
" * I can no| tell them yet,'he answered.
"'Oh, you dunce V " I said, latughing heartily. at his failure^
" The fool stai-ed, with a grin hoveling about his lips, and a
scowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might
not join in my mirth ; whether it were not pleasaiit femiliarity,
or what it really Was, contempt. I settled bis doubts by sud-
denly retrieving my gravity, and desiring Wm to walk i|way, for
I came to^isee Linton, not him.
" He reddened— I saw that by the moonlight'*- < lropped his
hand from, the latch, and skulked oli^ a picture of mortified
vanity. He imagined himself to be as accomplished as Linton,
I suppose^'because he could spell his own name; and was
marvelously discomfited that I didn't think the same.
" Stop, Miss Catherine, dear4 " I interrupted. " I shall not
scold, but I don^t like your conduct there. If you Kad remem*
bered that Hareton was your cousin, as much as Master Heath-
cliff, you would have felt how impK)per it was to behave in
that way. At least, it was praiseworthy ambition for him to
desire to be as acconaplished as Linton: and probably he did
not learn merely to show off; . you had made him ashamed of
bis iraorance before — ^I have no doubt; and Be wished to
remedy it and please you. To sneer at his imperfect attempt
was very bad breedings-had tf & u been brought up in his cir-
cumstances, would you be less rude 1 be was as quick and as
intelligent a child as ever you were, and I'm hurt that he should
be despised now, becaixse that base Headiciiff has treated. him
so unjustly. "'
'* Well, Ellen, vow won't cry about it, will you 1 " she ex-
claimed, surprised at my earnestness. ** But wait, and you
ahall hear if he conned his a ^ c, to please me ; and if it were
worth while being civil to the brute. I entered, Linton was
lying on the settle and half got up to welcome me.
"'I'm ill to-night, Catherine, love,'he said»'and you must
have all the talk, and- let me Usten. Come, and sit by < me ; I
was sure you wouldn't htevk your word, and I'll make yon
promise again, before you go.'
216 WUTU£ftINO UfilGUrS.
** I knew jkoW that I mustntt tease him, as ke waa ill ;, and I
spoke softly and put no questions, and avoided irntatiDg him iu
any way. I had brought some of my nioQSt books for him ; he
asked me to read a little of one, and I was about to comply,
when Eamshaw buvst the door open, having gathered venom
with reflection. He advanced direct to U0| seized Lioton by
the arm, and swung him off the seat.
"'Get to thy owb room 1'he said, in a voice almost inarticu-
late wit^ passion, and li^jui face looked swelled and fiinous;
'Take her there if she comes 16 see. thee-'Ht^ou Aatln't keep
me out.of thi$, fiegotie wi'ye both P
" He swore at us^ and left Lintop no time to answer, nearly
throwing him into the kitchen ; and he eleBche4 his fist, aa I
followea, seemingly longing to knock me down. I waa dlraid,
for a moment, and I let o^e volume fall ; he kicked it after me,
and shut us out.
** I heard a malignant, cjra < ^ly lau^ by^tl^ & ^e, and, turning)
beheld that odious Joseph, standing rubbing his bony bands, and
quivering. .
"'Aw wer suta he'd sarve ye eht ! He's a grand lad ! He's
getten t*ra^ht sperrit in him \ He k^aws^r-^ye, he knaws as
weel a» aw do, who. sud be t'maister yoi^er. £ch, ech^ ech !
He mad ye ski^ properly I Ech, ech, ech I'
'* * Where most we go ]'I said to my eousin, diszegarding the
old wretch's mockery.
** Linton lyas white and trembling. He waf not pretty then,
Ellen. Qh, no ; be looked fiightful, for his thin face and large
eyes were wrought into an expression of frantic, powerless
fury. He .srasj^eid the handle of tha dcior, and shook it It
was fastened inside.
*''If you don't )et me in I'll kill you*— if you don't let me in
I'll kill you !'he rather sfatieked than said, * Devil ! d«vil 1 I'D
kill you, I'll kiU you 1'
" Joseph uttered his croaking laugh agf^in.
•J * Thear, that's t'father !'he cried. /That's & ther ! We've
alias i^ummut uh orther side in us. Nivev hee^t H^e^n, ladr*
dunnut be'feard — ^he can not get at thee !'
'* I took hold of Linton's hands, and tried to pull him away ;
but he shrieked so shockingly that I dared not proceed. At last,
his cries. were choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood
goahad from his mouth« and he fell on the groi^ad.
" I ran into the yard, sick with tenor, an4 c^Ued for Zill^
WUTHERINC HEIGUT6. 217
ad loud aa I could. She soon heard me ; she was milkiBg the
cows iir a Ished behiijid the b«ini, andj hurrying from her work,
she inquired what, there was to do ?
** I hadn't breath to explqiin ; dragging her in, I looked about
for Linton. Earnshaw had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing up
staiiB. Zillah and I ascended after him; but he stopped me at
the. top of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in, I must go
home. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, . and I would
enter.
** Joseph locked the door, and declared I should do'no sich
stu^'and asked me v^hether I were'bahn to be as mad as
him!'s J
'< I stood crying, tillthe housekeeper re-appeared ; she affiim
ed he would be better in a bit ; but hei couldn't do with that
^rieking and din, and she took me, and nearly carried me into
the house. . ,
*'-£llen, I was r^'dy to teair my hair off my head ! I sobbed
aind wept, so that my eyes were almost blind ; and the ruffian
you have such sympathy^ with stood opposite, presuming every
now and then to bid me ^wisht,'and denying that it was his
fault; and, finally, frightened, by my assertions that'I would tell
papa, and he should be put in prison and hanged, he commenced
blubbering himself^ and hurried out to hide his cewaKlly agita-
tion. Still I was not rid of him. When at length they com-
pelled me to depart, and I had got some hundred yards off the
premises, be suddenly issued from the shadow of me road-side^
and checked Minny and took hold of me.
• " * Miss Catherine, I'm ill grieved,* he began, * but it's raythet
too bad'.
" I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking, perhaps he
would murder me. He lee go, thundering one of his horrid
curses, and I galloped home, more than^half o»t of my sensies.
''I didn't bid you gpod-night that evening ; and I didn't ^o
to Wuthering Heights the next. I vrished to exceedingly ; but'
I was strangely excited, and dreaded to hear that LtAton was
dead, sometimes, and sometimes shuddered at the thought of
encountering Hareton. .
<'0n the third day I took courage— at least I couldn^t bear
longer suspense— and stole off once more^ L went at five
o'clock, and walked, fancying I might manage to creep into the
house, and up to Linton's f < iom, unobserved. However, the
K
218 WUTUEHING HBIGUT9.
do0ft gate potice of Qiy approach ; I^Ulali received tne, tTKl. i^ay •
ing»'the lad was inendiiig nicely,'ebowed me iato a amalt tidy«
carpeted apartment, where, to ray inexpressiblQ joy, I beheld:
Linton laid ofn a lilide wie^ reading one of ray boekis. But he
would neither apeak to nUe aer k)ok NEtt me through a whol^
bour,'£llen» He has auch an unhappy temper ; and what quite
confounded rae, when he did open hia rao«lli, it was to uUei
the falflehopd, that I had occfisioned th,e uproar, and Harptoo
was not to blarae 1
** Unable to reply, except passionately, 1 got up, and walked
frora the xooio. lio sent after ine a iaint'Oatberme V he did
not reckon on being answered ao— but I wouldn'Mum back;
and the morrow was the second day gn which I stayed at homo,
nearly determined to visit him no more.
" Bat it was aa miserable g(Hag te b^d, and getting op, and
never hearing any thing about him» that my resolution melted
into air, before it was properly formed. It had appeared winong.
to taka the journey once ; iiow it . seemed wroiw to rcdfrain.
Michael cdme to aak if he must saddle Micmy ; I said'Yes,'
and considered myself ddihg & dnty as she Ime ne over the
bills. I was forced to pMa the & ont wiadowa to get to the
oourt; it was no use U'ying to conceal say presence.
« < Youi^; a»ast6r is in ^ house,'said Zillab, aa atie aaw us
makii^ f & c the parlor. . ^
. " I went in^i Eamshaw was there also, but he quitted the.
zoem directly. Union sat in the greet arm-ishair half asleep ;
walking up to the fire, I began m a serious tooev paxtly mean-
ing it to be true,
** * As ypu don't like me, lAnton, and as you think I corae on
purpose to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every d»e, t^ ia
Qox last meetiBg— -let < us say good bye ;- and tell Mr. Heatbcliff
1^ you bave no wish to see me» and that -he mustn't invent any
move falsehoods on the subject.'
" *Sik down and take your hat off, Catheiine,'he answered.
* You are so oittch happier than I am, you ong^t to be better,
Pppa talks esong^ or ray defects, and shows enough aconi of
rae, to make it natuii^ I dbpnU doubt rayse]£ I doubt wh^iier
I am not altogether as worthless as he calls me, frequently ; and
tiben I feel so cross and bitten, I hatb ev^ry body ! i m» wordi-
less, and bad i > temper, and bad in spirit, alrae0t.always-^--aiid
if you (dioose, you am^ aay flood bye^^you'U get rid d* an. an*
noyaitaa* Otaly, Caithmta, oo. ate this justihoe ; believe that if I
WUTHSmiNS HBI6HTB. S19
migfat be zb sweet, and as kind, apd as good as jaa ara^ I woidd
lw,^iawftlli]i^y^«idiiKH:eflo,cfaanB^ha{^ymnda8^^ And,
believe that your kindness has made me loYe you deeper diah
if I deserved jour love, and though I couldn't, and 9an not help
shewing my naticre to yoix, I r^pret it, and lepent it, and riuul
regret, and repei]^ it, till I die 1'
" lielthe^ spoke die truth; and i felt I must forgive him ; and»
though he^ should quarrel the next moment, I must forme him
again. We were reconciled, but we cried, both of us, the
whole time I stayed. Not entirely for sorrow, yet I was sorry
Linton had that distorted nature. He'll n^ver let his friends m
at ease7 and he'll never be at ease himself!
" I have always gone to his little parlor, since that^ night;
because his father returned the day aner. About three times,
I think, we have been meny and hopeful, as we were the first
evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and tix > ubled — ^now
with his selfishness and spite i and now with his sufferings : but
I've learned to endure the ^rmer with nearly as little resent-
ment as the lattet.
'^Mr. Hoathchff purposely avoids me. I have hardly seett
him at all. Last Sumday, indeed, coming earlier diai^ u»ual, I
hieard hhn abuising poor Linton, cruelly, §bt his conduct of the
n^t before. I can t tell how be knew of it, unless he listened.
Linton had ciertaktly behaved prov < ^ingly ; however, it vras the
business of nobody but me ; and I int^rupted Mr. HeatlieHfF*a
bdiuie, by entering, and td^ng him so. He burst into a laugh»
and went away, saying he was glad I took that view of thf
matter. Since then, I've told Linton he must whisper his bitter
^ Now, Ellen, you have beard all; lOnd I cto't be prevented
tarn going to Wmthering Heights, except by inflicting mismy
on two pi^pie-^whei-eas, if you'll cmly not letl papa, m^ going
need disturb the tranquillity of none. You'll not teU, will you %
It vrill be very heaitless if you do. "
** FH make vp my m^Jidon that point by to=-monnow,^ Miss
Catherine, " I li^ied. ^It r^uires B€»ne iStudy; md so I'll
leave you to your rest, and go think it over.*':
I thou^t it oTcnr aioad in.«iy master's pi^esenoe; walking
straight from her room to his, and relating the whole story with
the exception of h^ conversatione with her cousin, and any
mention of Harelcm.
Mr. Liatoir was alarmed and disttessed mcse than he would
230 WUTBEEINfi HEIGHTS*
acknowledge to me. In the morning, Cathmne learned my
betrayal of her confidence^ and she learned also that her secret
visits were to end.
In Tain she wept and writhed against the interdict ; and im <
plored her father tm have pity on Linton : all she got to comfort
her was a promise that he would write, and give him leave to
come to the Grange when he pleased ; but explaining that he
must no longer expect to see .Catherine at Wumering Heights*
Perhaps, had he been awarei of his nephew's disposition and
state, of health, he would have seen fit to mthhotd even that
slight consolation.
CHAPTER XXV.
These things happened last winter, sir, — said Mrs. Dean.—
hardly more tiban a year ago. Last winter, I did not^ think, at
another twelve months'end, I ehould be amusing a stranger to
the family with relating them 1 Yet, who knows how long
you'll be a stranger 1 You're too young: to rest always con^
tented, living by yourself; and I some way fancy no one could
see Catherine j^inton, and not love her. Vou smilei but why
do you look so lively and interested, when I talk about her —
and why have you asked me to hang her picture over your fire-
place 1 and why— t
" Stop, my good friend 1 " I cried? " It may be very possible
that /should love her; but would she love me. ? I doubt it
too much to venture my tranquillity, by running into tempta-
tion ; and then my home is not here. I'm of the buiy world,
and to its arms I must return. Go on. Was Catherine obedient
to her father's commands ? "
She was, continued the housekeeper.^ — Her aiSecdon fi)r him
was still the chief sentiment in her heart ; and he spoke without
anger ; he apoke in the d^ep tenderness of one about to leave
his treasure amid perSs and. foes, where his remembered wovds
would be the only aid that he Could bequeath to guide her.
. He said to me, a few days afterward,
^ " I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call. Tell me,
sincerely, what do you think of him ; is he changed for the better,
or ia there a prospect of improvement, as be grows a man V*
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 221
" He's very delicate, sir, " I replied; " and scarcely likely to
reach manhood ; but this I can say, he does not resemble his
lather; and if Miss Catherine had die misfortune to marry him,
he would not be beyond her control, unless she were extremely
and foolishly indulgent. However^ master, you'll have plenty
of time to get acquainted with him, and see whether he would
suit her ; it wants four year? and more to his being of age. "
- Edgar sighed ; and, walking to the window, looked out to-
ward Gimmerton Kirk. It was'a misty afternoon, but the
February sun shone dimly, and we could just distinguish the
tw:o iir-trees in the yard, and the sparely scattered gravestones.
" I've prayed often, " he half soliloquized, " for the approach
of Ivhat is coming ; and now I begin to shrink and fear it. I
thought the memory of the hour I came down that glen a bride-
groom, would be less sweet than tlie anticipation that I was
soon, in a few months, or, possibly weeks, to be~ carried up and
laid in its lonely hollow ! Eflen, I've been very happy with my
little Cathy. Thtough winter nights and summer days she was
a living hope at my side — ^but I've been as happy musing by
myself among those stones, under that old church — ^lying,
through the long June evenings, on the green mound of her
mother's grave, and wishing, yeaniing fbr the time when I
might lie beneath it. What can I do for Cathy 1 How must
I quit her ] I'd not care one momeiit for Linton being Heath-
cliff's son ; nor for his taking her from nie, if he could console
her for my loss. I'd not care that Heathcliff gained his ends,
and triumphed ui robbing me of my last blessing ! But should
Linton be unworthy— only a feeble tool to his father — ^I can
not abandon her to him ! And, hard though it be to crush her
buoyant spirit, I must persevere in making her sad while I live,
and leaving her solitary when I die. Darling ! I'd rather re-
sign her to G-od, and lay her in the earth Tjefore me. "
" Resign her to God, as it is, sir, " I answered, **and if we
should lose you — which may He forbid — under His providence
ril stand her fiiend and counsellor to the last. Miss Catherine
is a good girl ; I don't fear that she will go willfully wrong; and
people who do their duty are always finally rewarded. "
Spring advanced ; yet my master gathered no real strength,
though he resumed his walks in the gi'ounds with his daughter.
To her inexperienced notio^, this itself was a sign of con-
valescence ; arid then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes
were bright ; she felt sure of his recovering.
322 WUTHERTING H E I 6 K T ».
On her sevdnteentb Hrdiclay bo ^d not ^it the clnircliyftrd,
H was raining, and I oh»etwei — . ^
** You'll surely not go oat ^o-night, air? " ;'
" No, I'll defer it, this year, a little longer,'* he aiitiweced.
He wrote again to Linton, expreaaing hia great desire to aee
him ; and, had the invalid been presentable, I've no doubt hie
father would have- permitted him to come« As it waa^ being
instructed, he returped an answer, intimating that Mr. Heaths
cliff objected to his calling at the Grange ; but his uncle's kind
remembrance. deliffhted him, and he Iraped to meet him some^
times in his rambles, and personally to petition that bia couain
and he might not remain long so utterly divided.
That part of his letter was simple, and, probably, hie own.
Heathclm knew he could plead eloquently enough forCatherine's
conmany. Then-^
** I do not ask, " he said, " that she may visit here ; but am I
never to see her, because my fisither forbids me to go- to hef
home, and you forbid her to coma. to mine! Do, now and
then, ride with her toward the Heights ; and let us ei^cbauge a
few words in your presence 4 we mtve done^ nothing to deserve
ttiis'separation ; ana you are not angry with me*— you have no
reason to dislike me — ^you allow yourself. Dear uncle t send
me a kind note to-morrow; and leave to join you any wheoce
you please, except at Thrusbcross Grange. I oelieve an inte] >
view would convince you that my father's character is, not
mine; he affirms I am more your nephew than his son;; and
though I have faults which render me unworthy, of Catheripei
she has excused thent, and, for her sake, you should also* You
inquire after my health — ^it is better ; but while I remain cut
off from all hope,, and doomed. to solitude, or to the society
of those who never did, and never. will like me, how can I be
cheerful and well 1 "
Edgar, though he felt fer the boy, could npt consent to grant
his request ; because he cotkid not accompany Gatlierxne.
He said, in summer, perhaps, they might meet ; mea nti me,
he wished him to continue writing at intervals, and engaged to
give him what advice and comfort he was able by letter ; being
well aware of his hard position in his fomily.
Linton complied; and bad he been unrestrained, would
probably have spoiled, all by filling his epistlea with complamts
and lamentations ; but bis father kept a sharp watch over him;
and, of course, insisted on every line that mY master sent being
wuTHSsma umigbtb.
fihown; BO iMtead of peiming lik p^uHar peiBdnal sufbiings
and distresses, the themes GOtisCantlj lippei^ost in bis thoughts,
he harped on the cruel oWgatioa of being held asunder m > m
Us fHend and love t and gently intimated that Mr. Linton mnst
allow an interview soon, or he should iekt he was pniposely
deceiving him with empty promises.
'Cathy was a powem) ally at boine } and, between them,
they, at length, persuaded my master to acquiesce in their
bavinff a ride or a walk together, about once a week, under my
guarotanship, luid on the moors nearest the Grange; Ibr June
found him still declming ; and, thongh be hud set aside yearly
-a portion of his income for my yoimg l^y's fortune, be had a
natural desire that she might retain, x > i^ at leasts return in a
shoit time to the house of hw ancestors; and he consiclered
her only prospect of ^oing that was by a union with bis heir :
he had no idea that the latter wad failing almost as fast as him-
self; nor had any one, I beUeve ^ no doctor visited the Heights,
and no one saw Master Heathcliff, to make report of his eoti-
dition among us. ^
I, for my part, began to ikncy my forebodiitgs vrere fclse,
and that he must be actually rallying, when he mentioned riding
and walking on th^ moors^ and seemed so eafnest in pursuing
bis obJ€Nct. I donld not picture a fiither treating a dying child
as tyrannioally ai^d wickedly as I afterward learned HeathcHff
had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness ; his effbrts
redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling
plans were threatened with defeat by death.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Summer was already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly
yielded his assent to their entreaties,, and Catherine and I set
out on our first ride to join her cousin.
It was a close, sultry day, devoid of sunshine, but with a sky
too dappled and haey to threaten rain ; and our place of meet-
ing had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-road*. On
arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, dispatched as a i
senger, told us that—
324 WUTHSRING HEIGHTS.
'* Maister Linton wer just ut this side th'Heigbts, and he'd be
xnitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further. "
" Then Mast^ Linton has forgot the first injunction of his
unde, " I observed : " he bid us keep on the Grange land, and
here we are^ off at once. " >
" Well, we'll turn, our horses'heads round when we reach
him, " answered my companion ^ " our excursion shall lie toward
home. "
But when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter
of a mile from his own door, we found he had no horse, and we
were forced to dismount, and leave ours to graze.
He lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and did not rise
till we came within a few yards. Then h & walked* so jdebly,
and looked so pale, that I immediately exclaimed — -
*'Why, Master Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ram-
ole this morning. How ill you do look ! " .
Catherine surveyed him with erief. and astonishment, and
changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips to one tf- alarm, and
the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious
inquiry whether he were worse than usual 1
, « No — ^better — ^better 1 " he panted, trembling, and retaining
her hand as if he needed its suppoit, while his large bhie eyes
wandered timidly over her, the hoUowness round them trans-
forming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once
" But you have been worse, " persisted his cousin,''worse
than when I saw you last — ^you are thinner, and — "
" I'm tir^d, " he interrupted, hurriedly. " It is too hot for
walking : let us rest here. And in the morning I often feel sick
— ^papa says I grow.so fast. "
Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her.
" This is something like your paradise, " said she, making an
effort at cheerfulness.'* You recollect the two days we agreed
to spend in the place and way each thought pleasantest 1 This
is nearly. yours, only there are clouds; but then, thoy are so
sofb and mellow, it is nicer than sunshine. Next week, if you
can, well ride down to the Grange Park, and try mine. "
Linton did not appear to remember what she talked of, and
he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of con-
versation. Hialack of interest in the subjects she started, and
lus equal incapacity to contribute to her entertainment, were so
obvious that she could not conceal her disappointment. An in-
WUTHERING HEIGJITS. 225
definite alteration had come over his whole penson and manner.
The pettishnesB that might be caressed into fondness had yielded
to a listless apathy ; there was less of the peevish temper of a
child which frets and teases on purpose to be soothed, and more
of the self-absorbed mdroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling
consolation, and ready to regard the good-humored muth of
others as an insult. •
Catherine perceived, as well as I did, that he held it rather a
punishment than a gratification, to endure our company; and
cfhe made no^ scruple of proposing, presently, to depart. That
proposal, unexpectedly, roused Linton from his lethargy, and
threw him into a stranoe state of agitation.. He glanced fear-
fully toward thel Heists, begging she would remain another
half-hour at least.
" But, I thmk, " said Cathy, ** you'd be more comfortable at
honie than sitting hen ; and. I can not amuse yon to-day, I see,
by. my tales, and songs, and chatter. You have grown wiser
than I, in these six months ; you have. little taste for my diver-
sions now^; or else, if I could amuse you, I'd willingly stay. "
" Stay to rest yourself, " he replied.'.'And, Catherine, don't
think or say that I'm very unwell— it is the heavy weather and
heat that make me duH ; and^ I walked about, before you came,
a great deal, for me. Tell uncle, I'm in tolerable health, yn\\
your'.
" I'll tell him thai: you say so, Linton. I couldn't affirm that
you are, " observed my young lady, wondering at his pertina- .
cious assertion of what was^evidently an untruth. -
. " Ai0 be here again next Thursday, " continued he, shunning
her puzzled gaze.''And give him my thanks for permitting
you tf > come — my best thanks, Catherine. And — ^and, if you
did meet my father, and he asked you about me, don't lead
him to. suppose that I've been extremely silent and stupid —
don't look sad and downcast, as you are doing— he'll be
angry. " ^
'* I care nothing for his anger, " exclaimed Cathy, imagining
she would be its object. " .
" But I do, " said her cousin, shuddering. ^^DtnCt provoke
him against me, Catherine, for he is very hard. "
''Is he severe to you. Master Heathcliff 1 " I inquired.
" lias he grown weary of indulgence, and passed from passive
to active hatred 1 " , ^
Linton looked at me, but did not answer ; and, after keeping
226 WUTHERING HEIGRT8.
ber Mftt by bis side anotber ten miirates, during wbich bi» bead
fell drowsily oh bis breast^ and b6 Uttered notbing except e«p«
pressed moans of exbansHon^ or pain, Catby began to seek
solace in looking for bilberries, and sbarhig the prodnce of ber
researcbes widi me : sbe did not oier ^lem to faira, for slie Saw
fiirtber notice wonld only weary and annoy.
** Is it balf an bour now, Ellen ! " sbe wbisne^^ in my ear,
at last. " I can!t tell wby we sbonld stay. He's asleep, and
papa win be wanting us bade. " c
** Well, we must not leare bim asleep, " I answered ,* ** wait
taSk be wakes, and be patient. You were mighty eager to set
off, bvt your longing to see poor Linton bas soon evaporated.^
*• Why did he wish to see me 1 " returned Oatberine. ^ In
his Grossest humors, formerly, I liked bim better tban I do
in bii present curioQs mood. It's just as if it were a task be
was compelled to perform-^tbis interview^-^for fear bis fttb^r
abonld scoH bim. But I'm hardly going to eome togiife Mr.
Heatfacliff pleaaora ; whatever reason be may baire for ordering
Linton to nnderco tbia penance. And, diongb I'm glad he's
better in healthy I'm sorry he's so much less pleotsont, and so
tench kss affeetidnate to me/'
^ Yon tbink he ii better in health; then V^ I said.
** Yes, " sbe answered ;'^ because be always mad^ sncb a
great deal of his sufferings, you know. He is not tolerably
well, as be ixAd me to tell papa, but he's better, rery likely/'
« There yon differ with me. Miss Cathy,*'I remarked ; " I
should dOniectnre bim to be far worse. "
Linton, here started fiom bis slumber, in bewUdeted terror,
and asked if any one bad called bis name.
" No, " said Catherine ; " unless in dreams. I can not con-
ceive bow yon manage to dose, out of doors, in the mtfmm^J*
" I tbongbt I heard my ^ber, " be gasped, glancing up to
the frowning nab nbove us. ** You are sure nobody spoke 1 "
" Quite sure, " replied his cousin. " Only Ellen and I were
disputing concerning your beakb. Are yon truly stronger,
Linton, than when we separated in winter 1 If yon be, Tm
certain one thing is not stro)iger-«yonr regard for me-^-speak,
are you V*
Tears gushed from Linton'a eyes as be answered-^
" Yes, yes, I am!'* -
And, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, Ws gaze
wandered up and down to detect its owner. Cathy rose.
** Far to-day we must part, " she Mttd. •* And I Won't coa-
eeal that I hav« been sadly dkappoicted nHth ottr meetbfir,
though I'll mention it to nobody but you-^not that I ^ftand m
awe ot Mr. HeathcUff !**
« Hu8h,''murmured Linton ; ^'foikG-od*B sake, hush ! He's
coming.'* And he clung to Catherine's arm, striving- to. detain
her ; but, at that announcement, she hastilr disengaged herself,
«nd wMstled to Minny, who 6beyed her Hke a dog.
" I'D Jbe here next Tbumday, " she cried* springing to the
saddle. ^Goodbye. Quick, EnenP
Aud So we left him, scarcely conscious of our dmiarture, so
mbsprt > ed was he in anticipating his Other's approach.
Before we reached home, Catherine's diapleasute softened
hxto a peiplexed sensation of pity and regret, lareely blended
with vague, uneasy doubts about iiinton's actual cm;umstances,
physical and s€»cial; hi which I | > artook« though I cotmseUed
her not to say much, for a second journey woidd make us better
jud«es.
My niaster requested an accotmt of cmr ongoings : his nepli-
ew's oaring of thanks was duly delivered. Miss Cathy gently
touching on the rest : I also threw little light on his inquiries,
for T hardly knew what, to hide and what to reveal. ^
CHAPTER XXyil.
Seven days glided away, every one marking its course by
the henceforth rapid alteration of Edgai^ Linton's state. The
havoc that months had previously wrought was now emulated
by the inroads of hours. Catherine we would fein have de-
luded, yet but her own quick spirit refused to delude her. It
divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadfi^l probability,
gradually ripening into certainty.
She had not the heart to mention her ride, when Thursday
came round ; I mentioned it for her, and obtained permission
to order her out of doors ; for the llbra^, where her fether
stopped a short time dailv, the brief perioa he could bear tp sit
up, and the chamber, bad become her v^hole world. She
grudged each moment that did not find her bending over his
226 WUTHERING HEIGH T 8.
pillow, or seated by his side^ Her countenaQoe grevr wan
with watching and sorrow, and my master gladly dismissed her
to what he flattered himself would be a happy change of
scone and society, drawing comfort from the hope that the
would not now be left en^rely alone after-his death.
He had a fixed ^dea, I guessed by several observations he
let fall, that as his nephew reetombled him in person, he woiJd
resemble him in mind ; for Linton's letters bore few, or no in-
dications of his defective character. And I, through pardon-
able weakness, refrained from correcting the. error; asking my-
self what good there would be in disturbing his jast moments
with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to
turn to account
We deferred our excursion till the afternoon ; a golden after-
noon of Aug;ust— every breath from the hills so full ofllife, that it
seemed whoever rehired it, thoueh dying, might revive. Cath-
erine's face was just like the landscape — shadows and sunshine
ffitting over it in rapid succession ; but the shadows rested long-
er and the sunshine was more transient, and her poor litUe
heart reproached itseljf for even that passing forgeUulness of
its cares. ~ . ...
We discerned Linton " watching at the same 4spot \e bad se-
lected before. My younjg; mistress alighted, and told me that
as she was resolved to stay a very little while^ I had better
hold the pony and remain on horseback ; but I dissented, I
wouldn't risk losine sight of thexharge committed to me a min-
ute ; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
Master Heathcliff received us with greyer animation on this
occasion ; not the animation of high spirits, though, nor yet of
joy ; it looked more like fear.
" It is late! " he said,'speaking short, and with. diflSoulty.
" Is not your father very ill? I thought you wouldn't come, "
" Why won't you be candid V* cried Catherine; swallowing
her greeting. " Why can not ypa say at once, you don't want
me 1 It is strange, Linton, that for the second time you have
brought me here ou purpose, apparently, to distress -us. both,
and lor no reason besides ! "
Linton shivered,'and glanced *t her, half supplicating, half
ashamed, but his.cousiuts patience was not sufficient to endure
this enigmatical behavior.
" My father is veiy ill, " she said, «* and why am I called from
his bedside — why didn't you send to absolve me from my prom-
WtTTHKRINO HEIGHTS. 229
lae, when jqhl wished I wouldn't keep it 1 Come \ I desire an
explanation — playing and trifling are completely banished out
of my. mind ; and Z can't danee attendance on your aflfectationa
now I "
" My affectatienfl I " he murmured,/'what are theyl For
heaven's sake^ Catherine, don't look so angry ! Despise me as
much aa yoU please ; I am a wotthless, cowardly wretch — ^I
can't be scorned . enough f but I'm too mean ihr yoxir anger —
hate vay iather, and spare me— »for contempt I " :
. ♦ < Nonsense P cried Cath^ne, in a passion. " Foolish, silly
boy ! And there 1 he trembles, as if I were really going to
touch him ! You needn't bespeak contempt, Linton ; any body
will have it spontaneously at yx > ur service. Get off! I shall re-
turn homer— it is foQy driag^ng you from thb hearth-stone, and
pretending-^what do we pretend 1 Let go my frock— if I
pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
spurn such pit]^ ! Ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is.
^e, and don't degrade yourself i^to an abject reptile^-— < :^'^. "
With streaming frice and an expression of agony, Linton had
thrown his nerveless trame along the ground ; he seemed con-
vulsed with exquisite terror.
" Oh ! " he sobbed, " I can not bear it ! Catherine, Catherine,
I'm a traitor^too, and I dare not tell you ! But leave me and
I shall be killed) Dear Cathmne, my life is in your hands;
and you have said you loved me— -and if you Sid it wouldn't
barn;i you. You'll not go, then 1 kind, sweet, good Catherine !
And perhaps jou'wiU consent— and he'll let me die with ybu ! "
_My young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to
raise tnm. The old feeling of indulgent tenderness ovei*came
her vexation, atid she grew thoroughly moved and alaimed.
" Consent to what] " she asked. " To Jitayl Tell me the
meaning of this strange talk, and I will. You contradict your
own words, and distract me ! Be calm and frank, and confess
at. once all that weigha on your heart. You wouldn't injure me,
Linton, would youT You wouldn't let any enemy hurt me, if
yoa could prevent it] I'll believe your are a coward, for your-
selfj but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend. "
" But my father threatened me,** gasped the boy, clasping
his attenuated fingers^^^'and I dread him^^-I dread himi I dare
nor tell! "
*, . " Oh, well!''said Catherine, with scornful compassion, " keep
your secret, Tm no coward — save yourself, I'm not afraid ! "
230 WUTHBKINQ HEIGHT 0.
Her magnaDuxiity pf OToked his tetn ; ke wept wildly; Idttl-
iBg her BUppertiog bjuidsy wadjep could not sumizion oonrage to
apeak out. ^
I was cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined
Catherine i£ould nenrer suffer^ to benefit hiin or any one else, by
my good wiU. When, hearing a rustle among the ling, I locked
up, and saw Mr, HeathcKfT almost dose upon ut, deseending
the H^gtits. He didn't cast & glanoe towm my cottipamons,.
though they were sufficiently near ferXinton'n sgImi to be audi-
ble ; but hailing me, in the almost hearty tone he assomed to
none besides, and the sincerity of which I couldnH avoid doubt^
ing, he saidff
" It is somethh)g to see you so near to fny house, NeByl
How are you at the Grange 1 Let us hear I The rumor goes,**
he added in a lower tone, " that IBd^ Linton hi art his death-
bed— perhaps they exaggerate his ilkiessr*
^'No; my master is dying,'* I replied, *'it is true enough.
A sad thing it will be for us atl, but a blesshig for him V*
^ How long will he last, do you think 1 " he ai^ed, .'
" I don't kttow,*'I said.
** Because, " he continued, looking at the two yovitf people,
who were fixed under his eye-*-Linton appeared as ifne could
not T^nture to stlr^ or raise his head, and Catherine could not
move, on his aceoiint-*- " because that lad yonder, seems detex > -
mined to beat m^^and I'd thqsnk his unde to be qufek and go
before him. Hallo I Has the whelp been playing that game
long] I did give him some iessons about smvewng. Is he
pretty livelv with Miss lanton generally 1 "
" Lively 1 no — ^he has shown tjie greatest distress ; " I answer*
ed.'< To se6 him, I should say that, instead o£ rambling wkh
his sweetheart on the bills, he ought to be in bed, under the
hands of a doctor. "
" He shall be, in a 4ay or tw!o,'^ muttered HeatiiQHffl ** But
fii*st — get up, Linton ! Get up I " he shouted. " Don't grovdi
on the ground there^-Hip this moment 1 "
Linton had sunk prostrate again in anoUier paroxysm of
helpless fear, caused by his father's glance towam faim, I sup-
pose;, there wa0 nothing else to produce such faumiltation^ lie
made several efforts to obey, but his Httb strength was^ torn-
hilated, for the. time, and he fell back again with a moan. Mr.
Heathcliff advi^nced, and lifted him to lean against a ridge of
turf.
WUTHERING HEIGHT 8« 231
I ^* Now/'said lie ,wicb curbed fevocity,''Vm/g^tixo/g uigry —
I and if you don't oonunand kha^ paltry spirit of yoara*-^ X)amm
j jqial Getup, direotly ! " . .
'< I will, father 1 " be panted. ** Only, let me aloiie, or I ahall
faiitti I've done aa you wiabed, Vtsl sure. Catherine will tell
you that I-— that I^^ave bee«i cheerfol. Ah^ keep by me,
Catherine ^ giro me y out hand/*
" Take^mhie/'aaidhia father;''stand on your Ami! There
■ now — she'll lend you her pum^^hat's right-^look at het. You
would- imagine I was the devil himselfi Miss Linton, to excite
such hcHTor,. Be so kind as to w^lk home with him^ will yoia ?
He shudders if I touch ium. "
'* Linton, dear, " whispered Catherine, " I can't go to Wuth-
ering Heights — ^papa has forbidden me. He'll not harm you,
why are you so afi»id 1 "
" I cai^ never re-enter th^ house,''be answered.'^ I am n§i
to reenter it without ypu. "
" Stop—'^ cried his father. " We'll respect Catherine's fiHd
scruples. Nelly, take him in, and I'll follow your advice con-
cerning the doctor, without delay/'
VYou^il do well, " replied I, " but I must retnain vrith my
mistress* . To mind your son is not~my business. "
" You are very stiff! " said Heathdiff, " I know that**4)ut
you'll force me to pinch the baby,4ind make It scream, before it
moves your charity. Come, then, my hfHrp, are yott willing to
return, escorted by me 1''
He approached once more, and made as if he would seize
the fragile bejng ; but shrinking back, Liiaton clung to his cousin,
and implored her to accompany lam, with a franticimpoiiunity
that admitted no denial.
However 1 disapproved, I couldn't hinder her; iiKleed how
ycould she have remsed him herself) What ^as filling him with
dread we had no means of discerning ; but there he was, pow-
erless under its gripe^ and any addition, seemed capable of
shocking him into idiocy. We reached the threshold ; Cathe-
rine walked in ; and I stood waiting AiU she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately, when Mr
Heathchff, poising me forward, exclahned^-**^
" My house is not stricken with the plague, N«]ly ; aikl I
have a, mind to be hospitable to-day ; sit down^ and allow me ta
shut the door. "
He shut and locked it also. I started.
S^32 WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS.
" You shall faaye tea befere you go botne/'he. added. " I
am by niyselC Hareton is gone with some cattle to the Lees
— and ZiUah and Joseph are off on a journey of pleasnrel And,
though I'm used to bemg alone,. I'd rather hate some interesting
company if I can get it. Miss Liilton, take your seat by kim.
I givo you what I have ; the present is hardly worth accepting;
but I have nothing el9e to offers-Hit is Linton /I mean. How
she does stare ! It's odd what a savage feeling I have to any
thing that seems afraid of me ! Had I been bom where laws
are less strict, and tastes less dainty, I should treat myself to a
slow vivifisection of those two, as au evening's amusement. "
He drew in his breath, struck the table, aind swore to him-
self, ^'.
" By belli I hate them. " ■'
" I'm not afraid of you ! " exclaimed Catherine, Who could
not hear the latter pajt of his speech.
She stepped close up ; h^r black eyes flashing with passion
and resolution.
" Give me that key — I will have it !'^ she said. " I wouldn't
eat or drink here if I were starving. "
Heathcliff had the key in his haind that remained Oi\ the
table. He looked up,^ seized with a sort of surpiise at her
boldness, or, possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the
person fhim whom she inherited it. :
She snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in getting
it out of his loosened fingers ; but her action recalled hiin to the
present ; lie recovered it speedily.
" Now, Catherine Linton, " he said, " atand off, or 1 shall
knock you down; and that will make'Mrs. Dean mad. "
Regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand, and
its contents again.
" We will go ! " she repeated, exerting her utmost efforts to
cause the iron muscles to relax ; and finding that her naUs made
no impression, she applied her teejth pretty sharply.
Heathcliff glanced at me a glance that kept me from interfeiing
a moment. Catherine was too intention his fingers to notice his
face.'He opened them, suddenly^atid resigned the object of
dispute; but, ere she had well secured it, he seized her with the
liberated hand, and, pulQing her on his knee, administered, with
the dther, a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the hea4»
each sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to
fall.
WUTAERINO HEI & nT0. 233
• At this diabolical violence^ I rushed ot Hva furiously,
" You villain ! " I began to cry, " you villain i'*
A toucb on .the chest silenced me ; I am stout,, and soon put
out of breath ; and, what with dntt and the rage, I staggered
diz2ily back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a blood-
yefilsel. - . - -
- The .scene, was over in. two- minutes; Catherine, released,
put her two hands to her tefnples, and looked just as if she were
not sure whether her eai-d were off or on. She trembled like a
reed, poor thing, and leaned a^inst the: table pei'fectly bewil-
dered.
** I know how to ehastise childreb, you see,^'said the scoun-
drel, grimly, -as he stooped to repossess himself of the key,
which had dropped to the .floor; " Go to Linton now^^ as I told
you ; and cry at your ease ! I shall bd your father to-morrow
— all the father you'll have in a few days — and you shall have
plenty of that— ^you can bear plenty — ^you're no weakling — you
shall have a. daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a -temper in
your eyes again r'
Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down, and put
her burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. Her cousin had
shrunk into a corner of the settle,, as quiet as a mouse, con-
gratulating himself, I dare say, that the correction had lighted
on another than him.
Mr. Heathcliff, perceiving us all confounded^ fose^ and ex-
peditiously made the tea himself. The cups and saucers were
laid read][. He poured it out, and handed me a cup.
" Wasn away your spleen, " he said. " And help your own
naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned, though I prepared it.
I'm going out to seek your horses.^*.
Our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit
somewhere. We tried the kitcnen door, but that was fastened
outside ; we looked at the windows-^they were too narrow for
even Cathy's little figure. >
" Master Linton,*'I cried, seeing we were regularly imprison-
ed» " you know what your diabolical iather-is after, and you
shall tell . us, or I'll box your ears, as be has done your
cousin's. "
" Yes, Linton ; you must tell, " said Catherine. " It was ^i^
your sake I came ; and it will be wickedly ungrat^l if you
re & se.f __.
" Give me some, tea, I'm tHiraty, and then I'll tell you, "
234 WtTTHBRINO HBIGHTfl.
he answered. ** Mn, Deaiit go away. I cIoD^t Hke you stand-
ing over me» Now, Catherine, you «Te letting your teais fall
into xny cupT'I won't drink that. Give me asiother. "
Catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. I Iblt
disgusted at the Httle wretch's composure, since he wa^ no
longer in terror for himse1£ The anguish he had exhibited on
the moor subsided as soonjis ever he entered Wuthering He%hts ;
BO I guessed he had been menaced with an & w^ visitation of
vn:ath,;if he ^led in decoying us there ^ and, that accomplisbed,
he had no further inmiediate fears.
" Papa wants us to be married, " he continued, after siBping
some of the liquid. ** And he knows your j > apa wouldn't let us
marry now ; and he's airaid of my dying it we wait; so we aie
to be maxried in the morning, and you are to stay here all night ;
and if you do as he wishes you shall return home next day, and
take me with you. "
*'Take you with her, pitifiil changeling f " I exclaimed.
*'Ysnc marry % Why, the man is mad, or he thiidLS us fools,
every one. And do you imagine (hat beautifhl youi^ lady* thf|^
healthy, hearty girl, will tie hetself to a little perishing molikey
like you t Are yoa cherishing the notion that amy body, let alone
Miss Catherine Linton, would have you for a husband ? You
want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with your dastardly,
puling tricKs; and — don't look so silly now! I've a very good
mind to shake you jseverely, for your cotitemptible treachery^
and your imbecile cpnceit. "
I did give him a sli^ shaking, but it iMougfat on the Cough,
and he took to his ordinary resource of moanii^ and weeping,
and Catherine rebuked me.
^Stay all night? No!^ she said, looking •hm'ly romd.
''Ellen, rU bum that door down, but I'B get ottt.''
And she would have commenced the execution of her thrdat
directly, but Linton waa up in alarm, for his dear self, agaiA. He
clipped her in his two feeble arms, sobbing —
« Won't. you have me, and save me*-4iot let me come to the
Ghrange ? Ok ! darliDg Catherine ! you mustn't go, and leave
me, afier aH. You must obey my father, you muH / "
" I must obey my own, " she replied, " and xelieve him fhxn
this cruel suspense. The whole night 1 What would he think ?
He'll be distressed already. *'I'll either break or burn a way
out of the house. Be quiet ! You're in no daliger — but if you
hinder me, Linton-^I love papa better than you !'^
WUTHBRINQ q:£IOBT0. 335
The nuHtal torror he f^ of ^£r. Hec^tkofiirs angor, rntored
to the 1 > oj his ci^ward's eloqueaee. Cathetioe was near diA-
traugbt-iT«till »hd perai^ed Ibat ^inust g^ homo, aud tiied
es^TBSktyf in hm: UitOf peswiading hirxk to iubduo bsB^elfiAb agony.
WbUe they were thoe occupied, our jailer re-eotere < L
''Your beasts bave trotted elf/'. he aaid;''and^^now, Lin-
ton! eoivetiDg again ? What bai she beeoEi doing to yoa? Come,
come, have £me, and get to bed.- In^ a mpodi or two, my lad,
yoU'Jl be able to pay her badL her preaeiit tyrannies, witk a vig*
orottd hand-^you're pinw^ for, pure love, are. you not 1 noibitig
else in the world-— and ahe shall have you ! Thoare, to bed I
ZiUab won't be here to nigbtr— you muKt undress yourself.
Husbl hold .your n < Hae! Once in your own room, Til not oome
near you, you, needn't fear. By chance, you're majiaged toler*
aWy. . I'll look to the reslU*
He spoke these words, holding the door Open for his son to
pass ; and the latter achieved his e^t exactly as a spaniel migikt
which Buapeeted the peraon who attended on it of designing a
spiteful squeeze*
The lock was r^ecured. Heatbcliff appiraacbed the fite,
whero my mistress and I stood silent; Catherioe looked up,
and insitinctively nosed her band to ber dieek-^fais neighbor*'
hood revived a painful senaatioB. Any body else wculd hare
been incapable of regarding die dbildisL act wkb sternness, but
he scowled on her, aisA muttered-r—
" Oh, you are not afi-aid of me I Your courage is well dis^
guised — you teem damnably afraid 1 •'
" I am afi^id now, " she i*eplied ; " becavse if t stay, papa
will be miserable; and how can I endure ma^ng him miserable
— when he-~wb^ be-^Mr« Heatbdiff, hi me go bcunel . I
promise to marry Linton^-^papa would Eke roe to, and I love
tkiuH— and why should you wii^ to foroe-rae to do what I'Q
willingjy door myself P*. ■ -
. " Let him dare to force you !''I cried..'* There's law in the
land, thank Crpd, there is ! though we de in an ottt-of*tiie«way
place. I'd inform, if he were my ovm son, and it's^felony
widiout benefit of clergy !^
**. SUenoe ! " sedd the rufiao. ** To tlie devil with your clamor !
I don't want p^m to ^ > eak. Miss LijQton, I shall enioy myself
remarkably in thinking yomr faidier will be miseraUe ; I shall
net sleep & ir satis & ction. You could have hit on no surer way
of fixing your resadenoe under my roof, ftyr the next twenty*
236 WUTUERING HBIGHT0.
four, hours, than informing- me that sacfa an event would, follow.
As to your promiiBe to marry Linton, I'll take care you shall
keep it,- for you shall not quit the place till it is fulfilled/'
^'Send Ellen then, to let pi^a know I'm safe! " exclaimed
Catherine, weeping bitterly. *^ Or marry me now. Poor papa !
£llen, he'll think we're lost. What shall we do %*'
" Not he \ He'll think you are tired of waiting on him, and
run off for a little amusement, " uiswered HeathcUff. " You
can not deny that you entered my house of your own accord, in
contempt of his injunctions to the contrary. And it is quite
natural that you should desire amusement at yout age; and that
you should weary of nursing a sfck mto, and that m & n tmly
your lather. Catherine, his happiest days were orer when your
days began. He cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the
world — 1 did, at least And it would Just do if he cursed you
as he went out of it. I'd join him. I don't loVe you ! How
should 1 1 Weep away. A^ far as I can 8ee„ it will be your
chief diversion hereafter,- unless Linton make amends lor other
losses, and your provident parent appears to & ncy he may;
His letters of advice and consolation entertained me vastly. > In
his last, he recommended my jewel to be careful of Ids; and
kind to her when he got her. C arefiil and kind — ^that's pateiiial !
But Linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for
himself. Linton can play the little tvrant well. Hell under-
take to torture aily number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and
their claws pared. You'll be able to tell his uncle fine tales of
his kindness, when you get home again, I assure you. " ^
*'You're right there ! " I said,''explain your son's character.
Show his resemblance to yourself; and then, I hope. Miss
Cathy win think twice, before she takes the cockatrice ! "
" I don't much mind speaking of his amiable quaUties now, "
he answered,''because she must either accept him, or remain'
a prisoner, and you along vnth her, till your master dies. I
can detain you both, quite concealed, here. If you doubt,
encourage her to retract her word, arid you'll have an oppor-
tunitv pf judging ! "
'* rn not retract my word, " said Catherine. ** 1*11 marry
him, within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange after-
ward. .Mr.Heathcliff, you're a cruel man, but you're not a
fiend; and you won't, from mere malice, destroy, irrevocably,
all my happiness. If papa thought I had left him on purpose ;
and if he died before I returned, could I tear to live 1 I've
WVTH BEING H E I OH T 8. 287
giyen over crying; but Fm going to kneel here, at your knee;
and I'll not get up, and I'll ncH taike my eyes from your face,
till you look bacK at me! No, don't turn away! do look!
You'll see nothing to provoke you, . I jdon't bate you. I'm not
angry that you struck me. Have yoa neVer loved a9iy ^dy, in
all your life, uncle 1 never ? Ah !^ you must look once-— I'm so
wretched^— you- can't help being sorry and pitying me.'*
" Keep your eft's fingers off; and move, or I'll kick you I "
crie4 Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.'" I'd rather be hugged
by a snake, tloyt the devfl can you dream of fawning on me I
I detest yonV .
He shrugged his shoulders— ^^oe > k himself, indeed, as if his
flesh crept with aversion-^nd. thrust back his chair : while I
got up, and opened my mouth to commence a downright tor-
rent of abuse; but I was rendered dumb in the middle t > f the
first ^sentence,, by a threat that I should be shown into a toom
by myself, the very next syUabJe I uttered. .
. It was growing dark— we heard a sound of voices at the gai •
den gate. Our host hurried out, instantly ; ke had his wits about
him ; tpe had not. There was a talk of two t > r three minutes,
and he returned alone.
** I dxought it had been your cousin Hareton,** I observed to
Catherine. " I wish he, would arrive! Who kiiows but be
might take our part I "
''It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange,'*
said Heathcliff, oveibearing me, . ** You should have opened a
lattice and called out; but I. could swear that chit is glad you
didn't. She's glad to be obliged to Stay, I'm certain/'
. At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to
our grief without control; and he allowed us to wail on tiBnine
o'clodc ; then he bid us go up-stairs, through the kitchen, to
Zillah's chamber; and I whispered my companion to obey;
perhaps wo might contrive to get through the vrindow there, or
mto a garret, and out by its skylight.
The window, however, was narrow like those below, and the
garret trap was safe from our attentats ; for we were fastened
in ad before. We neither of us lay down : Catherine took her
station by the^ lattice, and watched anxiously for mornings— a
deep sigh being the: only answer I could obtain to my firequent
entreaties that she would try to rest.
I seated myself in a chidr,.and rocked to and fro, passing
harsh judgment on my many, derelictions of duty ; from which,
9S8 WOTBSBIlfa ■BI«HTa.
it^tmA flw fSbeOf «n die mufertaBes of all my employeiB spmng^.
It wtts not ike case, in veaKty, i an aware; but k was, in ibj
iuagbiatioD, dwt daanal Bi^t,'aDd I tfaoagbt Heatkdiflrinnsetf
lets gniltj than I.
At •avm a^ < dodi ha canae, and inqoiied if Min LiatDa bad
lieea* SIm raa to the door iinfiiadiately» and aaawe rod ■■■ -
-'Yes/'
--Here, tlien,''he eead, c^eiUBf it, and pttliBg her out.
I roea to fi^low. Vat he tatned ikio loek again. I dwrtanded
mj release.
- Be patient/'be replied^; IH send tip yoar braakfiuft in a
wlrile. "
I tbanq»ed on the pan^ and lattied die latek lOigiflj; and
Cadierioe aeked why I was stiil abut tip 1 He answered, I mutm
try to eadare it ano & er boor, and diey went away. I endmed
it two or three home; at length, I heatd a footstep, not fiead^
cliff's.
- I've bfooght yoa semething to a«t, " said a irmoe.; ** oppen
t'deori "'
Coniplyiag eagerly, I beheld Haretoa, kden with £M > d snoagli
to last me all day.
- Tak itl " he added, ibrosting thetray into nrf hand.
*'Stay'one miottte, " I began.
''Nay 1 " cried he, and retired, regardlsfls of any piayeiv I
coald poar forth to detain hnii.
- Aad. there I retnained indosed the whole day, and the
whole of the neict aight ; and anoth^ and another. ^ Five mf^tm
and ft > ur days I ^ttmined, ahogether, seeing nobody but Hare*
ton, oiice/eveiynioniing; andbe wasamodelof a jaileP'-early,
and dttndb, and deaf to erery atieiapc at mofing hk sense of jus
tke or eanpasBioB ■ -
CHAPTER Tsym:
Off the Mfa TDortdng, or rather aftemboa, a difibrent step ap-
prdeched'-^lighter and iihorter^aad, this time, the peraan entered
the room. It was Zillah ; donned hi her scarlet ilttiwl, with a
black silk bomiat on her head, and a wilhiw basket swang to
WUTHSEfN13 9BIBHT8. 889
" ^ filli desr 1''Mm, Bmhi, " she excloitiiBd. " < Welii tbere is
a talk dboifttyaQ at i^HuMitoq^ I never tboaglrt bat you wera
sunk in the Blackhorse marBb, and Missy with you, tul master
told me you'd been found, and he'd lodged yoa hm\ What,
and you must have got on an island, sure ? JLnd how ki^ were
you ink the iroiet Did master save you, Mrs. Dean 9 But
you'i:^9 not so thin — ^you've not been so poorly, have ybut "
*^ Your master is « true scpimdrei i " 1 r^HecL ** But he shall
answer ^r it; He needn't kare xaised that ta1^«*Hit shaM all be
IumL barer
'* What ch > yen medok V\ asked Zaiah. ** it^ not fab tale~
tbey tell that in tJ» village^-^about your being lost in tin mai'sL ;
fod I calls te Eansriiaw, wbea I cpaie ish^
"'£31, they's quera: things, Mr. HatetoB^hi^ypened nnce I
went off. It''s a sad pity of that ]akeij yoitng lass, and cant
Nelly Dean.'
" Hestar^dv I tiknight he had not beard aiq^bt, sb I told him
the rumor. .'^
* < The msater HtteiMsd, and h^ just smiled to faimscdl^ und said— -
'''If diey have been in tiie manh, tbey are eat now, 2^Hah.
NeHy Dean is lodged, at ^is asoaniite, in your roonib You can
tell her to'flit, when yoa ^ up } here is the key. The bog-
water got into her head, and shB would ha^e ran home, quite
flighly, bmt I fixed her, 1^1 ^ < mm^ ixMnd to liisr senses* Yoa,
can bid ber go to tbe CSrsogs afc once, if she be able,. and carry
a message mm me, that her young lady will £^ow in time tb
attend the squire's faneraJ.* "
''Mr. Bdgar is not dead V I gasped. «'Oh ! Zilkh, Zillah P'
" No, no— sit you down, my good mistress, " she TOpHed,
''you're right siddy yet He's not dead: Doctor Kenneth
thmks he may laitt anodier day«iH[ met him on tlie Toad and
asked. "
Instead of sitting down, I snatched soy ontdoor things, and
hastened below, fer the way was fi:ee.
On entexinff the honse, I looiced about for some ode to give
inforihatioi} cr Oalberine.
The place was ^led with suiilshine, and liie door stood wide
open, but Bc4xidy seenied at hand.
As I hesitated whe & er to go off at OQce^ or neCarn and seek
my mistress, a slight cough drewxny attention to thebeaith.
Lintoa lay on & e settle sole tenant, soieking a etiek of sugar-
candy, and pursuii^ my mofemems with apametic eyes.
840 WUTHISRING HEICHT8.
, ** Where u Miss Catberine V* I demanded Bternlj, supposbg
t could- frighten him into giving intelHgence^ by catching him
thus alone. ^'^ -
He sucked like an innocent. ,
. " Is she goner,! 6aid. , _,
.''No, " he replied;''^e'« up^Btairs^-Hihe's not to go; we
won't let her. "'
** You won't let her, Utile idiot 1^'I esolaimed.'* Direct me
to her room iimnediately, or I'll make you sing out sharply. " *
" Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get
there/'he answered. *'He says I^m not to be Bdk widi Cath-
erine — she's my wife, and it's shameful that she should wish to
leave me 1 He says, she hates me, and ^ants me to die, that
she may have my money, but she shan't have it;'i^nd she shan't
go home! she n^ver shall ! she may cry, and be siick as mudh as
she pleases 1 "
. JEiB resumed his former occupation, closing his lids^ as if he
meant to drop asleep,
*'Master Heathcliff, " I resumed,^'have you forgotten all Cath-
erine's kindness to you, last winter, when i you affirmed you
loved her, and when she brought^ you books, and sung you
songs, and came many a time through virfnd and snow to see
you ? She wept to miss one evening, because you would be
disappointed; and you felt then that shQ was a hundred times
too good to yon ; and now you believe the lies your father tells,
though you^ know he detests you bodi! And you join him
against ber. That's fine gratitude, is it not V*
The comer of Linton's mouth fell, and he took the sugar-
candy f]::om his lips.
" Did she come to Wuthering. Heights, because she hated
you 1 " I continued.'* Think for yourself! As to your money,
she does not even know that you will have any. And you say
she^s sick ; and yet, you leave her alone, up ibere in a strange
house! You, who have fek vrhnt it is to be so neglected!
You could pity your own sufferings, and she pitied them^ too,
but you won't pity hers! I shed tears Master Heathcliff, you
see— an elderly woman, and a servant merely— -and you,. after
pretending such affection, and having reason to wcnn^ip her, al-
most, dtore every tear you have Ihr yourself, and lie thiere quite
at ease. Ah ! you're a heartless,, selfish boy 1 " ^
" r can't stay vritb her, " he answered crossly. * " I'll not stay,
by myself. She cries fio l can't bear it And she won't give
W U T II K B I N G HEIGHTS. 241
■ -'■■■- oi ■■■■!■ — II ■! II » II I .1 ■ *■ II..I-I... ■■■■■I.. Ill .a
over, tbough I day I'll call my father. I did ,call him once ;
and he threatened to strangle her, if she was not quiet ; but she
began again thein stant, he left the room; moaning and giiev-
ing alL night long, though I screamed for yexation that I couldn't
sleep. " .
" Is Mr. Heathcliff out, " I inquired, perceiving that the
wretched creature had no power to sympathize with his cous*
in^s mental tortures. ^
^* He's in the court, " he replied, ** talking to Doctor Kenneth
who says uncle is dying, tiruly, at last. I'm glad, for I shall be
master of the Grange after him — Catherine ialways spoke of it
as her house. It isn't hers ! It's mine —'papa says every thing
flb^ has is ndine. AH her nice books are mine — she offered to
give me them, and her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I
would get the key of our room, and let her out : but I told her
she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. And then she
cried, and took a little picture from her neck, and said I should
have that — ^two pictures in a gold ease— on one side her mother,
and on the other, uncle, when they were young. That was
yesterday. I said they were mine, too ; and tried to get theta.
from her. The spiteful thing wouldn't let me ; she pushed me
off) and hprt me. I shrieked oiit-^that frightens her — ^she heard
papa coming, and she broke the hinges and divided the case,
and gave me her mother's portrait ; the other she attempted to
hide ; but papa a^ked what was the matter, and I explained it.
He took the one I had away ; and ordered her to resign hers to
me ; she refused, and he— he struck her down, and wrenched
it off the chain, and crushed it with his foot. "
" And were you pleased to see her struck ] " I asked : having
my designs in encouraging his talk.
" I winked, " he answered. " I wink to see my father strike
a dog, or a horse, he does it so hard — ^yet I was glad at first —
she deserved punishing for pushing me : but when papa was
gone she made me come to the window and showed me her
cheek cut on the inside against her teeth, and her mouth filling
with blood : and then she gathered up the bits of the picture^
and went and sat down with her face to the wall, and she has
never spoken to me since ; and I sometimes think sho can't
speak for pain. I don't like to think so ! but she's a naughty
thing for crying continually ; and she looks so pale and wild,
I'mafiaid < ir*err "
■M
you ean get the key if you choose? " I said.
242 WUTHEBINO HEiaHTS.
" Yes, when I am up-staira, " he answered, " but I can't walk
up-stairs. now. "
•* In what apartanent is it 1 " I asked.
" Oh, " he cried, " I shan't tell you where it is ! It is our
secret. Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, are to know.
There ! you've tired me — go away, go away! " And he turned
his face upon his arm, and shut his eyes again.
I considered it best to depart withbut seeing Mr. HeathclifT;
and bring a rescue for my young ladyjfrom the Grange.
On reaching it, the astonishipent of my fellow servants to see
me, and their joy also, was intense ; and when they heard that
their little mistress was safe,. two or three were about to hurry
up, and shout the news at Mr. Edgar's door : but I bespoke
the announcement of it myself.
How changed I found him, even in those few days ! He lay
an image of sadness and resignation, waiting his death. Very
young he looked : though his actual age was thirtyrninej one
would have called him ten years younger, at least. He thought
of Catherine, for he murmured her name. I touched his hand
and spoke.
" Catherine is coming, dear master! " I whispered; " she is
alive and well, and will be here I hope to-night. "
I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence : he half rose
up, looked eagerly round the ^apartment, and then sunk back in
a swoon.
As soon as he recovered I related our compulsoiy visit and
detention at the Heights : I said Heathcliff forced me to go in,
which was not quite true ; I uttered as little as possible against
Linton ; nor did I describe all his father's brutal conduct — my
intentions being to add no bitterness, if I could help it, to hia
already overflowing cup.'
He divined that one of his enemy's purposes was to secure
the personal property as well as the estate to his son, or rather
himself; yet why he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle :
to my master; because ignorant how nearly lie and his nephew;
would quit the world together.
However, he felt his will had better be altered; instead
of leswring Catherine's fortune at her own . disposal, he de-
termined to put it in the hands of trustees, for her use during
life ; and for her children, if she had any, after her. By that
means it could not fall to Mr. Heathcliff, should Linton die.
Having received his orders I dispatched a man to fetch the
WUTHEftJNO HEIGHTS. 243
attorney, and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to
demand my yoting lady of her jailer. Both parties were de-
layed very late. The single servant retamed firG(t.-
He said Mr. Green, the lawyer, was out when he arrived at
his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance ; and
then, Mr. Green told him -he had a little business in the village
that must be done, but he would be at ThtuBhcross Grange be-
fore morning.
Th^ £)ur men came back unaccompanied also. They brought
word that Catherine Was iH ; too ill to quit her room i and Heath-
cliff would liot suffer them to see her.
I scolded the stupid fellows well for liQtening tu ihat tale,
which I would not carry to my master, resolving to take a
whole bevy up to the Heightia, at daylight, and storm it literally,
unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to ua.
Her- father shall see her, I vowed, and vowed again, if that
devil be killed on his. own door-stones in trying to prevent it \
Happily I was Spared the journey and the trouble.
I had gone down stairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of wa-
ter ; and was passing through the hall with it in my band, when
a sharp knock at the front door made me jump.
" Oh ! it is Green, " I said, recollecting myself^ " only Green "
— ^and I went on, intending to send somebody else to open it ;
but the knock was repeated, not loud, and ^till importunately.
I put the jug on tne bannister, and hastened to admit him
myselft
The harvest moon shone clear outside. It wds not the at-
torney. My sweet little mistress sprung on my neck, sobbing,'
" Ellen! Ellen I is papa alive V
** Yes, " I cried, " yes my angel he is. God be thanked, you
are safe with us again ! "
She wanted to run, breathless as she was, up-stairs to Mr.
Linton's room ; but I compelled her to sit down on a chair, and
made her drink^ and washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint
color with my apron. -. Then I said I must go first, and tell of
her anival; imploring her to say she would be happy with
young Heathclifil She stared, but soon comprehending wty I
counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me she would
not complain.
I couldn't abide to be present at their meeting. I stood out-
side the chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured
near the bed then.
844 WUTHKXIN6 BXI0HT8.
All was compoeed, bowever; CatfaeriBe's despair was as si*
lent as her father's joy. She supported him calmly, in appear-
ance; and he fixed oi^ her features his raised eyes, that seemed
dilating with ecstasy.
He died blissfuHy, Mr. Lockwood ; he died so ; kissing her
cheeky he murmured,
" I am going to her, and youf darling child, shall come to us ; "
and never stin-ed or spoke again, but continued that tapt, ra-^
diant gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped, and his soul
depaited. None could have noticed the exact minute of his
death, it was so entirely vnthout a struggle.
Whether Catherine had spet > t her tears, or whether the grief
were too weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till
the run rose— -she sat till noon, and would still have remained,
brooding over that death-hed, but I insisted on her coming away
and taking some repose.
'It was well I succeeded in Removing her^ for at dinner-time
appeared the lawyer, haying called at Wuthering Heights to
get his instructions how to behave. He had sold himself to Mr.
Heathcliff,'and that was the cause of his delay in obeying my
master's summons. . Fortunately, no thought of worldly affairs
Crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him after his daughter's ar-
rival. . .
Mr. Green took upon himself to order every thing and every
body about the place. He gave all the servants but me notice
to quit. He would have canied his delegated authority to the
point of insisting that Edgar Linton should not be buried beside
his wife, but in the chapdf with his family. There was the will,
however, to hinder that, and my loud protestations against imy
infringement of its directions.
The funeral was hurried over; Ca.therine, Mrs. Linton Heath-
cliff now, was suffered to stay at the Grange, fill her father's
corpse had quitted it -
She told me that her anguish had at last spurred Linton to
incur the risk of liberating her. She heard the men I sent dis-
puting at the door, and she gathered the jsense of Heathcliff's
answer. It drove, her desperate. Linton, who had been con-
veyed up to the little parlor soon after I left, was terrified into
fetching the key before his father re-ascended.
He had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
shutting it; and when he should Jhave gone to bed, he begged
to sleep vrith Hareton, and his petition was giAHted, for once.
WUtHBRIKQ HBI^HTfl. f4fi
Catherine stole out beforo break of day. She dare not try
the doors, lest the dogs should raise an alarm ; she visited the
empty chambers, and exan^ed their windows; and, luckily,
lighting on her mother's, she got easily out of its lattice ^nd to
the ground, by means of the fir-tree close by. Her accemplice
suffered for his share in the escape, notwithstanding his timid
contnYancee. ^ .
CHAPTER XXIX. ,
Thb erenidg after the funeral, my young lady and I were
seated in the library ; now musing mournfully, one of us despair*
ingly, on our loss ; now venturing conjectures as to the gloomy
future. ^
We had just agreed the best destiny which could await Cath«
erine w6uld be a permission/to eontinue resident at the Grange,
at least during Linton's life ; he being allowed to join her there,
and I to remain as housekeeper. That seemed rather too fa-
vorable an arrangement to be hoped for; and yet I did hope,
and began to cheer up , under the prospect of retaining my
horn A and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young
mistress, when a sei^vant— -one of the discard^ ones, not yet
departed — ^nished hastily in, and said, *'that devil Heathcliff "
was coming through the cpurt^-^^hould he fasten the door in
his face 1
If we had been mad enough to ordet that proceeding, we
had not time. He made no ceremony of knocking, or announce
ipg his name ; he was master, and availed himself of the mas-
^r's privilege to walk straight in; without saying a word.
The sound of our informant's voice .directed him to the
libraiy ; he entered, and, moticming him out, shut the door.
'It was the same room into which he had beep ushered, as a
guest, eighteen years befdre ; the same mdon i^one through the
window, and the same autumn landscape lay outside. We had
not yet lighted a candle, but all the apartment was visible, even
to the poitraits on the wall — the splendid head ^f Mrs. Linton,
and the graceful one of her husband.
Heathclifif advanced to the hearth. Time had little altered
246 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
his person either. There was the same man — his dark face
rather sallower and more composed, his frame a stone or two
heavier, perhaps, and no other difference'.,
Catherine had risen, with an impulse to dash out, when she
saw him.'^
" Stop ! " he said, arresting her by the arm. " No more run-
nings away ! Where would you go ? . Fm come to fetch you
home ; and I hope you'll be a dutiful daughter, and not encour-
age my son to further disobedience. I was embarrassed how
to punish him, when I discovered hil9 part in the business — he's
such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him — ^but you'll see by
his look that he has received his due.'I brought him down oiie
evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in a -chair,
ai^d never touched him afterv^ard. I sent Hareton out, and we
had the room to ourselves. In two hours I called Joseph to
carry him up* again, and since then my presence is as potent on
his nerves as a ghost; and I fancy he sees me often, though I
am not near. Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night
by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me ;
and, whether you like your precious n^ate or not, you must
come — ^he's your concern now ; I yield a31 rty interest in him
to you.**
" Why not let Catherine continue here V I pleaded, " and
send Master Linton to her. As you hate them both, you'd not
miss them — ^they can only be a daily plague to'your unnatural
heart. "
" I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange, " he answered ; *^ and
I want my children about me, to be sure. Besides, that lass
owes me her services for her bread : I'm not going to nurture
her in luxury and idleness after Linton is gone. Make haste
and get ready now, and don't oblige me to compel you. "
" I flhall, " said Catherine. " Linton is all I have to love in
the world ; and, though you have done what you could to make
him hateful to me, and me to him, you can not make us hate
each other ; and I defy you to hurt him when I am by, and I
defy you to frighten me. "
" You are a boastful champion, " replied Heathcliff ; " but I
don't like ^ou well enough to hurt him — ^you shall get the full
benefit of the torment, as long as it lasts. It is not I who will
make him hateful to you— it is his own sweet spirit. Hfe's as
bitter as gall at your desertion and its consequences : don't ex-
pect thanks for diis noble devotion. I heard him draw a pleas-
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS. 247
ant picture to Zlllah of- what he would do if he were as strong
as I., The- inclipation is there, and his very weakness wiU
sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength/'
. ** I know be has a bad nature, " said Catherine :'*he*s your
son. But I'm glad I've a better, to forgive it ; and I know he
loves me, and for that reason I love him. Mr; Heathclifif, you
have nobody to love you ; and, however miserable you make us,
we shall stiU have the revenge of thinking that your cruelty rises
£:om your greater misery! You are miserable, are you notl
Lonely, like the devil, and envious like him? Nobody loves
you — nobody will cry for you when you die ! I wouldn't be
you. "
Gathering spoke with a kind of dreary triumph : she seemed
to have made up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future
family, and draw pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
" You shall be Sony to be yourself presently, " said her father-
in-law, " if you stand there another minute. Begone, witch,
«nd get your things. "
She Bcomiully withdrew.
In her absence, I began to beg for Zillah's place at the
Heights, offering to resign her mine-; but he woula suiter it on
no account* He bid me be silent, and then, for the first time,
allowed himself a glance round the. room and a look at the pic-
tures. Having studied Mrs. Linton, he said —
" I shall have that at home. Not. because I need it, but — "
He turned abruptly to the fire, and continued, with what, for
lack of a better word, I must call a smile —
" I'll tell you what I did yesterday ! I got the sexton, who
was digging Linton's grave, to remove the earth olF her coffin
lid, and I opened it. I thought, once, I would have stayed
there, when I saw her face aeain — ^it is hers yet — ^he had hard
work to stir me ; but he said it would change if the air blew
on it, and so I struck one side of the coffin loose — and covered
it up— not Linton^s side, damn him ! I wish he'd been soldered
in lead — and I bribed the sexton to pull it away^ when I'm laid
there, and slide mine out too, I'll have it made so, and then, by
the time Linton gets to us, he'll not know which is which 1 "
" You. were very wicked, Mr. HeathclifFI " I exclaimed
" were you not ashamed to disturb. the dead i "
" I disturbed nobody, Nelly, " he replied ; " and I gave some
ease to myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable now ;
and you'll have a better choice of keeping me underground,
248 WUTHESINO HEIGHT 8.
when I get there. Disturbed her 1 No ! she has disturbed me^
night and day, through eighteen years — ^incessantly — remorse-
lessly — ^till yestemight^-^nd yestemighl,^ I was tranquil. I
dreamed I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with my
heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers. "
" And if she had been dissolved into earth, or wdrse, what
would you have dreamed of then4 " I said.
** Of dissolving with her,^ and being more happy still 1 " he
answered. " Do you suppose I dread any change of that sort?
I expected such a transfonnatipn on raising the lid, but I'm
bettef pleased that it should not commence till I share it. Be-
sides, unless I had received a distinct impression of her passion-
less features, that strange feeling would hardly have been re-
moved. It began oddly. You know I was wild after she died,
and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her t!o return to me
— ^Her spirit — I havie a strong & itK in ghosts; I have a conviction
that they can and do exist among us-l
** The day she was buried there came a fall of snow. In the
evening I went to the churchyard. • Zt blew bleak as winter-^
all around was solitary : I didn't fear that her fool of a husband
would wander up the den so late*-and no one ebe had business
to bring them there.
** Bein^ alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
sole bamer between us, I said to myself —
" * I'll have her in my arms again ! . If she be cold, I'll think
it is this north wind that chills me ; and if she be motionless, it
is sleep.'- ^
" I got a spade from the tool-hOuse, and began to delve with
all my might — ^it scraped the coffin : I fell to work with my
hands ; the wood commenced cracking about the screws, I was
on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that I heard
a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and
bending down. * If I can only get this off,'I muttered,'I wish
they may shovel in the earth oyer 4i8 both !'and I > yrenched at
it more desperately still. There was another sigh close at my
ear. I appeared to feel the warm breath of it, displacing the
sleet-laden wind. I knew no living thing in flesh and blood was
by — but as certainly as you perceive the approach to some sub-
stantial body in the dark, though it can not be discerned, so
certainly I felt that Cathy was there, not under me, but on the
earth.
" A sudden sense of relief flowed from my heart, throtigh
WUTQKRIN« BBI GHTS. 249
ft , , . _.
eveiy limb. I relinquished my labor of agony, and turned
consoled at once« unspeakably consoled. Her presence was
ivitb me ; it remained while I refilled the grave, and led me
home. You may laugh, if you will, but I was sure I should
see her there. I was sure she was with me, and I could not
help talking to her.
" Having reached the Heights, I rushed^ eagerly to the door.
It was fastened ; and I remember that accursed £amshaw and
my wife opposed my entrance. I remember stopping to kick
the breath out of him, and then hurrying up-slairs to my room,
and her^r-I looked round ii^patiently — I felt her by me-— I
cpuld alfiwst see her, and yet I cotdd not / I ought to have
sweat blood then > from the anguie^h df my yearning, from the
fervor of my supplications to have but one glimpse ! I had
not one. She showed herself, as she oft^n was in life, a devil
to me ! And sipce then^ sometimes more, and sometimes less,
I've been the sport of that intolerable torture ! Infernal-
keeping my neiTes at mlch a stretch, that, if they had not re-
sembled Catgut, they would, long ago, have relaxed to the
feebleness of Linton's.
'* When I sat in the house with Hareton^ it seemed that on
foing out, I should meet her ; when I walked on the moors,
should meet her eoming in.. When I went from home, I
hastened to return, she must be somewhere at the Heights,
I was certain ! And when I slept in her chitmbeiH-'I was
beaten out of that — I couldn't lie there ; for. the moment I
closed my eyes, she was either outside the window, or sliding
back ^he panels, x > r entering the room, or even resting her
darling head on the same pillow as she did when a child.
And I must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed
thenoi a hundred times a night — to be always disappointed !
It racked me ! I've often groaned alotid, till that old rascal
Joseph, no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the
fiend inside of me.
" Now since I've seen her, I'm pacified— a little. It was a
strange way of killing, not by inches, but by fractions of hair-
breadths, to beguile me with the specter of a hope through
eighteen years 1 - .-
Mr. Heathcliff paused, Qnd griped bis forehead — ^his hair
clung to it, wet with perspiration ; his eyfes were fixed on the
red embers of the fire ; the brows not contracted, but raised
next the temples^ diminishing the grim aspect of his oounte*
250 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
''• ^ .
nance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and a painful
appearance of mental tension toward one absorbing subject.
He only half addressed me, and I maintained BilenCe — I did
not like to hear him talk.
Afler a short period, h^ resumed his meditation on the
picture, took it down, and leaned it against the sofa to con-
template it at better advantage ; and while so occupied Cathe-
rine entered, announcing that she was- ready, when her pony
should be saddled.
" Send that over to-morrov^,*'said Heathcl^ to me ; then
turning to her, he added, " You may do without your pony —
it is a fine evening, and you'll need no ponies'at Wuthering
Heights, for what jtmineys you take your own feet wi^ serve
you. Come, along. "
" Grood-bye, Ellen! " - whispered my dear little mistress. As
she kissed me, her lips felt like ice. " Come and see me, Ellen,
don't forget. "
" Take care you dq no such thing, Mrs. Dean ! " said her
new father. " When I wish to speak to you, I'll come here. I
want none of your prying at my house ! "
He signed her to precede him ; and casting back a look that
cut my heart, she obeyed.'
I watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
Heathcliff fixed Catherine's arm under his, though she disputed
the act at first, evidently, and with rapid strides he hurried her
into the alley, whose trees Concealed them.
CHAPTER XXX.
I HAVE paid a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen her
since she left ; Joseph held the door in his hand, when J called
to ask after her, and wouldn't let me pass. He said Mrs.
Linton was'Vthrang, " and the master was not in. Zillah has
told me something of the way they go on, otherwise I should
hardly know who was dead, and who living.
She thinks Catherine haughty, and does not like her, I can
guess by her talk. My young lady asked some aid of her^ when
she first came, but Mr. HeathcM told her to follow her own
WUTHBRIN6 HEIGHTS. 251
business, and let his danghter-in-law look after berself, and
Zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded, selfish wo-
man. Catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among
ber enemies, as securely as if she. had done her a great wrong.
I had a long talk with Zillah, about six weeks ago, a little
before you c^me, one day when we foregathered ^on the moor;
and this is what she told me.
" The first thing Mrs. Linton did, " she said, ** on her arrival
at the Heights, was to run up-stairs without even wishing good-
evening to me and Joseph; she. shut herself into Linton's room,
and remained till morning — ^then, while the master and Eam-
shaw weire at breakfast, she entered the house and asked, all in
a quiver, if the doctor might be sent for ? her cousin was very ill.
" * We know that !'answered Heathcliff, * but his life is not
worth a farthing, and I won't speiid a farthing on him.'
" , * But I can not tell how to do,'she said. * If nobody will
help me, he'll die 1'•
" * Walk out of the room !'cried the master, *• aild let me never
bear a word more about him ! None here care what becomes
of him ; if you do, act the nurse ; if you do not, lock him up
and leave him.'
" Then she began to bother me,, and I said I'd had enough
plague with the tiresome thing ; we each had our tasks, and
hers was. to wait on Linton. Mr. Heathcliff.bid me leave that
labor to her.
" How they ^managed together, I can't tell. I fimcy he fret-
ted a great deal, and moaned hisseln, night and day ; and she
had precious little rest, one could guess by her white face and
heavy eye— Hshe sometimes came into the kitchen all wildered
like, and looked as if she would fain beg a^istance ; but I was
not going'to disobey the masteir— I never dare disobey him,
Mrs. Dean; and though I thought it wrong that Kenneth should
not be sent for, it Was no concern of mine^ either to advise or
complain ; and I always refused to meddle.
" Once or twice, after we had gone to bed, I've happened to
open my door again, and seen her sitting crying on the stairs'
top ; and then I've shut myself in quick, for fbar of being moved
to interfere. I did pity her then« I'm sure; .still I didn't wish
to lose my place, you know !
" At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and
frightened me out of my wits by saying.
252 WUTHSSINO HBiaHTS*
"'Tell Mr. Heathcliff that his son is dying — ^I'm sure he is
this time.. Get up instantly, and tell him V
" Having utterad this speech^ she vanished again. I lay a
quarter of an hour, listening and trembling. Nothing sttired-*-
Uie house was quiet.
** * She's mistaken/ I said to my8el£ ^ He's got over it. I
needn't disturb them.'And I began to doze. But my aleep
was marred a second time, by a s^rp ringing of the bell— the
only bell we have, put lip on purpose for Linton ; and the mas-
ter called to me to sqo what was the matter,, and mform them
that he wouldn't have that noise repeated.
" I delivered Catherine's message. He cursed to himself^
and in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle, and pro-
ceeded to their room ; I followed. Mrs, Heathcl^ was seated
by the bedside, with her hands folded on her knees^ Her father-
in-law went up, held the light to Linton's iace, looked at him,
and touched him : afterward he turned to her.
" * Now — Catherine,'he said, *how do you feelV
" She was dumb,
" * How do you feel, Catherine V he repeated.
*'* Ue'B safe, and I'm free,'she answered ; * I should feel well
^but,'she continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal^
'You have lefl me so long to struggle against death, alone, that
I feel and see only death ! I feel Uke death I'
''And she looked like it, tool 1 gave her a little wine. , Hare*
ton and Joseph, who had heeii wakened by the ringing, and the
sound of feet,, and heard our talk from outside, now entered.
Joseph was fikin, I b & lieve, of the lad's removal : Hareton seem-
ed a thought bothered, though he was more taken up with
staring at Catherine than thinking of Linton. But the master
bid him get off ta bed again — we didn't want his help. He af-
terward made Joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told
me to return to mine, and Mrs. Heathcliff remained by herselfl
^'In the morning he sent me to tell her she must come down
to breakfast. She had undressed, and appe^tred going to sleep ;
and said she was ill — at which I hardly wondered,^ I informed
Mr. HeathcfifiT, and he replied, -
" * Well, let her be till after the funeral, and go up now and
then to get her what is needful ; and as soon as she seems bet-
ter, tell me.'"
Cathy stayed up stairs a fortnight, according to Zillah, who
visited her twice a day, and would have been ratho: mora
W 9 T H E B I N O B E I 6 B T S. 358
■■ ■ n I I . I ■ ■ I . I III , .. M il ..II ■■ M ■ « I t II ^ I
friendly » but her attempts at increasing kindness were proudly
and promptly repelled. Heathcliff went up once; to shpw her
Linton's will. He had bequeathed the whole of his and what
had been .her movable property to his father. The poor crea-
ture was threatened or. coaxed into that act, during her week's
absence* when his uncle died. The lands^ being a,ininory he
could not meddle with. However, Mr. Heatbclifir has claimed,
and kept thi^m in his wife's right, and his alsoi — I suppose legally,
at any rate Catiieriney destitute of cash and fii(Bnds, can not dis-
turb his possession.
" Nobody/'said Zillah, " ever approached her door, except
that oncei but I ; and nobody asked any thing about her. The
first occasion ef her coming down into the house was on a Sun-
day afternoon.
" She had cried out, whep.L carried up her dinner, that she
couldn't bear any longer being iuc the cold i and I told her the
master was going to Thrushcross Grange ; and Eamshaw and
I needn't hinder her from descending; so^ as soon as she heard
Heathcliff's- horse trot pff, sh^ made her appearance, donned in
black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears — as
plain as a Q^uaker she couldn't comb them oyt. Joseph and I
generally go to chapel on Sundays.'^ (The kirk, you know, has
tiQ minister, now, explained Mrs. Dean, and they call the Meth-
odists'or Baptists'place, I can't say which it is, at Gimmerton,
a chapel.) " Joseph had gone, " she continued, " but I thought
proper to bide at home. Young^ folks are always the better & xr
an elder's, overlooking, and Hareton, with all his bashfulness,
isn't a model of nice, behavior. I let him know that his cousin
would very likely sit with us, and she had been always used to
isee the Sabbath t^spected, so he had as good leave his guns
and bits of in-door work alone, while she staid. .
" He colored up at the news ; and cast his eyes over his hands
and clothes. The train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of
sight in a minute. I saw he meant to give her his company ;
anid I guessed, by -his way, he wanted to be presentable ; so,
laughing as I durst not laugh when the master is by, I offered
to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion. He grew
sullen, and began to swear.
" Now, Mrs. Dean, " she went on, seeing me not pleased by
her manner, " you happen think your young lady^ too fine for
Mr. Hareton, and happen you're right — ^I own, I should love well
to bring. her pride a peg lower. And what will all her^leaming
254 WUTHEEINO HEIGH.TS.
and all her daintinesa do for her, now ? She's as poor as you,
or I — poorer. 1*11 be bound, you're saving — and I'm doing my
little all that road. "
Hareton allowed Zillah to giv« him her aid ;'and she flattered
him into a good humor ; so, when Catherine came, half forget >
ting her former insults, he tried po make himself agreeable, by
the housekeeper's account.
*'Missis •walked in, " ^he said, " as chill a^ an icicle, and as
high as a princess. I got up and: offered her my seat in the
arm-chair. No, she turned up her nose at my civility. Earn-
shaw rose too, and bid her come to the settle, and sit close by
the fire ; h^ Was sure she was starved.
"'I've been starved a month atid more,'she answered, Test-
ing on the word, as scornful as she could.
^ And she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance
from both of us. Having sat till she was warm, she began to
look round, and discovered a number of books in the dresser ;
she was instantly upon her feet again, stretching to reach them,
but they were too high up. Her cousin, after watching her en-
deavors a while, at last summoned courage to help her; she
held her/ frock, and he filled it with the first that came to hand.
" That was a great advance for the lad — she didn't thank him ;
still he felt gradfied that she had accepted his assistance, and
ventured to stand behind, as she'exammed them, and even to
stoop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pictures
which they contained-— nor was he daumed by the saucy style
in which she jerked the page firom his finger; he contented
himself with going a bit farther back, and looking at her, instead
of the book.
" She continued reading, or seeking for sdmetlnng to read.
His attention became, by degrees, quite centered in the study
of her thick, silky curls — ^her face he couldn't see, and she
couldn't see him. And, perhaps, not quite awake to what he
did, but attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded
from staring to touching ; he put out his hand and stroked one
curl, as gently as if it were a bird. He might have stuck a
knife into her neck, she started round in such a taking.
" * Gret away, this moment ! How dare you touch me 1 Why
are you stopping there V she cried, in a tone of disgust. * I
can't endure you ! I'll go up-stairs again, if you come near me.'
'*Mr. Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish ^s he could do; he
Bat down in th^ setde, very quiet, and she continued turning over
WUTHBKINO HEIGHTS. 255
her volumes another half-hour — finally, Earnshaw crossed over
and whispered to me.
- " * Will you ask her to read to us, ZiUah t I'm stalled of do-
ing naught — and I do like~I could like to hear her ! dunnot say
I wanted it, hut ask of yourseln.'
" * Mr. Hareton wishes you would fead to us, ma'am,'I said,
immediately. * He'd take it very kind — he'd be much obliged.'
''She frowned ; and, looking up, answered —
** * Mr. I^areton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough
to understand that I reject any pretense at kindness you have
the hypocrisy to offer ! I despise you, and. will have nothing
to say to any of you ! When I would have given my life for one
kind word, even to see one of your faces, you aU kept off. But
I won't complain to you ! I'm driven down hete by the cold,
not either to amuse you, or enjoy your society.'
"'What could I ha'done V began Earnshaw. * How was I
to blame]'
*^ * Oh ! you are an exception,'answered Mrs. Heathcliff. * I
never missed such a concern as you.'
** * But I offered more than once, and asked,'he said, kindling
up at her pertness-^^'I adked Mr. Heathcliff to let me wake for
you —'^ - ,''
"'Be silent ! I'll go out of doors, or any ^where, rather than
have your disagreeable voice in my ear !'said my lady.
''Hareton muttered, she might go. to hell, for him! and un-
slinging his gun, restrained himself from his Sunday occupations
no longer. He talked now, freely enough ; and she p»resently
saw fir to retreat to later solitude : but the fVost had set in, and,
in spite of her pride, she was forced to condescend to out com-
pany more and more. HoweVerj I took care there should be
no further scorning at my good natu]*e. Ever since, I've been
as stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us, and
she do < 9s not deiServe one-^for, let them say t & e least word to
her, and she'll curl back without respecr of any one ! She'll
snap at the master himself, and as good as^ dares him to thrash
her ; and the more hurt she gets, the more vehon & ous she grows. "
At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined to
leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to come
and live with me ; but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon permit that
as he would set up Hareton in an independent house : and I can
see no remedy at present, unless she could marry again ; and
that scheme, it does not come within my province to arrange.
250 WUTBBRING HEIGHTS.
Thu9 ended Mrs. Dean's story. Notwithstanding the doctor's
prophecy, I am rapidly recovering strength, and though it be
only the second week in January, 1 propose getting out on
horseback in a day or two^ and liding over tQ Wstbering
Heights, to inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six
months in London ; and, if he likes, He may look out for another
tenant to take the place after October. I would not paas anothex
winter here for much*
CHAPTER XXXI.
Yesteiuoay was bright, cahn, and frosty. I w^nt to the
Heights, as I proposed ; my housekeeper entreated i & e to bear
a little note from her te her young lady, and I did not ^refuse,
for the worthy woman was not conscious of any thing odd in
her request
The j & ont'door stood open, but the jealous gate was fastened,
as at my last visit; I knocked and invoked Earnshaw from
among the garden beds ; he unchained it and I entered. The
fellow is as handsome a rustic 4s need be seen. I took particu*
lar notice of him this time ; but then he does his best, apparent-
ly, to make the least of his advantaged
I asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home 1 He answered, no ;
but he would %e in at dinnei-time. It lyas eleven o'clock, and
I announced my intention of going in and waiting for him, at
which he immediately flung down his tools, and accompanied
me, in the office of watch-dog, not as a substitute for the ho6t.
We entered together ; Catherine was therq, making herself
useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal;
she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I had seen
her first. She hardly raised her eyes to notice me, and con-
tinued her employment with the same disregard to common
forms of politeness as before, never returning my bow and good-
morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
'* She does not seena so amiable, " I thought,'* as Mrs. Dean
would persuade me to believe. She's a beauty, it is trae, but
not an f^tigel. "
Earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to Ae kitchen.
WtJTfiBBINO R BIGHTS. 25T
I'■ ♦'f'•'_ M .I. - ... . II m .1 i.i. I ■1.11 — „ ■■
** Remove them yourself, " she said, puling them from her,
as sooa as she had done ; and retiring to a stool by the window,
where she began to carve figures of birds and beasts,, out of the
tumip-pariugs in het lap« I approached her, pretending to de-
sire a view of the garden, and, as I fancied^ adroitly dropped
Mrs. Dean's note upon her knee, uanoticed by Hareton, but she
asked aloud^- -^'
« What is that V and chucked it off.
*'A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the
Grange, " I answered, annoyed at her exposing my kind deed,
and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my own.
She \y.ould gladly have gathei'ed it up at this information, but
Hareton beat her; he seized and put it in hi» waistcoat, saying
Mr. Heathcliff should look at it first.
Thereat, Cfatherine silendy turned her face from us, and, very
stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to
her eyes ; and her cousin, after struggling a while to keep down
his softer feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor
beside her, as ungraciously as he could. Catherine caught and
perused it eagerly; then she put a few questions to me con-
cerning the inmates, rational -and irrational, of her former home,
and, gazing toward the hills, murmured in soliloquy —
" I shdidd like > to be riding Minny down there ! > I should
like to be climbing up there! Oh, I'm tired! — I'm staUedf
Hareton ! " , . .
And she leaned her pretty head back against the sill, with
half a yawn and half a sigh, > and lapsed into an aspect of ab-
Btmcted s^ness, neither caring nor knowing whether we re*
marked her, -^
" Mrs. HeathclifF, " I said) afler sitting sonie time mute, " you
are not aware that L am ^n acquaintance of youi-s ; so intimate,
that I think it strange you won-t come and speak to me. My
housekeeper never wearies of talking about and praising you;
and she'll be greatly disappointed if I i^tum with no news of,
or from you, ^except that you received her letter, and said
nothing! "
She appeared to wonder at this speech and asked,
" Does Ellen like you 1 " - ^
" Yes, very well,** I replied unhesitatingly.
" You must tell her, " she continued, " that I would answer
her letter, but I have no materials for writing, not even a book
fix)m which I might tear a leaf "
258 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
" No books ! " I exclaimed. " How do you contrive to live
here without them 1 if I may take the liberty to inquire.
Though provided with^a large library, I'm frequently v^ry dull
at the Grange-^take my h^oks away, and I'should be. des-
perate ! "
" I was always reading, when I had them ; " said Catherine,
" and Mr. Heathcliff never reads ; so he took it into his head to
destroy my books. I have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.
Only once, I searched through Joseph's store of theology, to
his great irritation : and once, Hareton, I came upon a secret
stock in your room — some Latin and Grreek, and some tales and
poetry ; all old friends. I brought the last here^ — and you
gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, ibr the mere
love of stealing ! They are of no use to you-*— or else you con-
cealed them in the bad spirit, that as you can not enjoy them,
nobody else shall. Perhaps your envy counseled Mr, Heath-
cliff to rob me of my ti'easures 1 But, I've most of them written
on my brain and printed in my heart, and you can not deprive
me of those* "
- Eamshaw blushed crimson, when his cousin made this reve-
lation of his private literary accumulations, and stammered an
indignant denial of her accusations.
" Mr. Hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowl-
edge, " I Qaidi coming to his rescue. " He is toot envious but
emulous of your attainments. He'll be a clever scholar in a few
years ! "
" And he wants me to sink into, a dunce, meantime, " an-
swered Catherine. " Yes, I hear him trying to spell and read
to himself, and pretty blunders he makes ! I wish you would
repeat Chevy Chase, as you did yesterday. It was extremely
funny ! I heard you ; and I heard you turning over the dic-
tionary, to seek out the hard words, and then cursing because
you couldn't read their explanations ! "
The young man evidently thought it too bad that he should
be laughed at for his igpiorance, and then laughed at for trying
to remove it. I had a similar notion, and, remembering Mrs.
Dean's anecdote of his first attempt at enlightening the dark-
ness in which he had been reared, I observed,
** But, Mrs. HeathcliflT, we have each had a conimencement,
and each stumbled and tottered on the threshold, and had our
teachers scorned, instead of aiding us, we should stumble and
totter yet. "
WUTH & RIN6 HEIGHTS. 250
" Oh V* she replied, " I don't wish to limit his acquirements —
still, he has no right to apprppriate what is mine, and make it
ridiculous to me with. his vile mistakes and mis-pronunciations !
Those books, both prose and verse, were consecrated to me by
other associatibns,'and I hate to have them debased knd pro-
faned in his mouth ! Besides, of all, he has selected my favorite
pieces that L love the most to repeat,^ as if out of deliberate
malice! " .
Hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute ; he labored under
a severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy
tiask to suppress.
I rose, and from^a gentlemanly idea of relieving hi» embar-
rassment, took up my station in the door-way, surveying the ex-
ternal prospect, as I stood. He followed my example, and left
the room, bujt presently reappeared, bearing hdf-a-dozen
volumes in his hands, which he threw inta Catherine's lap, ex-
claiming,
" Take thdm! I never want to hear, or read, or think of
them a^n T'
" I won't have them, now ! " sh© answered. " ,I shall connect
them with you, and hate them ! "
She opened one that had obviously been 6ften turned over,
and read a portion in- the drawling tone of a beginner ; tlien
laughed, and threw it from hdr.
" And listen! " she continued provokingly, commencing a
verse of an old ballad in the same fashion.
But his self-love would endure no fuither torment — ^I heard,
and not altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to her
saucy tongue.. The little wretch had done her utmost to hurt
her cousin's sensitive though uncultivated feelings, and a physical
argument was the only mode he had of balancing the account,
and repaying its effects on the infltcter. ^
He aftiBrwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
fire. I read in his countenance what anguish it was < to offer
thst sacrifice to spleen. I fancied that as they consumed, he
recalled the pleasure they had already imparted ; and the tri-
umph and ever increasing pleasure be had anticipated fix)m
them — and I fancied I guessed the incitement to his secret
studies, also.. He had been content with da;ly labor and rough
animal enjoyments, till Catherine crossed his path. Shame at
her scorn and hope of her approval were his first prompters to
higher pursuits'; and instead of guarding him from otfe, and
260 WUTHBEINe HEIGHT 8*
wiDiuDg him the other, his endeavors to rsise himself had pro-
duced just the contrary result.
" Yes, that's all the good th'at such a brute as you can get
from them 1 " cried CJatherine, sucking her damaged lip, and
watching the confiagration with indignant eyes.
" You'd better hold your tongue now 1 " he answered fiercely.
And his agitation precluding further speech, he advanced hastily
to the entrance, where I made way for him to pass. But, ere
he had crossed the doorHBtones, Mr. Heathcliff, coming up the
causeway, encountered him, and laying hold of hb shoulder,
asked, .
" What's to do now, my lad V
** Naught, naught 1 " lie said,^ and broke «way, to enjoy his
grief and anger in solitude* Heathcliff gazed > after him, and
sighed.
*'It will be odd, if I thwart myself! " fae.muttered, uncoo*
scions that I was behind him. ^ But when I look for his father
ia his frice, I find her every day more ! How the devil is he
so like 1 I can hardly bear to see him. "
He bent his eyes to the ground, and vT & lked moodily in.
There was a restless, anxious expression in his countenance I
bad never remarked there befi > re, and he looked sparer in per-
son. His daughter-in-law on perceiving him through the
window, immediately escaped to the kitchen, so that Ij^mained
alone.
*'I'm glad to see you out of doors ag^in, Mr. Lockwood, "
he said in reply to my greeting, " from selfish; motives partly,
I don't think I could readily supply your loss in this desolation.
. I've wondered, more than once, what brought you here. "
" An idle whim, I fear, sir,. " was my answer, " or else an
idle whim is going to spirit me away. I shall set out for
London, next week, and I must give you warning, that I feel
no disposition to retain Thrushcross Grange beyond the twelve-
month I agreed to rent it. I believe I shall not live there any
more.
" Oh, indeed ! you're tired of being banished from the world,
are you ] " he said. " But if you be coining to plead off pay-
ing for a place you won't occupy, your journey is useless-^I
never relent in exacting my due from any one. "
" I'm coming to plead off nothing about itl " I exclaimed,
considerably irritated. " Should you wish it, I'll setde with
you now,^ and I drew my notebook frt > m my pocket.
WUTHEBIN6 HEIGHTS. 261
" No, no, " he replied/ coolly, " you'll leaye safficient behind
to cover your debts, if you fail to return. I'm not in such a
burry — sit-down and take you dinner with us-— a guest that is
safe from repeating his visit, can generaJly be made welcome.
Catherine ! bring the things in — where are you V*
Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.
" You may get your dinner with Joseph, " muttered Heath-
cliff aside, ** and remain in the kitchen till he is gone. "
She obeyed his directions very punctually — ^perhaps she had
no temptation to trans^s^ress. Living among clowns arid misan-
thropists, she probably can not appreciate a better class of
people, when she meets them.
With Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on one hapd, and
Hareton absolutely dumb,'on the other, 1 made a somewhat
cheerless meal, and bid adieu early. I would have departed
by the back way, to get a last glimpse of Catherine and annoy
old Joseph ; but Hareton received orders to lead up my horse,
and my host himself escorted me to the door, so I could not ful*
fill my wish.
** How dreary life gets over in that house ! " I reflected, while
riding down the road. ** What a realization of something more
romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for Mrs. Linton
Heathcliff, had she and I struck up an attachment, as her good
nurse desired, and migrated together into the stirring atmos-
phere of the town ! "
. CHAPTER XXXn.
1802. — This September, I was invited to devastate tfie moors
of a friend* in the north ; and, on my journey to his abode, I
unexpectedly bame. within fifteen miles of Gimmerton. The
hostler, at a roadside public-hou^, was holding a pail of water
to refresh my hoises,'when a cart of very green oat6, newly
reaped, passed by, and he remarked —
" Yen's frougb Gimmeiton, nah ! They're alias thrtee wick'
after other folk wi'ther harvest.''
" Gimmerton] " I repeated, my residence in that locality had
already erown dim ana dreamy.'< Ah ! I know ! How far is
itftomdisr
262 WUTHERIN41 HEIGHTS.
''Happen fourteen mile'o'er th'hills, and a rough road, " he
answered.
A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange.
It was'scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as well pass
the night under my own foof as in an inn. Besides,. I could
spare a day easily, to an^anee matters with my landlord, and
thus save myself the trouble of invading the neighborhood again.
Having rested a while, I directed my servant to inquire the
]way to the village ; and, with great fatigue to our beasts, we
managed the distance in some three hours. I left him there,
and proceeded down (he valley pilone. The gray church
looked grayer, and the lonely churchyard lonelien I distin-
guished a moor sheep cropping the short turf on the graves.
It was sweet, warm Weather — ^too warm for traveling ; but the
heat 4id not hinder me froni enjoying the delightful sceneiy
above and below ; had I seen it nearer August, I am sure it
would have tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes.
In winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold
swells of heath.
I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for ad-
mittance r but the famUy had retreated into the back premises,
I judged by one thin, blue wreadi curling from the kitchen
chimney, and they did not hear. I rode into the couit. Under
the porch a girl of nine or ten sat knitting,'and an old woman
reclined on the horse-steps, smoking a meditative pipe.
" Is Mi-s. Dean within 1 " I demanded of the dame.
" Mistress Dean 1 Nay ! " she answered, " shoo doesn't bide
here ; shoe's up at th'Heights. "
" Are you the housekeeper, then 1 " I continued^
** Eea, aw keep th'hause, " ste replied. *
" Well, I'm Mr. Lock wood, the master. Are there any
rooms to lodge me in ? I wish to stay here all night. "
" T'maister! " she cried in astonishment, " Whet, whoiver
knew yah wur coming ? Yah sud ha'send word ! They's
nowt norther dry nor mensful abaht t'place-^nowt there isn't! "
She threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed,
and I entered too ; soon perceiving that her report was true
and, moreover, that I had almost upset her wits by my unwel-
come apparition.
I bid her be composed — I would go out for a walk ; and,
meantime, she must try to prepare a comer of a sitting-room.
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS. 263
for me to sup in, apd a bed-room to sleep in. No sweeping
and dusting, only good fires and dry sheets were necessary.
She seemed willing to do her best; though she thrust the
hearth-brush into the grate in mistake for the poker ; and mal-
appropriated, several other articles of her crafi : but I retired,
confiding in her energy for a resting-place against my return.
Wuthering Heights was the goad of my proposed excui'sion..
An after- thought brought me back, when I had left the court.
" All well at the Heights V* I inquired of the woman.
" Eea, ,f'r oiyt aw knaw! " she answered,i skuriying away
with a pan of hot cinders.
I would bave asked why Mrs. Dean kad deserted the
Grange ; but it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis,
BO I turned aWay and made my exit, rambling leisurely along
with the glow of a sinking sun behind, and the mild glory of a
rising moon in fronts one fading and the other brightening, as
I quitted the park and climbed the stony by-road branching
oif to Mr. HeathcKff's dwelling. Before I arrived in sight
of it, all that remained of 4ay was a beamlessj amber light
alon^ the west;, but I could see every pebble on the path, and
every blade of grass, by that splendid moon.
I had neither to climb the ga.te, nor to knock — it yielded to.
my hand. That is sin improvement, I thought. And I noticed
another, by the aid of my nostrils ; a fragrance of stocks and
wall flowers, wafted on the air from among the firuit trees.
Both doors and lattices were open ; and yet, as is usu^ly the
case in a coal district, a fine, red fire illuminated the chimney ;
the comfort which the eye derives firom it renders the extra heat
endurable. But the house of Wuthering Heights is so large,
that the inmates have plenty of space for withdrawing out of its
influence ; and, accordingly, what inmates there were had sta-
tioned themselves not far fi'om one of the windows. I could
both see them and hear them talk before I entered ; and looked
and listened in .consequence, being moved thereto by a mingled
sense o£. curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.
" Con-trary /*'said a voice, as sweet as a silver bell. " That
for the third time, you dunce ! I'm not going to tell you again.
Recollect, or 1 pull your hair! "
" Contraiy, then, " ana^Vered another, in deep, but softened
tones. " And now, kiss me, for minding so well. "
" No, read it over first correctly, without a single naistake. "
The male speaker began to read — he was a young man, re-
spectably dressed, and seated at a table, having a book before
264 WDTHERING HEiaHTB.
bim. His bandsdme features glowed wkh pleasure, and hui
eyes kept impatiently waudering from tbe page to a small wbite
band over his shoulder, which recalled him by a smart slap on
the cheek, whenever its owner detected such sigiis of inattentioD.
Its owner stood behind ; bar light shining ringlets blending at
intervals with his brown locks, as sl^ bent to superintend his
studies ; and her face— -it was lucky he could not see her face,
or he would never have been so steady— I could, and I bit my
Hp in spite, at having thrown avt^ay the chance I might have
had, of doing something besides staring at its smiling beauty.
The task was done, not free fi:om & rther blunders, but the
pupil claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses^ which,
nowever, he ^nerously returned. . Then they came to the door,
and from their conversation I judged tbey were about to issue
out and have a walk on the moors. I supposed I should be
condemned in Hareton Eamshaw's heart, if not by his mouth,
to the lowest pi( in the infernal regions, if I showed ray unfor
tnnate person in his neighborhood then : and feeling very mean
and malignant, I skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.
There was unobstructed admittance on that side also ; and at
the door sat my old friend Nelly Dean, sewing, and singing a
song, which was often interrupted from v^ithin, by harsh words
of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
" Aw'd rayther, by th'haidf, hev'ein swearing i* my lugs
frough mom tub neeght, nur hearken yah, hahsiver! " said the
tenant of the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's.
" Jt*s a blazing shaime, ut aw cannut oppen t'Blessed Book,
bud yah set up them glories tub Sattan, un'all t* flaysome
wickednesses ut iver ^er bom intuh t'warld ! Oh ! yah're a
raight nowt; un'shoe's another; uif that poor lad'uU be lost,
atween ye. Poor lad 1 " he added, with a groan, *• bp's witched,
aw'm saitin on'tl Oh, Lord, judge'cm, for they's norther law
nur justice amang wer rullers ! "
" No I or we should be sitting in flaming fegots, I suppose, "
retorted the singer. *'But wiaht, old man, and read your Bible,
like a ChrisCiatt, and never mind me. This is * f'airy Annie's
Wedding*— a bonny tune — ^it goes to a dance. "
Mrs. Dean was about to recommence when I advanced ; and,
recognizing me directly,- she jumped to her feet, crying —
♦* Why, bless you, Mr. Lockwood, how could you think of
returning in this way ? All's shut up at Thrashcross Grange.
You should have given us notice. "
" I've aiTanged .to be accommodated ther^ for as long^ as I
WUTHEHiNG HEIGHT^. 3$5
shall May, " I aiieiwered. ** I d^ait again to^Daorrdw. And
how are you transplanted here, Mi:s. Dean ? tell me that. "
''Zi]lah \e% and Mr. HeathcliflP wished me to come, soon
after you went to Xondon^ and stay till you returned. ^B^t step
in, pray. Have you walked from Gimmeilon this, evening t "
" From'the Grange, " I replied ; " and, while. they make me
lodging room there, t want to finish, my husiness with your
master—*! don't think of having another opportunity in a hurry. "
** What business, sir ? " said NeUy,. condubting me into the
house. " He*s gone out at present, and won't return soon/'
" About the rent, " I answered.
" Oh 1 then it is with Mrs. Heathclifi* you must settle, " she
observed, ^ or rather with me.. She has not learned to manage*
her affairs yet > and I act for her — there's nobody else. " ^
I looked surprised.
" Ah ! you have not heard of Heathcliff's death, I see, " she
continued. . ^
•''Heathcliff dead 1 " I exclaimedf astonished.'* How long ago 1 "
V Three months since. But sit down, and let me take your
hat, and I'll tell you all about it. Stop^ you have had nothing,
to eiat, have you 1 "
''I want nothing. I have ordered supper at home. You sit-
down too, I never dreamed of his dying.* ]liet me hear how it
came to pass. You say you don't Qxpect.them back for some'
tim6 — ^the young people 1 "
" No. Ihave to scold them eveiy eveningfcw their late ram-
bles ; but they don't care for me. At least, have a drink of our
old ale : it " will do you good — you seem weary.'^
She hastened to fetch it before I could refuse ; and I heard-
Joseph asking whethier''it wam't a crying scandal that she
should have fellies at her tinie of life ] And then, to get them
jocks out uh t* mai & ter's cellar ! He & ir shaamed to'bide still'
and see it. "
She did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a tninute, bear-
ing a creaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with becom-
ing earnestness ; and afterward she furnished me with the sequel
of Heathciiff's history. He ha^ a''queer^'end, as she expresa-
ed it. .
I was summoned to Wuthering Heights within a fortnight of
your leaving, she said, and I obeyed joyfully for Catherine's sake.
My first mtervj^w vnth her gneved and shocked me, she had
altered so much since our s^amtion. Mr. Heathcliff did not
M
266 WUTH£R1NG HEIGHT 0.
----'■
explain his reasons for taking ^ nevf mind abopt mj coming
here ; lie only told me he wanted tne, and he wae tired of see*
ing Catherine; I mnst mi & ke the little parlor my litting-room,
and keep her with me. It was enough if he were ebliged to
see her once or twice a day. -
She seemed pleased at this arrangement i and, hj degrees, I
smuggled over a great number of hooks and other^articles that
had formed her amusement at the Orange, and flsittered myself
we should get on in tolerable eomfoit. •
The delusion did not last long. Catherine, contentc^d at iSrst,
in a brief space grew irritable and restless. For one thing, she
was forbidden to move out of the garden, afid it fretted her sadly
to be confined to its narrow bounds as ^mng drew on ; for an-
other, in following the housd, I was forced to quit he;r frequently,
and she complained of loneliness ; she preferred quarreling with
Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her soH^de^
** 1 did not mind their skirmishes ; but Hareton was ofteir
obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to
have the house to himself; and though, in the beginning, she
either lefl it at his approach, or quietly joined in my occupations,
and shunned remarking or addressing him-— and though he was
always as sullen and silent as possible — after a while bm changed
her behavior, ahd became incapable of letting him alone. Talk*
ing at him ; commenting on his stupidity and idlenera ; express-
ing her wonder how he could endure the lifh he lived — ^how he
could sit a whole evening, staring into the fire and dozing.
** He's just like a dog, is he not, Ellen t " she once observed,
" or a cart-horse ? He does his work, eats his food; and sleeps,
etmmally ! What a blank, dreary mind he must have ! I > o you
ever dream, Hareton ? And, if you do, what is it about? But,
you can't speak to me ! "
Then she looked at him; but he would neither open his
mouth, nor look again.
" He's perhaps, dreaming now,''she continued. He twitched
his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him, Ellen.'*
" Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you up stairs^ il
you don't behave! " I said. He had not only twitched hie
shoulder, but clenched his fist, as if tempted to use it.
" I know why Hareton never speaks when I am in the kitch-
en, " siie exclaimed, on another occasion. " He is i^raid I shall
laugh at him. Ellen» what do you think ? He liegan to teach,
himself to read onee; and, beeau$e I laughed, he burned his
books, and dropped it — was he not a fool V*
WUTHEBrlBia HBICIUTB. 36T
** Were ikot you naugbty f'I tfiud ^'* liti9wer me tbat. "
*'Perbap6 I v^bs " she went on, " t > at I did not expect him
to be BO Billy. Hareton, if I gaye yon a book, would jou take
it now I THtryr ^'
She placed one she had been perusing < m bis band ; be finng
it off, and muttered if sbb did not gfive over he^d break her neck.
" Well, I shall put it here,*'she Biaid > " in the table drawer,
and am goin^ to bed. "
Then she whispered me to wlitcb whether he touched it, and
departed. But he " would not come near it, and bo I informed
her in the morning,, to her great disappointment. I saw she was
sorry for his perBeveiii^ sulkiness and indolence*— her conBcience
reproved her for frightening him off improying himself. She
ka < l doioe it effectually.
But her ingenuity was at work to rBmedy the injury ; while I
ironed, or pursued other stationary employnento I could not well
do in tbe parlor — she would bring some pleasant volume, and
read it aloud tome. When Hareton was there, she generally
paused in an interesting part, and left the book lying about —
that she did repeatedly ; but he was as obstinate as a mule, and,
instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to smo-
king with Joseph, aaid they sat like aiutbmata, one on each side
of the lire, the elder happily too deaf to nndentand her wicked
nonsense, as he ^ would have called it; the younger doing bis
best to seem to disregard it On fine evenings the latter Allowed
bis shooting expeditions^ and CatheriniB yawned and sighed, and
teased me • to talk to'her, and ran off into the court or garden,
the moment I began ; and, as a last resource, cried, and said
she was tired of living, her Hfe wis useless.
Mr. Heathcliff, who ere w more and more disinclined to soci-
-ety, had almost banished E amshaw out of his apartment. Owing
to an accident, at the commencement of March, he became for
some days a^xture in the kitchen. His g^n burst while out on
the bills by himself; a splinter cut his arm, and he lost a good
deal of blood befbre he could reach home. The consequence
was, that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and tran-
quillity till he made it up again.
It suited Catherine to have him there ; at any rate, it made
ber hate her room up stairs more than ever; and she would
compel me to find out bunness below, thai she might accompa-
ny me'•
On Easter Monday, Joseph v^nt to Gimmerton fair with
some cattle ; and in the oftenioon I was busy getting up linen
368 WUTHBXISO 1IBI6HT0.
in the kitchen* Eamshaw Qat, morose «te usual, at jthe ehknney
eorner, and my little mistress was beguiling an idle, hour with
drawing pictures on the window panes^ Tfirying her amusem^it
by smothered bursts of songs, and whispering ejaculations, and
^uiek glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of
£er cousin, iidio stead & stly smoked* onA looked into the grate.
At a notice that I could'do with her no longer, intercepting
my light, she removed to the hearth-stone. I bestowed little at-
tention on her proceedings, but, presently, I heard her begin —
''I've found out, Hareton, that I want—that I'm gladrr4hat
I should like you to be my cousin, now, if you had not giown
ao cross to me, and so rough. " Hareton returned no answer. ^
*'Hareton, Hareton, Hareton ! do you hear V* she continued.
" Get ofiTwi'ye ! " he growled, with uncompFOmising gruffneas.
'* Let me take that pipe, " shd said, cautiously advancing her
hand, and absti'acting it from his mouth.
Before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken and be-
hind the fire. He swore at her and seized another.
" Stop, " she cried, " you must listen io me, first ; and I can't
jpeak while those clouds ar^ floating in my ^ce. " ■
" Will you go to the devil ! " he exclaimed, ^ and let me be ! "
''No, " she persisted,''I won't. I can't tell what to do to
make you talk to me, and you are determined not to under-
stand. When I call you stupid, I don't mean any thing — ^I
don't mean that I despise you.'Copde, you shall take notice of
me, Hareton — you are my cousin and you shall own me. "
** I shall have naught to do wi'you, and your mucky prida,
and your damned, mocking tiicks ! " he answered.''I'll go to
hell, body and soul, befisre ~i look side wayi^ after you again!
«ide out oft'gait, now; this minute 1 "
Catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat, chew-
ing her lip, and endeavoring, by humming an eccentric l;une, to
conceal a growing tendency to sob.
" You should be friends wiUi your cousin, Mrl Hareton, " I
interrupted,'< since she repents of her sauciness ! it would do
you a great deal of good— ^t would make you another man, to
nave her for a companion. " "'
'* A companion 1 " he cried ;''when she hates me, and does
not think me fit to vripeher shoon ! Nay, if it made me a king,
I'd not be scornqd for seeking her good will any more* "
" It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me ! " wept
Cathy, no longer disguising her trouble^'^ You hate* me as
much as Mr. Hcathclifl* does, and more. "
# U T ^ E R~I N O if t I e H T 9. 269
" You-re a damned liar, " began Earhshaw; " why Have I
made bim angry by taking your part, then, a hundred times ? and
that, when you. sneered atj and despised nie, and—. Go on
pluguing me, and 1*11 step in yonder, and say you woiried me
outofthe kitchdnl "
** I didn't know you took my part, " she aiisw^red, drying her
eyes ; " and I was miserable and bitter at every body ; but, now
I thank you, and beg you to forgive me ; what can I do besides? "
She returned to'the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.
'He* blackened,'and scowled like a thuifd^r-Qloud, and kept his
fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground.
Catherine, by instinct, must have divined it was obdurate^
perversity, and not dislike, that prompted this dogged conduct;
for, after remaining an instailt, undecided, she stooped, and im-
pressed on bis cheek a eentle kisd. The little rogue -thought I
had not seen her,^ and, drawing back, she took her former sta-
tBOTT by the window, quite demurely: I shook my head reprov-
ffigly ; and then she blushed, and whispered,
•* Well, what should I have done, Ellen ?\ He wouldn't shake
hands, and he wouldn't look. -■ I must show him some way that
I like him — that I want to be friends. "
WbefAier-the kiss convinced Hareton, I can not tell; he was
veiy carefol, for some minutes, that hi» ^ce should not be seen ;
and when he did raise it, he was sadly puzssled where to turn
his eyes.
Catherine employed hferself in wrapping a handsome book
neatly in white paper ; and having tied it with a bit of ribbon,
and addressed it to ** Mr. Hareton Eamshaw, " she desired me
to be her embassadress, and convey the present to its destined
recipient.
" And tell him, if he'll take it, I'll come and teach him to
read it right,^'she said, " and, if he refuse it, Til go up stairs,
and never > tea8e hitn again. "
'I carried it, and repeated the message, anxiously watched by
my employer. Hareton would not open his fingera, so I laid it
On bis^knee. He did not strike it off, either. I returned to my
v^ork : Catherine leaned her head and arms on the table, till she
heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed ; then she
stole away, and quietly seated herself beside her cousin, fie
trembled, and his face glowed*— all hi§ rudeness and all his
surly harshness had deserted hitn — ^he could not summon cour-
age, at first, to utter a syllable, in reply to her questioning look,
and her mumraxed petition,
270 WUTUEHINO H£I«HTlb
" Say youjTorgive ipe,'Hareton, do! You c & n make lae so
happy» by speaking that little word. " He muttered something*
" And you'll be my fiiend ] " added Catherine^interrogatiTely.
''Nay ! you'll be ashamed of me e^ery day of your life ; mid
the more, the more you kndw me, and I can not abide it, "
'* So you won't be my fiiend V ahe said, amiliBg as sweet as
honey, and creeping close up.
I overheard no rarther distinguishaj^le talk ; but on looking
round again, I perceived two suck radiant countenances bent
over the page of the accepted book, that I did not doubt the
treaty had been ratified on both jsidejs, and the eoemiea were
thenceforth sworn allies.. -
The work they studied was fuU of costly pictures ; and those
and their position had charm enough to keep them unmoved, till
Joseph came home. He, poor man, was peri^ctly aghast at the
spectacle of Catherine seated on the same b^ach with Haretcm
Eamshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder y and confounded
at his favorite's endurance of h^ proximity. It affected him
too deeply to allow an observation on. the subject that night.
His emotion was only revealed by the imknense sighs he drew,
as he solemnly spread hb large Bible on ^q table, and. overlaid
it with dirty bank-notes from his pocketrbook, the- produce of
the day's transactions. At length he summoned Hai'^ton.
** Tak* these in tub t'maister, lad, " he said, ** un bide theiire ;
aw's gang up tub my awn rahm. This hoile's norther mensM
nor seemly mr us — we mun side aht, and seearcb another I "
" Come, Catherine, " I said, " we must * side out,'tpo — ^I've
done nay ironing, are you ready to go? "
" It is not eight o'clock ! " she answered, rising unwillingly.
** Hareton, I'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and I'll
bring you some more to-morrow. "
''Ony books ut yah leave, aw shall tak'intuk th'hahse, "
said Joseph, " un'it'uU be mitch if yah find'em agean ; soa,
yah muh plase yourseln 1 "
Cathy direatened that his library should pay for hers ; and,-
smiling as she passed Hareton, went singing upHstairs, lighter
of beait, I venture to say, than ever she had been under that
roof; except, perhaps, during her earliest visits to Linton.
The intimacy^ thus commenced, grew rapidly ; though it en-
countered temporary interruptions. Eamshaw was pot to be
civilized with a wish; and my young lady was no philosopher,
and no paragcm of patience ; Init both their minds tending to
the same point—- one loving and desiring to e^eem; and the
WUTHE & ING HEIGHTK 871
Other loving and desiring to be esteemed^-^they contrived, in
the end, to reach it.
You dee, Mr. Lockwood, it waa easy enough to win Mrs;
Hei^hcliff's heart; but -now, I'm glad you did not try^— the
crown of ail my wishes will be the union of those two *, I shdl
envy no one on their wedding^day-^-there won't be a happier
woman than myself in England !
CHAPTER XXXm.
On the morrow of that Monday, Eamshaw being still unable
to follow his ordinary employments, and, therefore, remaining
about the house, I speedily found it would be impracticable to
iMtatn my charge beside me, as heretofore.
She got down stairs before me, and out into the garden;
where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work ;
and when I went to bid them come to breakfast, I saw she had
persuaded him to clei^ a large space of ground from currant
and goosebetry bushes, and £ey were busy planning together
an importation of plants from the Grange.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished
in a brief-half hour; the black currant trees, were the apple of
Joseph's eye, and she had just fixed her choice of a flower bed
HI'the midst of them 1
" There ! That will be all shown to the master, " I exclaimed,
** the minute it is discovered. And what excuse have you to offer
for taking such liberties with the garden 1 We shall have a
fine explosion on the head of it : see if we don't ! Mr. Hare-
ton, I wonder you should have no more wit than to go and
make that mess at her bidding!'^
'*I'd foigetten they wA'e Joseph's, " answered Eamshaw,
rather puzzlsd, " but I'll tell;him^ I did it. "
We always ate our meals with Mr, Heatbcliff. I held the
mistress's post in making tea. and carving ; so I was indispensa-
ble at table. Catherine usually sat by me^ but to-day she
stole nearer to Hareton, and I presently saw she would have no
more discretion in her friendship than she had in her hostility.
** Now, mind you don't t & lk with and noti < ie your cousin too
much, " were my whispered instructions as we entered the
xioom;''It will certainly annoy Mr. Heatbcliff, and he'll be
mad at yon both, "
273 WUTHESING H'EIGETK
'* I'm not gopng to/'she answered^
The minute fSer, she had sidled to him, and was atiddng
primitMea in his plate of porridge.'He dared not speak to her,
there ; he dared hardly look ; and yet she went on teasing, dlj he
twice was on die point of being provoked to laugh ; and I fiownr
ed, and dien she glanced toward the master, whose mind was
occupied on other subjects than his company, as his eenntanfce
evinced, and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him
with deep gravity. Afterward she turned, innd recommenced
her nonsense ; at last Hareton uttered a smothered laugh.
Mr. Heatbcliff started ; his eyes rapidly surveyed our faces.
Catherine met it with her accustomed look of nervousness, and
yet defiance, which he abhorred.
" It is well yoa are out of my reach; " he ezdaimed. ** What
fiend possesses yoa to staie back at me, continually, with those
infernal eyes t Down with them ! and don't remind me of your
existence again. I thought I had cured yoa of laughing ! "
'* It was me, " muttered Hareton.
'i What do yoa say 1 " demanded the master.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did noit repeat the confess
sion. Mr. Heatheliff loolred at him a bit, and then silendy re^
sumed his breakfast, and his interrupted musing.
We had nearly finished, and the two young people prudently
shifted wider -asunder, so I anticipated no farther distnrbanoe
during that sitting ; when Joseph appeared at the door, reveal-
ing by his quivering lip and fiinous eyes, that the oatrage coi»-
mitted on his precious shrubs vras detected.
He must have seen Cathy and her cousin about the spot^
before be examined it, for while his jaws worked like those of a
cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech, difficult to undm^
stand, he began :
« Aw mun hev my wage, and aw mun goa ! Aw hed aimed
tub dee, wheare aw'd san^ fur sixty year ; un'aw tbowt a w'd
lug my books up intuh X* garret, un'all my bits nh stuflT, an'they
sud hev t'kitchen tuh theirseln ; for t'sake uh quietness. It
vnir hard tuh gie up my awn heart^un, but aw tbowt aw could
do that 1 But, nah, shoe's taan my garden firongh roe, un'by
th'heart ! ^laister, aw can not stand it ! Yah muh bend tuh
th'yoak, an ye will. Aw noan used to't and an ow'd man
doesn't sooin get used tuh new bardiens— aw'd rayther am my
bite an'my sup wi'a hammer in di'road ! "
" Now, now, idiot! " interrupted Heatfadiff, " cut it short!-
What's your grievance 1 I'll interfere in no quands bo t w ee a
W U T H E B I N G'b'fi I 6 H t 9. 278
you and Ncilly. She may tfantft yduibtb the ooal-hole for any
thing I care. "
" It's Doati NeByJ " answered Joseph. *♦ Aw sudn't shift fur
Kelly. Nasty, ill-aawt as shoo is. Thank God I shoo can not
stale t'sowl uh lu^^dy } Shoo ?rvrer niver soa handsome, bud
whet a body mild look at her'baht wmking. It's yon flaysome,
graceless quean, ut'js witched ahr lad; wi'her bold een, un her
forcard ways— till. Nay ! I fair brusts my heart ! He's for-
getten all aw done for him, un made on him, un'goan un'riven
up a whole row ut t* gratideat currant trees, i't* garden ! " and
here he ^lamented outright, unmanned by a sense of his bitter
injuries, and £amshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.
• " la- the fool drunk V^ asked Mr. Heathcliff; « Hai'eton is it
you he's finding fault with 1 "
" Iv'e pulled up two or three bushes, " replied the young
man, " but I'jn going to set'em again. "
** And why have you pulled them- up 1 " said the master,
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
" We wanted to plant some flowers there, " she'cri6d.'* I'm
the only peraon to blame, for I wished 4nm to do it. "
" And who the deidl gave youle^ive to touch a stick about
the place 1 " demanded her father*in-law, much surprised.
" And who ordered you to obey her? " he added, taming to
Hareton. The latter was speechless, his cousin replied —
" You shouldn't grudge ^ fow yards of earth for me to orna-
ment, when you hav & takmi all my land ! "
" Your land, insolent, slut 1 you never had any ! " said Heath*
cliff.
" And my money, " she continued, returning his angry glare,
and, meantime, biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her
breakfast.. •
'* Silence 1 " he exclaimed. " Get done, and begone ! "
" And Haretbn*s land and his money, " pursued the reckles»
thing. *'Hareton and. I are frieiids now ; and I shall tell him
all about you! "
The master seemed confounded a moment, iie grew pale,
and rose up, eyeing her all the while with an expression of
mortal hate,
" If you strike me, HaretOn will strike you ! " she said, ** so
you may as well sit down; "
" If Hareton does not turn you out of the room 111 strike
him to hell, " thundered Heathdtfr, " Damnable witch! dare
yott pretend to rouse him against me ? Off with her ! Do you
274 WUTHfiRINO HSIG-nT|i.
hear t Fling her xato the kitcheit! Til kill her» Ellen Dean,
if yoa let her come into my sight again !''
Hareton tried, ander bis bieatb, to persuade her to go»
" Drag her away ! " he cried savagely.''Atfe yoa staying^ to
talk V* And he approa;cbed to execute hia own command. .
" He'll not obey you, wicked man, any morel " said Csth-
erine,'* and he'll soon detest you as much as I do ! "
*'Wisht ! wisht! " muttered the jroang man repniachlblly.
" I will not hear you speak so to hixxL Ho^ve done V*
*'But you won't let mm strike mei " she cried.'
'^Come then ! " he whispered earnestly.
It waa too late— Heathcliff had caught hold of her.
^* Now you go !'^ he said to Eamshaw. " Accutsdd witch !
this time she h^ provoked me when I could not bear it; and
I'll make her repent it fbr ever I "
He had his hand in her hair ; Hareton attempted to release
the locks, entreating him not to hurt her, that once. I{is black
eyes flashed, he seemed ready to tear Catherine in pieces, and
I was just vrorked up to risk going to the rescue, wh^i, of a
sudden, his fing^s relaxed, he shifted his grasp from her head,
to her arm^ and gazed intently in her face. Then he drew his
hand over bis eyes, etood a moment to collect himself, appa-^
rently, and turning to Catherine, said, with assumed calmness,
" You must learn to avoid puttkig me in a passion, or I shall
really murder you some time! go wilih Mrs. Dean, and keep
with her, and confine your iissolence to her ecffs. As to Hare«
ton Eamshaw, if I see lum listen to yoiv IH send him seekhig
his bread where he can get it [ your love will make him ao
outcast and a beggar. Nelly, take her; and leave me, all of
you ! Leave me I "'
I led my young lady out ; she was too glad of her escape
to resist ; the other foUowed, and Mr. HeathcHff had the room
to himself till dinner.'
I had counseled Catharine to get hers up-stairs; but as soon
as he perceived her vacant seat, he sent me to call her. He
spoke to none of lis, ate very little, and went out directly after-
Ward, intimating that he should not return before evening.
The two new friends established themselves in the house
during his absence, where I heard Hareton sternly chedk his
cousin, on her offering a revelation of ber father4n-law^s con-
duct to his & ther. He arid he wonld not suffer ^ word to be
uttered to hint in has disparagement ; if he were the devil, it
did not signify, be would stand by him; and be had ntber
WUTHSltNO HEIGHT ST. 875
M'I I W ■^■IIB»I1B I I II > I .1 11 ■ I II I !■■ .1.-.. — — — ^
9hp ^woald abuse huoBeUf b» she used to, than begin on Bir.
HeathcUff.
Catherine was waxing cross at this j but he found means le
make her hold her tongue* bj asking how she would like kim
to speak ill of her father! and then she comprehended that
Eamshaw took the^master's reputation home to himself: and
was attached by ties stronger than reason could break-— chains^
fimed by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to loosen.
She showed a good heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both com-
plaints and expressions of antipathy concerning Heathdiff^
and confessed to me her sorrow that she had mideavored to
raise a bad spirit between h\m and Hareton-^indeed, I do not
believe she has ever breathed a syllable, in the latter's hearing,
against her oppressor sinca
When diis slight disagreement, was over, they were thick
again, and ils busy as possible in their several occupations of
pupil and teachen I came in to sit with them, alter I had
done my work, and I felt so soothed and comforted to watch
tbem, that I did not notice how time |fot on. You know they
both appeared, in a measure, my children : I had long been
proud of one, and now I was sure the other would be a source
of equal s^isfaction. His honest, warm, and intelligent nature
shook off rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degi-adation in
which it hadbeen bred ; and Catherine's sincere commendations
acted as a spar to his industry^ His brightening mind brightened
his features, and added spirit and nobiUty to their aspect. I
could hardly fancy it the same individual I bad beheld on the
day I discovered my little lady at Wuthering Height0, after her
expedition to the Crags.
. While I admired, and they labored^ dusk drew on, and with
it returned the master. He came upon tis quite unexpectedly,
entering by the front way, and had a flill view of the whole
three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at him.
** Well, " I reflected, " there was never a pleasanter, or more
harmless sight i and it will be a burning shame to scold them.'*
The red firelight glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed
their & ces, animated with the eager interest of children; for
though he was twenty-three, and she eighteen, each had so
much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor
evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
They Med their eyes together to encounter Mr. Hea & cliff—
perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely
similar, and they are those of Catherine Eamshaw. The
^79 WUTHERINO HEXOHT0.
pg0B0ot Catherine has no other likeness to her except a breadth
of forehead and a certain arch of the nostril, that makes fa^f
appeaj: rather haughty, whether she will or not With Hare*
ton the resemblaiice is carried fiirther, it is singular at all ti moo ■ ■■
then it was particnlarly striking ; because his senses were aleit
and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted actiritj.
I supposed this resemblance disarmed Mr. HeathclifF.* lie
walked to the hearth in trident agitadoii, but it quickly sab*
sided as he looked at the young man*; or, 1 should say, altered
its character, for it was there yet. ^'
He took the book fiY > m his hand, and glanced tA the opeki
page, then returned it without any observation ; iaerely signing
C^atherine away. Her companion lingered very little behind
her, and I was about to depart also, but he. bid me sit stiH.
''It is a poor conclusion, is it not V* he obserred, having
brooded a while on the sceoe he had just witnessed. " An ab-
surd termination to my violent exertions] I get leven and
mattocks to demolish tne two houses, and train myself to-be
capable of working like Hercules, and when every thing is
ready and in my power, I find the will to hfb a slate off either
roof has vanished t My old enemies have not beaten me— -now
would be the precise time to revenge myself on their repre-
sentatives. I could do it, -and none could hinder me ; but
where is the use ? I don't care for striking—*! can't take the
trouble to raise my hand ! That sounds as if I had been la-
boring the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity.
It is far from being the case. I have lost the faculty of enjoying^
their destruction, and I am too idle to destroy for nothing.'
" Nelly, there is a strange change approaching ; I'm in its
shadow at present I take so little interest in my daily life,
that I hardly remember to eat and drink. Those twOj who
have left the room, are the only objects which retain a distinct
material appearance to me; and that appearance causes me
Sain, amounting to agony. About her I won't speak, and I
on't desire to think ; out J earnestly wish she were invisible —
her presence invokes only maddening sensations. He moves
me differently ; and yet if I could do it without seeming insane,
I'd never see him again 1 You'll perhaps think me rather in-
clined to become so, " he added, making an effort to smile, **Tf
I try to describe the thousand fi > rm8 of past associations and
ideas he awakens or embodies. But you'll not talk of what I
tell you, and my mind is so eternally secluded in itself, it ia
tempting at last to turn it out to another.
W V 7 « £ It 1 X G H Kl fi n T R V71
« < < Fiv^ niiHutiM a^ Haretoi^ a^ised a peTsondficattb^ of my
Sroutb, not a human being*. I felt to him in Biaeh a yariety of
ways, that it would have, been impossible to have accosted him
nuionally.
" In tne first place, his startling likeness to Catherine eon*
nected him fearfiilly ymth her, . That, however, which you- may
suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination is actually
the least ; ^r what is not oonneoted with her to me 1 and what
4oes not recall her ? I can not look down to this floor but her
features are shaped on the flags ! In eveiy cloud, in every
tree— filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every
object by day— 4 ao) surirounded with her image ! The most
ordinary faces of men and womeii^-my own features mock me
with a resemblance. , The ^tire world is a dreadful ooUectionr
of memoranda that she did exist, and that I have lost her 1
\** Well, Hareton's aspect was the ghost of my immortal love,
qf myswild endeavors- to. hold my right; my degradation, my
pride, my happiness^ and^ my anguish. But it is frenzy to re«
peat these thoughts to you ; only it will let 7 ou know why, with
a reluctance to be always alone, his society is no benefit, rather
an aggravation of the constant torment I suffer— and it partly
contributes to render me regardless how he and his, cousin go
on together. I can give them no attention any more.
" But what do you mean by a change, Mr. HeathcUff 1 " I
said, alarmed at his manner, thoxigh he was neither in danger
of losing his senses nor dying ; according to my judgment,, he
was quite strong and -healthy-; and as to his reason, fi'om child-
hood he had a delight in dwelling on dark things, and enter-
taining odd fancies : he might haye had a monomania on the
subject of his departed idol ; but on every other point his wits
were as sound as mine.
'* I shall not know that till it comes/'he said, .*'I'm only half
conscious of it noyv. " . .
" You have no feeling of illness, have you V* I asked,
.''No, Nelly, I have not*^*'he answered.
** Then, you are not afraid of death V I pursued,
" Afraid 1 No ! " he replied. . *'t have neither a fear, nor a
presentiment, nor a hope of death. Why should I ] With my
^ard constitution, and temperate mode of living, and unperilous
occupations, I ought to, and probably «A.a/2 remain above ground,
till thei-e is scarcely a black hair on my head. And yet I can
not continue in ,this condition ! I^ have to. remind myself to
l^reathe— almost to remind, my heart to beat ! And it is like
278 WCTHK & ING U^lQUtti,
bending back a tfiff spring-^ is by compulsion Ifast I do tbe
slightest act, netpfompted by one diougbt: and b]^ oompukRoa
that I notice any thing alive or dead, whiob ijb Hot associated
with one universal idea. I have. a single wish, and my whole
bmog and. faculties am yearning to attain it. They have
yearned toward it so long and so unway^ngly, that I'm con-
vinced it wiil be reacbed— ^nd soon — ^because it has devoured
my existence. I am swaBowed in the anticipation of its fblUll-
ment My confiMsions have not relieved m^-^but, they may
account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humor
which I show. Oh, God! It's a teng fight, I wish it were over! "
He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to
himself, till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph did»
that conscience had turned his heart to an eartihly hell. I yf < m*
dered greatly hoW^ it would end.
Though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind,
Qven by looks, it was his habitual mood, I had no doubt : he
asserted it himself— but not a S051I, firom his general bearing,
would have conjectured the fact. You did not, wheii you saw
him, Mr. Lockwood — -and at the period of which I speak he
was just the same as then, only fonder Of continued solitude,
and pwliaps still more laeonie in company.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
For some days after that evening Mr. HeathclHF shunned
meeting us at meals; yet he would not consent formally to
exclude Hareton and Cathy. He had an aversion to vielding
so completely to bis feefings, choosing, rather, to absent himself ;
and eating once in twenty-ifour hours seemed sufficient suste-
nance for him.
One night, after the fiimily were 11^ bed, 1 heard him f^ down
stairs, and out at the front door : I did not hear him re-enter,
and in the morning'I found he was stfll awav. We were in
April then, the weather was sweet and warm, the grass as green
as showers and sun could make it, and the two dwarf apple
trees near the southern wall in fhll bloom.
After breakfast, Catherine insisted on my biinging a chair,
and sitting, with my worfc, under the fir-trees at the end bf the
houses and she beguiled Hareton, who had recovered from hit
WUTHEKINO HEJCinTflL 379
accident, to dig and orraoge hmr Httle garden, whieb waa shifted
to that corner by the influence of Joseph's coniplahits*
I was ooibfortably revelling in the spring fragrance around,
and the beautiful sofi blue overhead, when my young lady, who
had run. down near the gate, to procure some primrose roots
ibr a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that
Mr« HeathcHff was coming in.
" ^ And he opoke to me, " she added with a perplexed look.
" What did he say Y'asked Hareton.
.''He told me to begone as fiist aal could, " she answered.
** But he looked so difietent from his usual look that I stopped^
a moment to stare at him. "
" Howl " be inquired.
V Why, almost bright and eheerful — no, almost nothing —
very mmh excited, and wild and fflad ! " , she replied.
" 2*(ight- walking amoses him, & en, " J remarked, affecting a
careless manner ; in reaH^ as surprised as she was, and anxious
to ascertain the truth of her statement, fOr to see the master
looking glad would liot be an evei*y-day spectacle, I framed an
jexcuse to go in^ .
Heathdiff stood at the open door ; be was pale, and he trem-
bled ; yet, certainly, he had a strange jbyful. glitter in his eyes,
that altered the aspect of his whole face. / /
" Will you have some breakfast ? " I said,''You must be
hungry, rambling about all night ! "
" I wanted to discover Where he bad b^n ; but I did not like
to ask directly.
" No, I'm not hungry, " be answered, averting his head,'and
speaking rather oontemptuovisly, as if he guessed I was trying
to divine the occasion of his good humor.
'I felt perplexed-*! didn't know whether it were not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
*'I don't think it right to wander out of doors, " I observed,
'* instead of being in bed : it is not wise, at any rate, |hb moist
season. I dare say you'll oatch a bad cold, or a f€tver > -^yon
have something the Boatter with you now I "
" Nothing but what I can bear, " he replied, " and with the
greatest pleasure, provided you'll leave me & lone-^get in, and
don't annoy me. "
I obeyed ; and^in passing,.! saw he breath^ as fast as a cat.
" Yes! " I reflected to myself, " we shall have a fit of ittnefls.
I can not conceive what he has been doing ! "
That BOOD, he s|kt down to dinner with us, and received a
380'WUTHEftINO HCiaHrS;
heaped-np plate itom my hands, as if h« intended to m$k^,
amends for pretions fastmg.
** I've neither cold nor fever, NeUy, " he remarked, in a & osion
to my morning's speech. " And I'm vesdy to do jvta^te to the
food yon give me. " •
He took hia knife and fork, and was going to commence
eating, when the inclination appeared to become suddenly ex-
tinct. He laid them on the table, looked eagerly toward the
window, then rose and went out. We saw him walkings to ahd
fro, in the garden, while we concluded our meal ; and £am-
shaw said he'd go and ask why he would not dine ; he thought
we had gricnred him some way.
" Well, is he coming V* cried Catherine, when he returned.
** Nay, " he answeced^ ** but he's not angry ; he seemed rsjre
and pleased indeed ; only I made him impatient by speaking
to him twice ;- and then he bid* me be off to you ; he wondered
how I oottld want the company of any body else. "
I set his plate to keep warm onthe fender ; and after an hour
or two he re-etitered, when the room was clear ; in no degree
calmer — the same unnatural — ^it was unnatural— appearance of
joy under his black brows ; the same bloodless hue ; and his
teeth visible now and then in a kind of smile ; his frame shiver*
ing. not as one shivers with -chill or weakness, but as a tight-
stretched cord vibrates— a Strong thriHing rather than trem-
bling.
" I will ask what is the matter, " I thought, ♦* or who should 1 "
And I exclaimed — " Have you heard any good news, Mr.'
Heatlicliff? Yon look uncommonly animated. "
« < Where should good news come from to me V* he said.
** I'm animated with hunger ; and, seemingly, I must not eat. "
" Your dinner is here, " I returned ; " why won't you get it 1 "
" I don't want it now, " he muttered hastily. •• I'll wait till
supper. And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn
Hareton and the other away from me. I wish to be troubled
by nobody-i-I wish to have this place to myself. "
" Is there some new reason for this banishment 1 " I inquired.
" Tell me why you are so queer, Mr. Heathdliff 1 Where were
you last night % I'm not putting the question tiirough idle cu-
riosity, but " —
" You are putting the question through very idle curiosity, "
he interrupted, with a laugh.''Yet I'll answer it. Last night
I was on the threshold of hell. To-day I am within sight of my
*•'-a— I have my eves on it— hardly three feet to sever me !
HrUTU EKING BBIOIITfl; S81
Aodiiiow you'd better go. You'll neither see* nor hear any
thing to frighten you, if you refrain from prying.**
Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I departed,
more perplexed than ever. He did not quit the house again
that aAemoon, and no one intruded on his solitude till, at eight
o\;loek, I deemed it proper, though unsummoned^ to carry a
candle, afid his supper to him.
He was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice, but not
looking out i his face was turned to the interior gloom. The
fire* had smoldered to ashes; the room was filled with the damp,
mild air of the cloudy evening ; and so still, that not only the
munnur of the beck dowti Gimmerton was distinguishable, but
its ripples, and its gurgling over t^e pebbles, or through the
large stones which it could not cover.
I uttered an ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal
grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one after an!''
other, till I caine to his.
'* Must I close this V* I aaked, iti order to rouse him, for he
would not stir.
The light flashed on hw features, as I spoke. Oh, Mr. Lock-
wood, I can not express what a terrible start I got, by the mo-
mentary view ! Those deep black eyes ! That smile, and ghast-
ly paleness ! It appeared to me, not Mr. Heathcliff, but a goblin ;
and,4n my terror, I let the candle bend toward the wall, and it
left me in darkness. v
" Yes, close it, " he replied, in his familiar voice. ** There,
that is pure awkwardness ! Why did you hold the candle hori-
ssontally? Be quick, and bring another. "
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Joseph—
«« The master wishes yon to take him a light, and rekindle the
fire. " For I dare not go in myself again just then, -
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went ; but he
brought it back immediately, ^^ith the supper tray in his other
hand, explaining that Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed, and he
wanted nothing to eat till morning.
We heard him mount the stairs directly ; he did not proceed
to his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the paneled
bed — ^its window, as I mentioned before, is Wide- enough for
Miy body to get through, and it struck me that he plotted an-
other midnight excursion, which he had ratiier we had no sus*
picion of.
• " Is he -a ghoul, or a vampire 1 " I mused. I had read of
such hideous, incarnate demons. And then, I set myself to re^
382 WVTHERING HEIGHT i*
fleet how I had tended him hi infancy; jand watched him grow
to youth ; and foHowed him ahnost through hm whole course ;
and what nonsense it was to yield to diaC sense of horror.
** But, where did he come from, the little dark things harbor*
ed by a good man to his bane? " muttered superstition, as I
dozed into onconsciousness. And I began, half dreaming, to
weaiy myself with imagining some fit parentage for him ; and
repeating my waking meditations, I tracked his existence orer
again, with grim yariationa; at last, picturing his death and
funeral; of which, all I can rememb^ is, being exceedingly
vexed at having the task of ^ctating an inscription for his monu*
ment, and consulting the sexton about it ; and, as he had no
surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to
content ourselves with the single word, " HeathdiflT. " That
came true-— we were. If you enter the kirkyard, you'll read on
his headstone only that, and the date of his death. Pawn re*
stored me to common sense. I rose, and went into the garden,
as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any foot-marks
under his window. There were none.
''He has staid at home, " I thought,''and he'll be all right
to-day! "
I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my usual
custom, but told Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the
master came down, for he lay late. They preferred taking it
out of doors, under the trees, and I set a littJe table to aceom*
modate them.
On my re-entrance, I found Mr. Heathcliff below* He and
Joseph were conversing about some farming, business; he gave
clear, minute directions concerning the matter disoossed, but
he spoke rapidly, and turned his head continually aside, and
had the same excited expression, even more exaggerated.
When Joseph quitted the room, he took his seat in the place
he generally chose, and I put a beisih of coflfee before him. He
drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked
at the opposite wall, as I suppjosed, surveying one particular
portion, up and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with
such eager interest, that he stopped breathing, during half a
minute together,
'* Come, now,** I exclaimed, pushing some bread against his
hand. *'Eat and drink that while it is hot It has been wait*
ing near an hour. "
He didn't notice me, and yet he smiled. I*d rather have
seen him gnash his teeth than smile so.
WUTH£RIN« HEIGHTS. S83
" Mr. Hecttbcliff! master ! " I cried.'< Oon% for God'a sake,
fl & are as if yoa saw aq unearthly vision. "
''Don't, for God's sake, shout so bud, " ha repHed. " Turn
round, »id tell me, are yf0 by ourselves V*
" Of course, " was my answer, " of course we are V*
Still I involUBtarily obfieyed him, as if I were not quite sure.
With a sweep of his hand, he cleared a racant space in front
among the break & st things, and leamed forward to gaze more
at bis ease.
. iKow I perceived he Was not looking at the wall, for wben I
itegaided bipi alone^ it seeined, exactly^ that he gazed at some-
thing within two yards distance^ And, whatever it was, it
communicated, apparently^ both pleasure and pain, in exquisite
extremes i at least the anguished yet raptured expression of his
countenance suggested that idea.
The fancied object was not fixed either ; his eyes puraucd it
with unweaiied vigilance, and, even in speaking to me, were
never weaned away.
X vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence firom food.
If he stirred to touch any thing m compliance with my entreaties
— if he stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread — bis fingers
clenched before they rejached it, and remained on the table, for-
getful of their aim.
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed at-
tention firom its engrossing speculation, till he grew irrkable and
got up, asking why I would not allow him to have his own time
in taking his meals 1 and saying that on the next occasion I
needn't wait — I might set the things down and go. Having
uttered tliese words, he left.the house, slowly sauntered down
the garden path, and disappeared through the gate;
The hours crept anxiously by : another evening cam#. I did
not retire to rest till late, and when I did I could not sleep. He
returned after midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut him-
self into the room beneath. I listened and tossed about, and
finally dressed and descended. It was too irksome to lie up
there, harassing ray brain with a hundred idle misgivingSi
I distinguished Mr. Heathcliff's step, restlessly nieasuiing the
floor ; and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration,
resembling a groan. He muttered detached words also; the
only one I could catch was the name of Catherine, coupled
with some wild teriti o£ endearment or suffering, and spoken as
one woukl speak to a person prese]^r-4ow and eamesti and
wrung from the depth of his soul. .
284 WUTHEEING HBI0HT8;
I bad DOt courage to walk straight into the apartment ; bat I
desired to divert bim from bis TOvery, and therefore fell fbnl of
the kitchen fire ; stirred it and began to scrape the cinders. It
drew bim forth sooner than I expected. He opened die door
immediately, and sai^—
** Nelly, come bere^-is it morning 1 Ooine in with your lig^ "
*'It is striking fixir/'I answered ;'* you want a candle to
take upi^stairs— yon nught have lighted one at this fire. "
" No, I don't wish to go up-stairs, " he said. " Come in, and
kindle me a fire, and do any tbtng there is to do about the room. "
** 1 most blow the coais red first, before I can cany any, " I
replied, getting a chair and the bellows.
lie roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching dis-
traction, his heavy sighs succeeding eaeh other so thick as to
leave no space for common breathing between.
" When day breaks, I'll send for Green, " he said ; ** I wish to
make some legal inquiries of bim, while I can bestow a thought
on those matters, and while I can act calmly. I have not
written my will yet, and how to leave my property I can not
determine 1 I vnsh I could annihilate it from the frice of the
earth. "
'* I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff, " I interposed. " Let
your will be a while— you'll be spared to repent of your many in«
justices yet i I never expected that your nerves would be dis-
ordered-*-they aro, at present, marvelously so, however; and'
almost entirely through your own fiiult. The. way you've passed
these three last days might knock up a Titan. Do take some
food and some repose. You need only look at yourself in a
glass to see how you require both. Your cheeks are hollow
and your eyes bloodshot, like a person starving with hunger and
going blind with loss of sleep. "
" It is not my fault, that I can not oat or rest, " he replied.
" I assure you it is through no settled designs. I'll do both as
soon as I possibly can. But you might as well bid a man
struggling in the water, rest within arms-length of the shore ! I
must reach it first, and then I'll rest. Well, never mind Mr.
Green ; as to repenting of my injustices, I've done no injustice,
and I repent of nothing. I'm too happy, and yet I'm not happy
enough. My soul's bliss kills my body, but does not satisfy it-
self. "
** Happy, master 1 " I cried. < * Sbrange happiness ! If you
would hear me without being angry, I might otter some advke
that would make you happier. "
WUTHIMlINa. HBI6HT0.
" What is that T he asked. " Give it. "
''You are aware, Mr. Heathclifi^ " I said,''that from the time .
Tou were thirteen years old, yoQ have Hved a selfish, unchrist;
MR life : and probably hardly had a Bible in your hands, during
all that period. You must have forgotten the contents of the
booJcy and you may not have space to search it now. Could it
be hurtful to send for some cme-rsome minister, of any denomi-
nation, it does not matter which, to explain it, and show you
how very far you have erred from its precepts, and how unfit
you will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place befoi-e
you diel "
** I'm rather obliged than angry, ^dly, " he said, " for you re-
mind me of the manner that I desire to be buried in. It is to
be carried to the churchyard in the evening. You and Hareton
may, if you please, accompsmy me — and mind, particularly, to
notice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two
coffins ! No minister need come; nor need any thing be said
over me. I tell you, I have nearly attained my heaven ; and
that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me ! "
" And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and
died by that means, and they refused to bury you in the pre-
cincts of the kirk ] " I said, shocked at his godless indrSerence.
" How would you like it 1 "
" They won't do that,''he replied, " if they did, you must
have me removed secretly; and if you neglect it, you shall
prove, practically, that the dead are not annihilated ! " ,
As soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring,
he retired to his den, and I breathed freer. But in the after-
noon, while Joseph and Hareton were at their work, he came
into the kitchen again, and, \ifrith a wild look, bid me come and
sit in the house-^he wanted somebody with him.
I declined, telling him plainly that his strange talk and man-
ner frightened me, and I had neither the nerve nor the will to
bo his companion alone. < .
" I believe you think me a fiend ! " he said, with his dismal
laugh, " something too horrible to live under a decent roof ! "
Then turning to Catherine, who was there, and who drew
behind me at his approach, he added, half sneeringly.
•* Will you come, chuck 1 " I'll not hurt you. No ! to you,
I've made myself worse than the devil. Well, there is one who
won't shrink from my company ! By God ! she's relentless.
Oh, damn it ! It's unutterably too much fcur flesh and blood to
bear, eyen mine. "
*2B6 WUTfi SRI NO nEI«BTA
He Bolicited the society of no one more. At dusk he weot
into his lumber. Through the whole night, and tkr into t^e
morning, we heard htm groaning and roumdrinff to himself
Hareton was anxions to enter, but I bid him fetch Mr. Kenneth,
and he should go in and see him.
When he came, and I requested admittance and tried to open
the door, I found it locked ; and Hea'thcliff bid us be damned.
He was better, and would be left alone | so the doctor went
away.
The following evening was very wet, indeed it poured down
till day-dawn; and, as I took my morning walk round the
house, I ob8ei*Ted the master's window swinpng open, and the
rain driving straight in.
** He can not be in bed,''I thought, " lliose showers would
drench him through ! He must be either up or out. But I'll
make no more a < k > , I'll go boldly, and look r'
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I
ran to unclose the panels, for the'chamber was vacant— Kiuickly
J)U8hing them aside, I peeped in. Mr. Heathcliff was there— ^
aid on his back. His eyes met mine, so keen ai > d fierce that I
started ; and then he seemed to smile.
I could not think him dead-«^4 > ut his face and throat were
washed with rain ; the bed-clothes dripped, and he was per-
fectly still. The lattice, flapping to and fr6, had grazed one
hand that rested on the sill— no blood trickled frotti the broken
skin, and when I put my fingers to it I could doubt no more —
he was dead and stark !
I hasped the window ; I combed his long, black hair from
his fbr^ead ; I tried to close his eyes— to extinguish, if pos-
sible, that frightful, Hfe-Hke exultation, before any one elsd
beheld it. They would not shut-^they seemed to sneer at my
attempts, and his parted lips and sharp, white teeth sneered too !
Taken with another fit c^ cowardice, I cried out for Joseph.
Joseph shuffled up, and made a noise, but resolutely refused to
meddle with him.
" TV divil's hamed off his soul, " he cried, " and he muh hev
his carcass intuh t'bargin, for ow*t aw care ! Ech ! what a
wicked un he looks, grinning at death ! " and the old sinner
grinned in mockery.
I thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed; but
suddenly composing himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his
hands, and returned thanks diat the lawful master and the
ancient stock were restored to their rights.
WVTH^nilta HSI^HTfl. 8ft?
I felt stunned by the awful event ; and roj memory unayoid-
ably recurred to Ibmer times wkh a sort of oppressive sadness.
But poor Hareton, the most wronged^ was the only one that
really suffered much. He sat by the corpse all night, weeping
in bitter earnest He pressed its hand, and kissed the sarcastic,
ravage fece that every one else shrank Irotn contemplating ; and
bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs naturally
from a generous heart, though it be tou^ as tempered steel.
Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the
master, died. I concealed tbe Awt of his having swallowed
nothing for four days, fearing it might lead to troable ; and then,
I am persuaded, h0 did not not abstain on purpose : it was the
consequence of his strange illness, not the causes
We buried Um, to the scandal of the whole neighborhood,
as be had wished^ ESamshaw and I, the sexton, and six men to
carry the coffin, comprehended the whole attendance.
The six men departed when they had let it down into the
ffrave : we stayed to see it covered. Hareton, with a streaming
& ce, dug green sods, ^and laid them over the brown mold him-
self. At present it. is as smooth and verdant as its companion
mounds— and I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. But the
country folks, if you asked them, would swear on their Bibles
that he walks. There are those who speak to having met him
near the church, and on the moor, and even Within this house.
Idle'tales > you'll say, and so say I. Yet that old man by the
kitchen fire affirms he has seen'* two on'em " looking out of his
chamber wmdow, on every rainy night, since his deaUi — and an
odd thing happened to me about a month ago.
I was going to the Grange cme evenings— a dark evening
threatening thunder-^and, just at the turn of the Heights, I en
countered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before him.
He was crying terribly, and I supposed the lambs were skittish,
and would not be guided.
^ What is the matter, my little man V* I asked.
<'They's Heathdiff and a woman yonder, under t'nab/'h^
blubbered, " un'aw damut pass'em. "
I saw nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would go on, so
I bid him take the road lower down. He probably raised the
phantoms fi*om thinking, as he travemed the moon alone, on
the nonsense he had heard his parents and companions repeat ;
yet, still, I don't like being out m the dark now, and I don't like
being lefb by myself in thib grim house. I can not help it ; I
shall be glad when they leave it, and shifi; to the Grange !
^BS WUTHBRIN.Q HBIGHTfl.
■- " ■- " ■ ■ ■■■ I.I I. M M ■ ■■ llllll— — ^^pi
" They are gmng t6 the Gxange, then %** I said.
" Yes, " aDsweied Mrs. Dean, " as soon as jthey are married;
and that will be aa New Year's day/'
" And who mil live here then Y "
" Why, Joseph will take eare of the house, and, perhaps, a
lad to keep him company. They will live in the. kitchen, and
the rest will be shut up. "
''For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it, " I observed.
" No, Mr. Lockwood,'* said Nelly, shaking her head. ** I
believe the dead are at peace, but it is not right to speak of
them with levity. "
At that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers
were returning.
" They are afraid of nothing,*'I grumbled, watching their
approach through the window. ** Together they would brave
Satan and all his legions. "
As they stepped upon thc^ door-stones, and halted to take a
last look at the moon, or, more correctly, at 0ach other, by her
light, I felt irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and,
pressing a remembrance into the hands oOirs. Dean, and disre-
garding her expostulations at my rudeness, I vanished through
the kitchen, as they opened the house-door ; and so should have
confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his fe11ow*servant's g^y indis-
cretions, had he not, fortunately, recognized me for a respectable
character, by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet.
My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction
of the kirk. When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had
made progress, even in seven months — ^mamy a window showed
black gaps deprived of glass ; and slates jutted off, here and
there, beyond the right line of the roof, to be graduaUy worked
off in coming autumn storms.
I sought, and soon discovered, the three head-stones on the
slope next the moor — the middle one, gray, and half buried in
the heath — ^Edgar Linton's only harmonized by the turf and
moss creeping up its foot — ^Heathcliff's still bare.
I lingered round them, under that benign sky; watched ihe
moths fluttering among the heath and harebells; listened to
the soft wind breathing through the grass ; and wondered how
any one could ever imagine unquiet shimbers for the sleepecs
in that quiet earth. ^ ^
■ THB BND. ri^^^'f

