




:y..yi //...//„.
'J < U?

WTJTHEEING HEIGHTS.
3, Nopel.
BT
THE AUTHOR OF " JANE EYRE.'»
NEW YORK: : •.; ;'*
'> •
HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS
82 CLIFF STHBET.
1848.
/-

^ *-0aniJiJ*«» & . ./^ " \
16586
?
WTJTHEEIM HEIGHTS.
CHAPTER L
1801. — ^I HATS just ratorned from a visit to my landlord — ^the
solitary neigfaboi: that I shall be troubled with. This is cer-
tainly a beautifiil country ! In all England I do not believe
that I could have fixed on a situation so completely removed
from the stir of society. A perfect misanthropist's Heaven-«-
and Mr. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable pair to divide the
desolation between us. A capital fellow I He little imacmed
how my heart warmed tow«rd him when I beheld hia black
eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows as I rode up*
and when his fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous reso-
lution, still further in his waistcoat, as I announced my name.
" Mr. Heathcliff 1 " I said.
A nod was the answer.
" Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir— -I do myself the
honor of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to express
the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my perse-
verance in soliciting the occupation of Thrushcross Orange : I
beard yesterday you had had some thoushts-^''
*'Thrushcross Ghntnge is my own, 8ir, " Tie interrupted wincing,
" I should not allow any one to inconvenience me, if I could
hinder it — ^walk in ! "
The " walk in " was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed
the sentiment,'* Go to the Deuce ! " Even the gate over which
be leaned manifested no sympathizing movement to the words ;
and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the
invitation : I felt interested in a man who seemed more ex*
aggeratedly reserved than myselC
WUTHERING BEIOUTB.
V
When he saw my horse's breast fairly pushin? the bamer, he
did pull out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded
me up the causeway, calling as we entered the court :
" Joseph, take Mr. Lock wood's horse ; and bring up some
wine. "
** Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I
suppose/'was the reflection suggested. by this compound
order. " No wonder the grass grows up between the flags,
and cattle are the only hedge-cutters. "
Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps,
though hale and sinewy.
" The Lord help us ! " he soliloquized in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of ray horse : looking, .
meantime, in my face so sourly, that I charitably conjectured
he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner, and his
pious ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected advent.
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathdiff's dwelling.
" Wuthering " being a significant provincial adjective, descrip-
tive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in
stormy weather. Pure, bracing ventilation they must have up
there at all times, indeed : one may guess • the power of the
north wind blowing over the hedge, by the excessive slant of a
few stunted firs at the end of the house ; and by a range of
gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving
alms of the sun. Happily, the architect had foresight to build
it strong : the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and
the comers defended with large jutting stones.
Before passing the threshold, 1 paused to admire a quantity
of grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially
about the principal door, above which, among a wilderness of
crumbling griffins and shameless litde boys, I detected the
date, " 1500, " and the name, " Hareton Eamshaw; " I would
have made a few comments, and requested a short history
of the place fi:om the surly owner, but his attitude at the door
appeared to demand my speedy entrance or complete de-
parture, and I had no desire to aggravate his impatience pre-
vious to inspecting the penetralium.
One step brought us into the family sitting-room without any
introductory lobby or passage : they call it here " the house "
pre-eminently. It includes kitchen and parlor generally; but I
believe at Wutheiing Heights, the kitchen is forced to retreat
altogether into another quaiter ; at least I distiDguished a chat*
WUTHEKIWG HEIGHTS.
ter of tongues and a clatter of calinaiy utensils deep within ;
And I observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking about
the huge fire-place, nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin
cullenders on the walls. One end, indeed, reflected splendidly
both light and heat from ranks of imniense pewter dishes,
interspersed with silver jugs and tankards, towering row after
row in a vast oak dresser, to the very roof. The latter had
never been underdrawn, its entire anatomy lay bare to an in-
quiring eye, except where a fi*ame of wood laden with oatcakes,
and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
Above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a
couple of horse-pistols, and, by way of ornament, three gaudily
painted canisters disposed dong its ledge. The floor was
of smooth, white stone ; the chairs, high-backed, primitive
structures, painted green ; one or two heavy black ones lurking
in the shade. In an arch, under the dresser, reposed a huge,
fiver-colored bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of squeal-
ing puppies ; and other dogs haunted other recesses.*
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing ex-
trordinary as belonging to a homely northern farmer, with a
stubborn countenance, and stalwart limbs, set out to advantage
in knee-breeches and gaiters. Such an individual, seated in his
arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the round table before
him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles among
these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. But Mr.
HeathcM'forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of
living. He is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and
manners a gentleman ; that is, as much a gentleman as man)r a
country squire ; rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss
with has negligence, because he has an erect and handsome
figure ; and rather morose, possibly some people might suspect
him of a degree of under-bred pride. I have a sympathetic
chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort ; I know, by
instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays
of feeling, to manifestations of mutual kindliness. He'll love
and hate, equally under cover, and esteem it a species of im-
pertinence to be loved or hated again. — No, I'm running on too
fast. I bestow my own attributes over liberally on him. Mr.
EEeathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his
sand out of the way, when he meets a would-be acquaintance,
io those which actuate me. Let me hope my constitutioB is
^Ifoo & t peculiiar^, my dd»r mother ufied tb say I should never
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS.
have a comfortable home, and only last summer I proved my >
self perfectly unworthy of one.
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I
was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature, a
real goddess, in my eyes, as long as she took no notice of me.
I " never told my love " vocally ; still, if looks have language,
the merest idiot might have guessed I was over head and ears ;
she understood me, at last, and looked a retum-^the sweetest
of all imaginable looks — and what did I do 1 I confess it with
shame-— shrunk icily into myself, like a snail, at every glance
retired colder and faither ^ till, finally, the poor innocent was
led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with con^ion
at her supposed mistake, peinsuaded her mamma to decamp.
By this curious turn of disposition, I have gained the repu« <
tation of deliberate heartlessness, how undeserved, I alone can
appreciate.
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that
toward which my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval
of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother, who had
left her nursery, and was sneaking wolfisbly to the back of my
legs, her lip curled up, and her whito teeth watering for a
snatch.
My caress provoked a long, guttural snarl.
** You'd bettier let the dog alone, " growled Mr. HeathclifT,
in unison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of
Ills foot *'She's not accustomed to be spoiled — rnot kept for a
pet. "
Then, striding to a side-door, he shouted again,
« Joseph. "
Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar ; but
gave no intimation oi ascending ; so his master dived down to
lum, leaving me vis-a-vis vnth the ruffianly bitch and a pair of
prim, shaggy sheep-dogs, who shared with her a jealous guard*
ianship over all my movements.
Not anxious to come in contact with their fangs, I sat still-—
bat, imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, I
unfortunately indulged in virinking and making feces at the trio,
and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam, that
she suddenly broke into a fury, and leapt on my knees. I flung
her back, and hastened to interpose the table between us.
This prdceedmg roused the ^hole hive. Half-a-dozen four-
fcoCMl fiends, ot various sizes, and ages, issued firom hidden
^UTB£XIN6 BSiaHTB.
dens to tbe conmxm center. I Alt Biy lieele end coat laps
peculiar subjeda of aaiault ; and, pavryiiig off Uie larger com*
batSQitfl» aa eflfectoally aa I eoold, with the poker, I was eon-
strained to demand aloud assistance fiom some of the house*
hMf in re-establishiDg i > eace.
Mr. HoBthdiff and his man dimbed the cellar steps with
vexatious phlegm. I don't think they mored one second ftster
^an usual, though the health was an absolute tempest ol
worrying and yelping.
Happily, an inhabitant of the kitchoB nsade more dispatch ;
a lusty dame, with tucked up gown, bare arms, and fire-nushed
cheeks, rushed into the midst of us, flourishing a frying-pan^
and used that weapon, and her tongue, to such purpose, that
the storm subsided magically, and she only remained, heaving
like a sea after a high wind, when her master entered on the
scene.
" What the devil is the matter V* he asked, eyeing me in
a manner that I could ill endure after lUs inhoqntable treat-
ment.
" What the devil, indeed ! " I ranttemd.''The herd of nos-
sesaed swine could have had no wcne sphits in them Uian
those animals ci yours, sir. Yob might aa well leave a stranger
with a brood of tigers 1 "
" They won't meddle with persons who touch nothing, " he
remark^ putting the bottle befora me, and restonng the dis*
placed table. " The dogs do right to be vigilant. Take a glass
of wine 1 "
" No, thank you. "
" Not bitten, are yon V
''K I had been, I would have aet my signet on the biter. "
Heathclifif's ccMuUenance relaxed into a Btin.
" Come, come, " he said, « yon are flamed, Mr. Lockwood.
Ilere, take a litde wine. Gtwsis are so exoeedaigly rare ia
this house that I and my doos, I am willing to ovm, hardly
know how to receive them, i onr health, air ! "
I bowed and returned the pled^; begiBning to perceive
that it would be foolish to sit sulking ior the misbehavior
of a pack of curs; besides, I felt loth to yield the fellow
further amusement at my expense, since his humor took that
turn.
He — ^probably swayed by prudentia] ooBsiderations of the
& Uy of ofiending a good tenant-— relaxed a little in the laooaic
WUTH EEI N6 HE I O H T fl.
Style of clupping of his. pronouns and auxiliary verbs ; and in-
Uoduced, what he supposed would be a subject of interest Ui
me, a discpurBe on the advantages and disadvantages of my
present place of retirement.
I found him very intelligent on the topics we touched ; and^
before I went home, I was encouraged so far as to volunteer
another visit to-morrow.
He evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. I shaE
go notwithstanding. It is astonishing how sociable I feel my-
self compared wi£ him.
CHAPTER n.
Yesterpat afbemoon set in misty and cold. I had half a
mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through
heath and mud to Wuthering Heights.
On coming up fix)m dinner, however, (N.B., I dine between
twelve and one o'clock ; the housekeeper, a matronly lady taken
as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would not,
, comprehend my request that I might be served at five.) On
mounting the stairs with this lazy intention, and stepping into
the room, I saw a servant-'girl on her knees, surrounded by
brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as she
extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders. This spectacle
drove me back immediately ; I took my hat, and, af):er a four
miles'walk, arrived at Heathcliflf s garden gate, just in time to
escape the first feathery flakes of a snow shower.
On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black frost,
and the air made me shiver through every limb. Being unable
to remove the chain, I jumped over, and, ninning up the flag-
ged causeway bordered with straggling gooseberry bushes,
knocked vainly for admittance till my knucldes tingled and the
dogs howled.
'* Wretched inmates ! " I ejaculated, mentally, " you deserve
perpetual isolation firom your species for your churlish inhospi-
tality. At least, I would not keep my doors barred in the day-
time ; I don't care — ^I will get in ! "
So resolved, I grasped the latch and shook it vehemently. Vine-
WI7THSRINOHSIOBT8.
gar-faced Joseph projected his head from a round window of
the bam.
''Whet are ye fori " he shouted. " T'maister's dahn i'
ffowld. Groa rahnd by th'end ut* laith, if yah went tub n > ake
taU him.''
" Is there nobody inside to open the door V* I haDooed,
responsively.
" They's nobbut t'missis, and shoo'Il nut oppen't an ye mak
yer flaysome dins till neegfat. "
" Why, can not you tell her who I am, eh, Joseph V*
** Nor-ne me ! Awll hae noa bend wi't, " muttered the head,
vanishing.
The snow began to driye thickly. I seized the handle to
essay another trial, when a young man, without coat, and shoul-
dering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind. He hailed me
to follow him, and, atter marching dirough a wash-house, and a
paved area containing a coal-shea, pump, and pigeon-cote, we
at length arrived in the large, warm, cheerful apartment, where
I was formerly received.
It glowed delightfully in the radiance of an immense fire,
compounded of coal, peat, and wood ; and near the table, laid
for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased to observe the
" missis, " an individual whose existence I had never previously
suspected.
• I bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
She looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained mo-
tionless and mute.
" Rough weather ! " I remarked. ** I'm afraid, Mrs. Heath-
cliff, the door must bear the consequence of your servants'
leisure attendance ; I had hard woric to make them hear me. "
She never opened her mouth. I stared — she stared also.
At any rate, she kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless man-
ner, exceedingly embarrassing and disagrreeable.
''Sit down, " said the young man, gruffly. " He'll be in
sooiL "
I obeyed, and hemmed, and called the villain Juno, who
deigned, at this second interview, to move the extreme tip of
her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance.
" A beautiful animal ! " I commenced again. " Do you in-
tend parting with the little ones, madami "
" They are not mine, " said the amiable hostess, more repel-
lin^y than HtethcHff hunself could have replied.
A*
to WVTHBEINOHBIOBTV.
''Ah, jour & Tarke9 axe among these I " I coadnaed, tnmmg
to an obscure cushion full of something like cats.
" A strange dM)ice of fkvorites^ " die obaerved, acomfolly.
Unluckily, it was a heap of deail rablHta. I hemmed once
more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on
the wildness of the evening.
" You should not have come out, " she said, rising and xvach-
ing from the chimney piece two of the painted caniiterB.
Her position before was sheltered mm the light : now, I had
a distindt view of her whole figure and eonmtenaace. She was
slender, and apparently scarcely jpaat giiibood: an admirable
form, and the most exquisite little face that I have ever had ther
pleasure of beholding : small features, very fair ; flaaMn ring-
lets, or rather golden^ han^g loose on her delicate neck ; ana
eyes-^bad tfaey been agreeable in expression, tbey would hvtm
been irresistible— fortunately for my susceptible hmrt, 1^ only
sentiment they evinced hovered between soom and a kind of
4es|peratioB» singnlaiiy unnatural to be detected thera.
The canisters were almost out of her reach ; I made a motion
to aid her ; she turned upon me as a miser might torn, if any
one attempted to assut him in eounting his gold.
** I don t want your help, " she mnpped^ ^ I can get diem for
inyselE "
" I beg your pardon, " I hastened to reply.
" Were you asked to tea T " she c^manded, tjfing an anion
over her neat black frock, and standing with & spoonful or the
leaf poised over the pot.
*^ I shall be glad to have a cup, " I answered.
'^ Were you asked 1 " she r^ieated.
'* No ^ " I said, half smiling.'* You are the pnqMr person to
ask me. "
• She flung the tea back,^ ^oon and aO ; and retmned her
chair in a pet, her forehead corrugated, and her red isnder-lip
poshed out. Eke a dold's ready to cry.
Meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person n
decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting himself before
the blaze» looked down on me from the comm'of his eyes, for
all the world as if diere vrere some mortal feud unavenged
between as. I bisgan to donbt whether he were a servant or
not; his dress and speech wec» both rode, entirely devoid
of the superionqr observable in B£r. and M». HeathcKff ; his
thick, brown cmA wene lon^ anid nneuldvatedr his whisfcev»
WVTHBBING HEIGHTS. 11
encroached beamhlj orer his cheeks, and his bands wero
embrowned like those of a common laborer ; still bis bearing
was free^ almost haughty ; and he showed none of a domestic's
assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
In the absence of dear proofi of his condition, I deemed it
best to abstain from noticing his curious conduct, and, fire
minutes afterward, the entrance of HeathclifF relieved me, in
some measure, fix > m my uncomfortable state. .'
*'You see, sh*, I am oome, according to promise V* I i$z-
claimed, assuming the cheerful, ** and I fear I shall be weather-
bound for half an hoar, if you can afford me shelter during that
«paoe. "
" Half an hour V* he said, shaking the white flakes from his
dothes; " I wonder you should select the thick of a snow«
atonn to ramble about in. Do you know that you run a risk
of being lost in the marshes? People familiar with these
moors often miss their road on such evenings, and, I can tell
you, there is no chance of a change at present. "
'* Perhaps I can ^t a guide among your lads, and he might
stay at the Grange till morning— could you spare me onet "
" No, I could not. "
** Oh, indeed ! Well then, I must trust to my own sagaciCy.*'
" Umph. "
" Are you going to maJc th'tea V* demanded he of the
shabby coat, shifting his ferodous gaze from me to the young
Isdy.
" Is Ae to have any 1 " die asked, appealing to Heathdiff.
'*Get it ready, will you! " was the answer, uttered so
savagisly that I started. The tone in which the words were
said revealed a genmne bad nature. I no longer felt incKned
to call Heathditt a capital fellow.
■ When the preparations were finidied, he invited me with*
" Now, sir, brin^ forward your chair. " And we all, in-
- dading die rustic youth, drew round the table, tiin austere
silence prevailing while we discussed our meal.
I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make
an effort to dispel it. They could not every day sit so grim and
tiusiturn, and it was imposdble, however ill-tempered they might
be, that the universal scowl they wore was their every-day
countenance.
" It is strange, " I began,, in the interval of swallowing one
cup of tea, and receiving another, ** it is strange how custom
1 imagiBed^ {gt ft nxNttent, tint tins piece of eloquence wii| «•
addressed to me; and, sufficientlj enraged, stepped toward tbie*
aged i^ascal with an intention of kieking bim oat of the < |0Qn ^'J'*
Mrs. HeatfaclifT, however, checked me by her answer. " " * • ^^^^ .
" Yoo scandaloiXB old hypocrite ! " she replied f •* are yo'n ii^^.'. •'.
afraid of being carried away bodily, whenereryoa mention. tW'; .
deril's name) I warn you to refrain from provoking'me, ^V .'
I'll ask your abduction as a special fiivor. Stop^look here'J(^* *-
seph, " she eontiiiued, taking a long, dark book from a fbeK''
** rll show ye«i how far I've progressed in the Black An^-^l:
shall soon be competent to make a clear houee of it, The.4e$'. > r.
cow didn't die by ehance; and your iheumatism can havdly t[ir*- >'
reckoned among proxidential visitations! " [ **..•'-
" C^, wicked, wieked ! " gasped the elder,'*may ther.Ixyc^'^'.
deliver us from evil! " ! > :'5^^
" No, reprobate! you are a castaway-^be off, or I'll butr.yca > r ■ -
seripusly! I'll have you aU modeled in wast and elay >'nf^\''\ /
the iiiiBC who passes the limite I fix, shalL^I'll not saiV Vf}i^^* *
be shall be fbne'to^^but, you'll see! Gk > , I'm. looking ^ > f'"
^{vyiul " ^ •;./.:./'?;f^^..,;
t " . The little witch put a mock midignity into her lieaEDiifill'eyt^i^ * «*?. >'
'end Joseph, trembting with sincere horror, hurried out fH'^^ & t^-/,^
l and ejaculating " wicked " as he went. ;. ., [''^p.; ^^'.
1 thought her conduct must be prompted by a speciei'^riPiit^^iOE^'* ..'" ^
frin ; and, now that we were alone, I endeavoirBd to interesf Ifc^ "'*'.
in my distress. . *%V'-^'^ .^:J
" Mrs. Heathcliff, " I said, earnestly, *^ you must eiu3€^j^''> ^c
for troubling you-«I presume, because, with that faee^ Fin g^^ .V .*
you can not help bmng good-hearted. Do point out eoaie la»$ *•'*'•;
marks by whicn I may know my way home— ^I have -no.mtfiM»'/'
idea how to get there Utan you would have how teL'get'.tp < :'*V
:v Londou! " • tr;- ••'
" Take the road you came, " she answered, en80oncia|r Ji^iy'.
; self in ft: chair, with a candle, and the kmg book open • d^£m^; \
her. " it is brief advice ; but za soiind as I ean give. " . • ;r.*'
" Then, if you hear of me being discovered desid in. a:botfV < ^.'. .
a pit full of snow, your conseieace won't whisper that k* iii « • :
partly your fault 1 " • " -'.| ;?•
" How so 1 I can not eseort yon. They vrcmld'nt let.me j||o'^ ^ •'
the end of the garden- wall. " *. Vj
" You/ 1 8hoi:dd be sony to ask you to erossthe thre^holi .
for my convenience on snoh ft nightp " I cried. " I .t^asit yoii ]t^ /
wvTMnmino Bmimnrm, 15
kO me my way, not to Jkaw it; or clae to penosde Mr. Hesth-
cliff to giTe me a gaida. "
" Who ? There is himself Eanishaw, ZiBah, Jaaepli, and L
Which would yon have?'
'* Are there mk boys at du fioml "
«'No^th < Meareall. "
. " Then it follows that I am compelled to atay. "
*'That yott may settle with your host. I hvre notfaiag to do
with it. "
" I hope it wis be a leason to you, to make no mote rash
KMumeys on these hilk/'eried Hea & e]iff*8 stern iroice from the
JoteheB entranee.''As to stayiog here, I do»'t keep accom*
modatiena for visitors ; you moat share a bed with IlaretDii ev
Joseph^ if yon do. "
" I can sleep on a chair in this room, " I repfied.
" No, no ( A stranger is a stranger, be he lidi er poor*-it
w^l not suit me to permit any one the range at the place whila
I am off guard l " said the nnmanneriy wr^ck
With Uiis insalt my patience was at an end. I ntterad an
expression of disgust, aind pnahed past him into the yard, na^
mag agsinst Earashaw in my haste. It was so dark that I
could not seethe means of exit, and as I wandered ronnd I heaid
another specimen of their civil behavior among each other.
At & nt the young man appeared about to befriend ne.
'* I'll go with him as far as the park, " he said.
'* You'll go with him to hell ! " exclaimed his master, or what-
ever relation he bore. ** And who is to look after the horses,
ehl "
" A man's life is of more consequence than one eventng'e
neglect of the horses ; somebody nrast go, " murmured Mrs,.
Heathcliff, more kindly than I expected.
'* Not at your command I " retorted Hareton.'^ If you set
score on him you'd better be quiet
" Then I hope his ghost will haunt you ; and I hope Mr..
HeathcliiF wUl never get another tenant, till the Grange is a
ruin ! " she answered, ^avply.
* " Hearken^ hearken, shoe's cursing on em ! " muttered Josepli,.
toward whom I had been steering.
He sat within earshot, milking the eowa by the aid of a lan^
tern, which I seized unceremoniously, and caBing out that I
would send it back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest
postern.
16 Wt7TBERINO HEIGHTS.
" Maister, maister, he's staling t^ lantern ! " shouted the an-
cient, pursuing my retreat. " Hey, Guasher ! Hey, dog !
Hey, wolf, holld hira, holld him ! "
On opening the little door two hairy monsters flew at my
thraat, bearing me down and extinguishing the light, while a
mingled guffaw from Heathcliff and Hareton put the cppestone
on my rage and humiliation. «
Foitunately the beasts seemed more bent on stretching their
paws and yawning and flourishing their tails, than devouring
me alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and I was
forced to lie till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me;
then hatless, and trembling with wrath, 1 ordered the miscre-
ants to let me out — on their peril to keep me one minute longer
— with several incoherent threats of retaliation, that, in their in-
definite depth of virulence, smacked of King Lear.
The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleed-
ing at the nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and still I scolded.
I don't know what wo^ld have concluded the scene, had there
not been one person at hand rather more rational than myself,
and more benevolent than my entertainer. This was Zillab,
the stout housewife ; who at length issued forth to inquire into
the nature of the uproar. She thought that some of them had
been laying violent hands on me ; and, not daring to attack
^er master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger
scoundrel.
- " Well, Mr. Eamshaw, " she cried, " I wonder what you'll
have agait next ! Are we going to murder folk on our very
door-stones 1 I see this house will never do for me-— look at
t'poor lad, he's fair choking ! Wisht, wisht ! you mun'n't go
on so^-come in, and I'll cure that. There, now, hold ye still. "
With these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water
down my neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. Mr. Heath-
cliff followed, his accidental merriment expiring quickly in his
habitual moroseness.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy and faint ; and thus com-
pelled, perforce, to accept lodgings under his roof. He told
Zillah to give me a glass of brandy, and then passed on to the
inner room, while she condoled with me on my sorry predica-
ment, and having obeyed his orders, whereby I was somewhat
revived, ushered me to bed.
CHAPTER III.
Whii^k leading the way up-Btairs, she recommencled that I
should htde the candle and not make a noise, for her master
had an odd notion about the chamber she would put me in» and
never let any body lodge there willingly.
I asked the leason.
She did not know, she answered ; she had lived there only a
year or two, and they had so many queer goings on she could
not begin to be curious.
Too stupefied to be curious myself, I festened my door and
glanced round for the bed. The whole furniture consisted of a
chair, a clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out
near the top, resembling coach windows.
Having approached this structure, I looked inside, and per-
ceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch, very con-
veniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member'
of the & mily havinff a room to himself. In fact, it formed a lit-
tle closet ; and the ledge of a window, which it inclosed, served
as a table.
I slid back the panneled sides, got in with my light, pulled
them together again, and felt secure ag^ainst the vigilance of
Heathcliff and every one else.
The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed
books piled up in one comer, and it was covered vrith writing
scratched on the paint. This writing, however, was nothing but
a name repeated in all kinds of characters, large and small—
Catkerme Eamshaw, here and there varied to Cathennu Heath-
clijf, and then again to Ckuherine LmUm,
In vapid listlessness I leaned my head against the window,
and continued spelling over Catherine Eamshaw — ^HoathclifT —
Linton, till my eyes closed ; but they had not rested five min-
utes when a glare of white letters started firom the dark, aa
vivid as specters — the air swarmed with Catherines ; and, rous-
ing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my candle-
wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and perfuming the
place with an odor of roasted calf-skin.
I snuffed it off, and^ very ill at ease under the influence of cold
and lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome
18 WUTHBEINO BBIOHT8.
on my knee. It was a Testament, in lean type» and smelling
dreadfully musty : a fly-leaf bore the inscription — ** Catherine
Earnshaw, her book, " and a date some quarter of a century
back.
I shut it, and took up another and another, till I had exam-
ined all. Catherine's Ubraiy was select, and its state of dilapi-
dation proved it to have been well used, though not altog^her
for a legitimate purpose ; scarcely one chapter had escaped a
pen-and-ink commentary, at least the i^pearaace of one, cover*
ing every morsel of blank that the printer had left.
Some were detached sentences, other parts took the form of a
zegular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. At the
top of an extra page, quite a treasure probably when first lighted
on, I was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my i
fiiend Joseph, rudely yet powerfiilly sketched. i
An immediate interest kindled within me for the unknown i
Catherine, and I began forthwith to decipher her faded hiero* |
glyphlcs.
** An awful Sunday ! " commenced the paragraph beneath.
** I wish my father were back again. Hinoley is a detestable'
substitute— his conduct to Heatbdiff is atrocious— H. and I are
going to rebel-— we took our initiatory step this evening.
" All day had been flooding with rain ; we could not go to
church, so Joseph must needs get up a congregation in the gar-
ret ; and, while Hindley and his wiro basked down stairs before
a comfortable fire, doing any thing bitf reading their Bibles, VU
answer for it, Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy plow-boy were
commanded to take our prayer*«books, and mount We were
ranged in a row on a sack of com, groaning and shivering, and
hoping that Joseph would shiver too, so that he might give us a
short homily for his own sake. A vain kiea ! The service lasted
precisely three hours, and yet my brother had the Busm to ex-
claim, when he saw us descending,
"'What, done already 1'
" On Sunday evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we
did not mdcB much noise ; now a mere titter is sufficient to send
us into comers i
"'You foi^t you have a master here,'says the tyrant. < IH
demolish the first who puts me out of temper ! I inmst on pep-
feet sobriety and silence. Oh, boy ! was that vou 1 Frances*
darling, pull hij| luir as you go by: I heard him snap his fin-
fan.'
WVTHE & ING BBI«BT8. 19
** FrancfiB palled his hair heartilj, and then -wont and seated
herself on her hnsband's knee ; and there they were, Hke two
habiest kissing and talk & g nonsense by the faour«*ifoolish palaver
Aal we diould be ashamed o£
** We made ourselves as snag as our means mHow«d in the
arch q( the drasser. I had just ihsteoed our pinafores together,
aad hung them up for a eartain^ when in eomes Joseph on an
errand m > m the stables. He tears down my handiwork, boxes
my ears, and croaks,
" * T'maisler nobbut just buried, and Sabbath nut oe'i^, and
I'sahnd, uh't gospel stiE i'yer higa, and yah darr be laiking !—
shame on ye ! sit ye dahn, ill childer ! they's good books enough
if ye'll rem'em ; sit ye dahn, and think uh yer sowls !'
''Saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that
we might receive, from the & r-off fire, a dull ray to show us the
text of the lumber he thrust upon us.
" I could not bear the employment. I took my dingy volume
by the scroop and hailed it mto the dog4cennel, vowing I hated
a good book.
*'Heathcliff kicked his to the same place.
" Then there was a hubbub I
*'* Maister Hindley !'shoated our chaplain. * Maister, coom
hither! Mias Cathy's riven th'back off Th'Helmet nh Salva-
tion, un'Heathdiff's pawsed his fit intuh t'first part uh T'Brooad
Way to Destruction ! It's fair flaysome ut yah let'em goa on
this gidt. £ch 1 tfa'owd man ud uh laced'em properly — ^bud
he's goan 1'
** Hindley huiried «p fixNn his paradise on the hearth, and,
seizing one of us by the cellar and die other by the arm, hurled
bo & into the back kitchen, where, Joseph asseverated, * owd
Nidc'would fetch us as sure as we were luring ; and, so com-
Ibrted, we each soaght a separate nook to awatt his advent.
" I reached this book and a pot of ink ftom the shett; and
pushed the house-door ajar to give me li§^, and I have got the
time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairy-
woman's cloak and have a scamper on the moors under its shel-
ter. A pleasant suggestion — ana then, if th^ surly eld man come
in, he m^y believe his prophecy verified— ^we can not be damper
or colder in the rain than we are here. "
so WUTHE & ING BSIOBTi.
I suppose Catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence
took up another subject ; she waxed lachrymose.
** How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make me
cry so ! " she wrote. " My head aches till I can not keep it on
the pillow ; and still I can't give over. Poor Heathcliff ! Hind-
ley calls him a vagabond, and won't let him sit with us, nor eat'
with us any more ; and he says he and I must not play together, I
and threatens to turn him out of the .house if we break his
orders.
" He has been blaming our father (bow dared he 1) for treat- I
ing H. too liberally, and swears he will reduce him to his right I
place— " ,
• • • • • . I
I beffan to nod drowsily over the dim page ; ray eye wan-
dered from manuscript to print I saw a red ornamented titl^—
*'Seventy Times Seven, and the First of the Seventy-First. A
Pious Discourse delivered by the Reverend Jabes Branderham,'
in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough. " And while I was, half |
consciously, worrying my brain to guess what Jabes Brander-
ham would make of his subject, I sank back in bed, and fell I
asleep.
Alas, for the effects of bad toa and bad temper ! what else
could it be that made me pass such a terrible night 1 I don't
remember another that I can at all compare with it since I was
capable of suSeiing.
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible of my
locality. I thought it was morning; and I had set out on my
way home with J oseph for a guide. The snow lay yards deep
in our road ; and, as we floundered on, my companion wearied
me with constant reproaches that I had not brought a pilgrim's
staff: telling me I could never get into the bouse without one,
and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which I un-
derstood to be so denominated.
For a moment I consider it absurd that I should need such a
weapon to gain admittance into my own residence. Then a
new idea flashed across me. I was not going there ; we were
journeying to hear the famous Jabes Branderham preach from
die text — " Seventy Times Seven; " and either Joseph, the
preacher, or I had committed the " First of the Seventy First, "
and were to be publicly exposed and excommunicated.
We came to the chapel — I have passed it really in my walks
twice or thrice— it liev in a hcfflow between tw6 hills— fl?ki ele-
WI7TQBRINORBI6HT0. SI
rated hollow near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to
answer all the purposes of emhalmiog on the few corpses de-
posited there. The roof has been kept whole hitherto, but as
the clergyman's stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, and
a house with two rooms, threatening speedily to determine into
one, no clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor, especially
as it is currently reported that his flock would rather let him
starve than increase the living by one penny from their own
pockets. However, in my dream, Jabes had a full and attentive
congregation : and he preached — good God— what a sermon !
Divided into Jour hundred and ninety parts — each fully equal to
an ordinary address fi'om the pulpit — and each discussing a
separate sin ! Where he searched for them, I can not tell ; he
had his private manner of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed
necessary the brother should sin differant sins on every occasion.
They were of the most usurious character— odd trangressions
that I never imagined previously.
Oh, how weary I grew. How I writhed, and yawned, and
nodded, and revived I How I pinched and pricked myself, and
rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sat down again, and nudged
Joseph to inform me if he would ever have done I "
I was condemned to hear all out — ^finally, he reached the
** First of the Seventy- FirttJ " At that crisis a sudden inspiration
descended on me ; I was moved to rise and denounce Jabes
Branderham as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need
pardon.
. " Sir, " I exclaimed, " sitting here within these four walls, at
one stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and
ninety heads of your discourse. Seventy times seven times
have I plucked up my hat, and been about to depart.-— Seventy
times seven times have you preposterously forced me to resume
my seat. The four hundred and ninety-first is too much. Fel-
low martyrs, have at him ! Drag him down, and crush him to
atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
more ! "
" Thou art the ManP^ cried Jabes, after a solemn pause,
leaning over his cushion.''Sieventy times seven times didst
thou gapingly contort thy visage— seventy times seven did I
take counsel with my soul. Lo, this is human weakness ; this
also may be absolved ! The First of the Seventy-First is come.
Brathren, execute upon him the judgment written ! such honor
hi^ve all His saints ! "
S2 frVTHKRINOHBIORtB.
With that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting
their pilgrim's staTes, rushed round me in a body, and I, having
BO weapon to raise in seliMetose commenced grappling with
Joseph, my nearest and most ferocious assailant, for his. In
the cottfiuence of the multitude, several clubs crossed ; blows
aimed at me fell on other sconces. Presently fhe vrhole cbapd
resounded with rappings and counter-rappings. Every man's
hand was against his neighbor ; and Branderham, unwilling td
remain idle, poured forth his seal in a shower of loud taps on
the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly, that, at
last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me.
And what was it that had suggested the tremendous tumult t
what bad played Jabes^ part in the row t Merely the branch
of a fir-tree that touched my lattice, as the blast wa9ed by, and
rattled its dry cones against the panes 1
I listened doubtingly an instant ; det^ted the disturber, then
turned and dozed, and dreamed again ; if possible, still mor6
disagreeably than before.
This time I remembered I was lying in the oak closet, and 1
heard distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow ; 1
heard also the fiivbough repeat its teasing sound, And ascribed it
to the right cause; but it annoyed me so much that I resolved
to silence it, if possible ; and I thought I rose and endeavored
to unhasp the casement. The hook was soldered into the
staple, a circumstance observed by me, when awake, but f < H >
gotten.
" I must stop it, nevertheless! " I muttered, knocking my
knuckles through the glass, and stretching an arm out to seiz0
the importunate branch : instead of which, my fingers closed on
the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand !
The intense horror of nightmare came over me ; I tried to
draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melan-
choly voice sobbed—
" Let me in— let me in T*
''Who are you V* I asked, struggling meanwhile to disengage
myself.
" Catherine Linton, " it replied, shiveringly (why did I think
of LinUm ? I had read Eamshatff, twenty times for Linton),
" I'm come home, I'd lost my way on the moor ! "
As it spoke I discerned, obscurely, a child'is face looking
through the window— Terror made me cruel; and finding it
useless to attempt shaking the creature ofi*, I pulled its wrist on
WUTHSKIMO BXIVHTK 28
»
'•
to the broken pane, and nibbed it to and fro till the blood ran
down and soaked the bed-clothes : still it wailed,'* Let me in V
and maintained its tenadous gripe, almost maddening me with
iear.
'* How can I r I said at length. «*Let me g€^j£ you want
mm to let you in ! "
- The fingers relaxed, I snatched mine teongh die hole, hop*
tiedly piled the books np in a pyramid against it» and stepped
my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer.
I seemed to keep them closed above a quarter of an honr,
ret the instant I listened again, there was the doleful cry moaa^
tng on.
^Begone!''I shouted, ^I'll nerer let you in,not if you beg
fiir twenty years ! "
" It's twenty years, " momrned the Toioe, ** twenty yeaf% I've
been a waif for twenty years i "
'Thereat began a feeble scratehing outside, and the pile of
books moved, as if throst forward.
I tried to jump up ; but eonld not stir a limb, and so yelled
aloud, in a fienzy ot fVi^t.
To my Gonfosion, I discovered the yell was not ideal Hast^
ibotsteps i^proaehed my diamber door : somebody puobed it
open with a vigorous hand, and a light clnsnered through the
squares at the top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet, and wiping
the perspixatiott fiom my forehead : the intruder appeared to
hesitate, and muttered to himself
At last he said in u half-whisper, plainly not expecting an
answer,
" Is any one here 1 "
I considered it bert to confess my presence, for I knew Heath-
d^ft accents, and feared he might search fuzther if I kepi
quiet.
With this intention, I turned and opened the panel»— I shall
not soon forget the effect my action pxoduced.
Heathcliff stood near the entrance in his shirt and trowsers ;
with a candle dripping over his fingers^ and his fece as white ai
the wbU behind nun. The first creak of the oak staitled him
like an electric shock : the light leaped from his hold to a dis-
tance of some feet, and his agitation was so extreme that he
coald bardly pick it up.
** It is c»ly your guest, sir/'I called out, desirous to spare him
the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. " I had the
24 WVTHEKINO HEIGHTS.
— •''— -
misfortune to scream in my sleep, owing to a fiightfiil mghtmaie.
I'm sorry I disturbed vou. "
" Oh, God confovmol you, Mr. Lockwood ! I wish you were
at the /'commenced my host, setting the candle on a chmr^
because be found it impossible to hold it steady.
" And who showed you up to this room'1 " he continued,
crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to sub-
due the maxillary convulsions. " Who was it 1 I Ve a good
mind to turn them out of the house this moment.''
*'It was your servant Zillab, " I replied, flinging myself on the
floor, and rapidly resuming my garments.''I should not care
if you did, Mr. Heathcliff; she richly deserves it. I suppose
that she. wanted to get another proof that the place was haunt-
ed, at my expense. Well, it is — swarming with ghosts and
goblins. You have reason in shutting it up, I assure you. No
one will thank you for a doze in such a den ! "
" What do you mean ? " asked Heathcliff, " and what are you
doine 1 Lie down and finish out the night, since you are here ;
but, tor Heaven's sake, don't repeat that horrid noise. Nothing
could excuse it^ unless you were having your throat cut "
** If the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably
would have strangled me 1 " I returned.'* I'm not going to en-
dure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors, again. Was
not the Reverend Jabes Bi*anderham akin to you on the mother's
side ? And that minx, Catherine Linton, or Eamshaw, or how-
ever she was called — she must have been a changeling— -wicked
little soul. She told me she had .been walking the earth these
twenty years : a just punishment for her mortal transgressions^
I've no doubt. "
Scai-cely were these words uttered, when I recollected the
association of Heathcliff's with Catherine's name in the book,
which had completely slipped from my memory till thus
awakened. I blushed at my inconsideration ; but, without
showing farther consciousness of the offense, I hastened to add^
The truth is, sir, I passed the first part of the night in " —
Here I stopped afresh — I was about to say'* perusing those old
volumes ; " then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as wqII as their printed contents ; so coirecting myself,
I went on,
" In spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge.
A monotonous occupatlbn, calculated to set me asleep, like
counting, or " —
WUTfflRiNO HEIGHTS. 25
♦* Wkaft ean j€m mevn, hy talking in this way to me / " thun-
dered Heatfacliff with savage vehemence. " How — ^how dare
you, under ray roof— God ! he'» mad to speak so ! " and he
struck his forehead with rage.
I did not know whether to resent this language, or pursue
my explanation ; but he seemed so T > owerfully ai < 9cted that I
took pity, and proceeded with my dreams ; affirming I had
never heard the appellation of ** Catherine Lintxm'* before, but
reading it often over produced an impression iiHiieh personified
itself when I had no longer my imagination under control.
Heatheliff " gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed, as I
spoke, finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. I
guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepted breathing,
& at he struggled to vanquish an access of violent emotion.
Not liking to show him that I heard the conflict, I continued
my toilet rather noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquized
on the length of the night :
'* Not three o'clock, yet ! I could have taken oath it had been
sbt — time stagnates here — we must s«rely have retired to rest
at eight f "
" Always at nine in winCer, and always rise at four, " said my
host, suppresstng a groain ,• and, as I fancied, by the motion of
his sbadow^s apm, dashing a tear from his eyes. **
" Mr. Lockwood, " he added, " you may go into my room ;
you'll only l^o in the way, coming down staire so early : and
your childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me. "
** And for me too, " I replied. " I'll walk in the yaid till
diiyiight, and then I'll be oif; and you need not dread a repeti-
tion of my intrusion. I am no w quite cured of seeking pleasure
in society, be it country or town. A sensible man ought to find
sufficient company in himself. "
♦♦Delightfol company! " muttered Heathcliff. " Take the
candle^ and go where you please— I shall join you directly.
Keep out of the yard though — the dogs are unchained ; and the
hause— Juno mounts sentinel there— and — nay, you can only
ramble about the steps and passages — but away with you — I'll
come in two minutes.'*
I obeyed,, so fhr as to quit the chamber ; when, ignorant where
the narrow lobbies led, I steed still, and was witness, involun-
tuily, to a piece of superstitipn on the part of my landlord, which
beUed, eddly^ his apparent sense.
He got upon the bed, and wrenched open the lattice, burst-
B
26 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
ing, as he pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion of
tears. J
" Come in ! come in ! " he sobbed. " Cathy, do come. Oh,
do— o»cc more ! Oh ! my heart's darling, hear me this time-
Catherine, at last!*'
The specter showed a specter's ordinary caprice ; it gave no
sign of being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through^
even reaching my station, and blowing out the light.
There was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied
this raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and
I drew off, half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at hav-
ing related my ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that
agony ; though why^ was beyond my comprehension. .^
I descended cautiously to the lower regions ; and landed in the ,^
back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly together,
enabled me to re-kindle my candle. i
Nothing was stirring except a brindled gray cat, which crept \
from the ashes and saluted me witli a querulous mew. .
Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly inclosed
the hearth ; on one of these 1 stretched myself, and Grimalkin
mounted the other. We were both of us nodding ere any one
invaded our retreat, and then it was Joseph shuffling down a
woollen ladder that vanished in the roof, through a trap, the I
ascent to his garret, I suppose.'
He cast a sinister look at the little flame which I had enticed
to play between the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and,
bestowing himself in the vacancy, commenced the operation of
stuffing a three-inch pipe with tobacco; my presence in his
sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too
shameful for remark. He silently applied the tube to his lips,
folded his arms, and puffed away.
I let him enjoy the luxury unannoyed ; and, after sucking out
the last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up and
departed as solemnly as he came.
A more elastic footstep entered next, and now I opened my
mouth for a " good morning,''but closed it again, the salutation
unachieved ; for Hare ton Eamsliaw was performing his orisons,
sotto voce, in a series of curses directed against every object he
touched, while he rummaged a corner for a spade or shovel to
dig through the drifts. He glanced over the back of the bench,
dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of exchanging civilities
with me as with my companion, the cat.
WUTHERIN6 HEIGBXa. 27
I guessed b j his preparations that egress was allowed, and,
leaving my hard couch, made a movement to follow him. He
I noticed this, and thrust at an inner door with the end of his
spade, intimating, by an inarticulate sound, that there was the
place where I must go if I changed my locality.
\ It opened into the house, where the females were already
'astir, Zillah urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a coles-
I sal bellows, and Mra. Heathclifi*, kneeling on the hearth, reading
! a book by the aid of the blaze,
r She held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and
(her eyes, and seemed absoroed in her occupation, desisting from
it only to chide the servant fi > r covering her with sparks, or to
pash away a dog, now and then, that snoozled its nose over for-
I wardly into her face. ~
I was surprised to see Heathcliff there also. He stood by the
; Are, his back toward me, just finishing a stormy scene to poor
Zillah, who ever and anon interrupted her labor to pluck up
the comer of her apron, and heave an indignant groan.
** And you, you worthless " he broke out as I entered,
turning to his daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as
harmless as duck, or sheep, but generally represented by a
f dash.
, ** There you are at your idle tricks again ! The rest of them
do earn their bread — you Hye on my charity ! Put your trash
I away, and find something to do. You shall pay me for the
plague of having you eternally in my sight— do you hear, dam-
I nable jade V*
'" I'll put my trash away, because you can make me if I re-
I fuse, " answered the young lady, closing her book, and throwing
it on a chair. " But I'll not do any thing, though you should
I* swear your tongue out, except what I please ! "
Heathclifl* lifl;ed his hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer
distance, obviously acquainted with its weight.
Having no desire to be entertained by a cat and dog combat,
I stepped forward briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of
the hearth, and innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted
dispute. Each had enough decorum to suspend further hostili-
ties ; Heathclifi* placed his fists out of temptation, in his pock-
ets : Mrs. HeathcliflT curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off,
where she kept her word by playing the part of a statue duiing
the remainder of my stay.
That was not long. I declined joining their breakfast, and,
88 WVTHB & IN« BEIftXTIb
ftt the firet gleam of dawn, took an opportai Ht y of escaping iato
^ free air, now clear, and still, and cold as impa]pal»B ice.
Mj laiidl < ^ hallooed for me to stop, efe I reached the bottofoa
6t the garden, and ofiered to accompany me actxies the moor.
It was well he did, £ & r the fihole hilUback was ooe- IaIIowj^^
white ocean ; the swells and faUs not indicating corre^yonding
rises and depressions in the gtmuMl— many pits, at least, were
filled to a Urniy and emire ranges of mounds, the reltrne of th»
quarries, blotted from the chart w & ieh my yesterday^) walk left
pictured is my mind.
I had remarked on one side of the road, at interrals of sor
er seven yaa?ds, a line of upight stones^ continued through & e
whole length of the barren: these were erected and daubed
with lime, on purpose to serve as guides in the dark, and also
when a fall, like the present, co«£ > unded the d»ef swamps on
either hand with the firmer path : but, excepting a dirty dot
pointing up, here and there, all traces of their existence had
vanished ; and my companicm iK)und it necessary to warn me-
freqaently ta steer to me right, or leli;, when I imaghgied I was
IbUowing correctly the windings of the road.
We exchanged little conversation, and he halted at the en-
trance of Thrushcross park, saying I could make no error therSk-
Our adieus were limited to a hasty bow, and then I pushed for-
ward, trusting to my own resources, lor tk^ porter's lodge is un-
tenanted as yet
The distance from the gate to the Grange is two miles : I
believe I managed to make it four, what with losing myself
among the trees, and sinking up to the neck in snow — a predic-
ament which only those who have experienced it can appreciate.
At any rate, ^ribwtever were my wanderings, the clock chimed
twelve as I entered ^e house ; and that gave exactly an hour
fbr every m3e of the nsual way from Wuthering Heights.
My human fixturre and her satellites rushed to welcome me,
exclaiming, tamakoously, they had completely given me up;
every body conjectured that I perished last night ; and they were
wondering how they must set about the search for my remains.
I bid them be quiet, now that they saw me returned ; and,
benumbed to my very heart, I dragged up-stairs, whence, after
putting on dry clothes, and pacing a considerable time to and
fro to restore the animal heat, I am adjourned to my study, feeble
as a kitten — almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smo-
king GoSS^ which the 9ervanX has prepared for my refreshment
CHAPTER IV.
What vain weathercocks we are! I, who had detemnned
to hold myself independeDt of all sociftl intsercoarse, and thsiiked
ray stars that at length I had liglited en « spot wliere it was
next to impractical^le. I, weak wretch, mfter maintakiivg till
dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude, was finally com-
pelled to stnke my colors ; a»i, under pi-vteiiBe of gainiae tnfor-
tlftatiob oo/Bceming die iMcessitfes of my establifllime«t^ I desired
Mrs. Dean, when she bPouglA m supper, to «it down while I
«it & % hopiog sinoeirely she would prove a regular gossip, and
either rouse me to animation, or lull me to sleep by ber talk.
^ You have lived here a considerable dme,*'I commenced ;
^did you not say sixteen years V*
< ■ " " Eighteen, sir*, I eatne when the wnftress wtta married, to
wait on her; after she died the master retained mo Ibr hla
housekeeper. "
" ladeed.**
There ensued a pause. She WM not a gossip, I feared, un-
less about her own nKdts, and Ibese eouM hardly iniei««t me.
However, having studied for an interval, with a iKst on either
knee, and a cloud of meditation over her roddy coutitenance,
abe ej«Lculated,
" Ah, times are greatly changed since thent*
* < Yes, " I remarked) ^ you^ve seen a good many alterations, I
suppose t "
** I have : and troubles too,*'sbe said.
** Ob, I'll tatn the talk ea ray landlord^fc family 1 " I thought
*o myself. " A good wit^t to rftart^-and that pretty girl —
widow — I should like to know her history^ whether she be a
-native of the country, or > as is more ptobablo, an ex^ftie that the
surly indigenae will not recognise for kin.**
Wkh this intention 1 asked Mts. Dean why Heathcliff let
Thrushcross Grange, and preferred living in a situation and
leaidence so mn'dh inferior.
" Is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order f*
i inqvired.
'< Rich sir! " she returned. " " He kas nobody knows vHiai
30 ^UTHERINO HEIGHTS.
money, and every year it increases. Yes, yes, he's rich enough
to live in a finer house than this, but he's very near—- close-
handed ; and if he had meant to flit to Thrushcross Grange, as
soon as he heard of a good tenant, he could not have borne
to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more. It is
strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
world! "
" He had a son, it seems ] "
" Yes, he had one — ^he is dead. "
" And that young lady, Mrs. Heathcliff, is his widow ! "
" Yes. "
" Where did she come from originally V*
** Why, sir, she is my late master's daughter ; Catherine Lin-
ton was her maiden name. I nursed her, poor thing ! I did
wish Mr. Heathcliff would remove hei-e, and then we might
have been together again. "
" What, Catherine Linton! " I exclaimed, astonished. But
a minute's reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly Catl^
erine. " Then, " I continued, " my predecessor's name was
Linton? "
« It was. "
" And who is that Eamshaw, Hareton Eamshaw, who lives
.with Mr. Heathcliff? are they relations 1 "
^* No ; he is the late Mrs. Linton's nephew. "
" The young lady's cousin then ! "
" Yes ; and her husband was her cousin also— one on the
mother't) — the other on the father's side — Heathcliff married
Mr. Linton's sister. "
" I see the house at Wuthering Heights has'Eamshaw'
carved over the front door. Are they an old family 1 "
" Very old, sir ; and Hareton is the last of them, as our Miss
Cathy is of us — ^I mean, of the Lintons. Have you been to
Wuthering Heights 1 — I beg pardon for asking, but I should
like to hear how she is ! "
" Mrs. Heathcliff? she looked very well, and very hand-
some ; yet, I think, not very happy. "
" Oh dear, I don't wonder! " And how did you like the
master ? "
" A rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean. Is not that his char-
acter? "
" Rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone ! The less
you meddle with him the better. "
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS. 31
" He must have bad some ups and downs in life to*make him
such a churl. Do you know any thing of his history V*
** It's a cuckoo's, sir ; I know all about it, except where he
was bom, and who were his parents, and how he got his money
at first — and Hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dun-
nock — the unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parish that
does not guess how he has been cheated! "
** Well, Mrs. Dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell me
something of my neighbora. — I feel I shall not rest, if I go to
bed; so be good enough to sit and chat an hour. "
" Oh, certainly, sir! I'll just fetch a little sewing, and
then I'll sit as long as you please but you've caught cold, I
«aw you shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive it
oat. "
The worthy woman bustled off; and I crouched nearer the
fire : my head felt hot, and the rest of me chill ; moreover I was
excited, almost to a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and
brain. This caused me to feel, not uncomfoitable, but rather
fearful, as I am srill, of serious effects from the incidents of to-
day and yesterday.
She returned presently, bringing a smoking basin, and a
basket of work, and having placed the former on the hob,
drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find me so companion-
able.
Before I came to live here, — she commenced, waiting no
^rther invitation to her stoiy, — I was almost always at Wu-
thering Heights, because my mother had nursed Mr. Hindley
Earnshaw, that was Hareton's father, and I got used to playing
with the children, I ran errands too, and helped to make hay,
find hung about the farm ready for any thing that any body
would set me to.
One fine summer morning — ^it was the beginning of harvest
I remember — Mr. Earnshaw, the old master, came down stairs
dressed for a journey, and afl:er he had told Joseph what was to
be done during the day, he turned to Hindley, and Cathy, and
me — ^fbr I sat eating my porridge with them, and he said,
speaking to his son,
" Now my bonny man, I'm going to Liverpool to-day. What
shall I bring you 1 You may choose what you like, only let it
be little, for I shall walk there and back, sixty miles each way,
that is a long spell ! "
Hindley named a fiddle, and then he asked Miss Cathy ; she
32 .WUTHKBINO HBIOHTB.
y\r$B hardly six yeaiB old^ but she eould lid^ any horse in the
stable, and she chose a whip.
He did not foi^et me, for he had a kind heart, though he
was rather severe sometimes. He profnised to bring me a
pocketful of apples and peai^Si and then he kisaed his children
good bye, and set ^,
It seemed a long while to us all, the three days of his ab-
sence, and oflen did little Cathy ask when he would be home ;
Mrs. Eamahaw expected him by supper^ime on the third
eyening, and she put the meal hour off w & av hour ; there vfeoe
no signs of his coming, however, and at last the children got
tired of running down to the gate to loc^ ; then it grew dark,
she would have had them to bed, but they be^ed sadly to be
allowed to stay up ; and just about eleven o'clock, the door-latch
was raised quietly, and in stept ihe master. He threw himself
into a chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand dST,
for he was nearly killed, he would not'have such another walk
lor the three kingdoms. .
" And at the end of it, to be flighted to death ! " he said,
opening his great coat, which he held bundled up in his arms,
** See here, wife, I was never 60 beaten with any thing in my
lile ; but you must e'en take it as a gifl of God, though it's as
dark almost as if it came & om the devil. "
We crowded round, and over Miss Cathy's head I bad a
pe^ at a dirty, ragged, black-haired ehild, big enough both to
walK and talk — indbed its face looked older than Catharine's^—
yet, when it was set on its ieet, it only stained round, and re-
peated over and over again, some gibberish that nobody could
understand^ I was frightened, and Mrs. Eai-nshaw was ready
to fling it put of doora ; she did fly up, asked how be could
fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when tbey had
their own bairns to feed and ^nd for ? What he meant to do
with it, and whether he were mad 1
The master tried to explain the matter, but he was i^ally
half dead with fatigue, and all that I could make out, amongst
her scolding, was a tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless,
and as good as dumb, in the streets of Liverpool, where he
picked it up, and inquii^ for his owner. Not a soul knew to
whom it belonged, he said* and his money and time being both
limited, he thought it better to4;ake it home with him at once,
than run into vain expenses there, because, he was determined
he would not leave it as he found it.^
PrUTHKSIir« SKIGHTH. SB
Well, the coodttBioB w«8 tlnft wj misfresB gnuabM bei^elf
cahn; etid Mr. EavoftfaavT toU me to wnk ky mad give it dean
thiogBy and id; it sleep with tbe diUdren.
Hkidley « & d Cathy tmnteabed theiB8eh > es widi looking and
Jisteuiiig till peace wai resteired, then Iwth began eearchtng
their father's pockets Ibr the preeents he bad prombed them.
The fottner was a boy of iburteen, but when he drew oat what
had been a Mdle, crowed to morsels in the great coat, he
blubbered alottd; and Cathy, when she learned ^e master had
lost ber'whip in atteoding on the stranger, dsowed her httmor
by grinning and spitting at the stupid Httle thing, earning for
her pauis a sotsad blow from ber nther, to teach her cleaner
mann^ns.
They entirely loused to ha^e it in bed with them, or even in
^eir roefliiy and I had no mere sense, so I pot it on tbe landing
of the stairs, hoping it mig^t be gone on the morrow. By
chance, or else attraoHed by hearing his voice, it crept to Mn
Eai'nshaw's door« and there he fewnd it on quitting his chamber.
Inquiries were made as to how it |[Ot ibere. I was obliged td
confess, and in recompense for my cowaxdke and inhxnnanity
wms sent out e^ the house.
This was Heathdiff's iitst introductioii to the family. Oil
coming back a few days alborwards, for I did not consider my
basifi & raeitt p^ipetiiaJ, I found they had duistened him'* Heath*
clifil " It was the name of a son who died in childhood, and it
has served him «ver since boKb for Cbtistian and surname.
Miss Cathy and he were now rery thick; but Hindiey hated
him, and to say the truth I did the sams, and we ^agued and
went en with him sbaimefttlly, for I was'nt reasonable enough
to ieel my tiij«»tioe, and the mistress never put in a word on his
behalf wh^i she saw him wttmgBd.
He seemed a sullen, patient child ; hardened, peirhaps, to
ill-treatment ^ be would stand HindJey's blows v^ibMit winking
or shedding a tear, and my pinches moved Mm only to draw in
a bteath^ and open his eyes as if he had hnrt himself by acci*
dent, and nobody was to blame.
This endurance made old BamshaW furioas wh & n be dis-
covered his son persecuting the poor teheitos child, as he
called bim. He took to HeathcHff strangely, believing all he
said (for that matter, he said piecious little, and generally the
trudi), and neuing him up far above Cathy > who was too mis-
chievous and wayward for « favonte.
94 WX7TBEKINO HEIGHTS.
So, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeline in the house ;
and at Mrs. Eamshaw's death, which happened in less than
two years after, the yoang roaster had learned to regard his
father as an oppressor rather than a friend, and Heathcliif as a
usurper of his parent's affections, and his privileges, and he
grew bitter with brooding over these injuries.
1 sympathized awhile, but when the children fell ill of the
measles, and I had to tend them, and take on me the cares of
a woman at once, I changed my ideas. Heathcliff was dan-
gerously sick, and while he lay at the worst he would have me
constantly by his pillow ; I suppose he felt I did a good deal
for him, and he had'nt wit enough to guess that I was com-
pelled to do it. However, I will say this, he was the quietest
child that ever nurse watched over. The difference between
him and the others forced me to be less partial ; Cathy and her
brother harassed me terribly, he was as uncomplaining as a lamb ;
though hardness, not gentleness, made him give little trouble.
He got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great
measure owing to me, and praised me fin* my care. I was vain
of his commendations, and softened toward the being by whoso
means I earned them, and thus Hindley lost his last ally ; still I
could'nt dote on Heathcliff, and I wondered oflen what my
master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy, who never, to
my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.
He was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible,
though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and
conscious he had only to speak, and all the house would be
obliged to bend to his wishes.
As an instance, I remember Mr. Eamshaw once bought a
couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when
he discovered it he said to Hindley,
" You must exchange horses with me; I don't like mine,
and, if you won't, I shall tell your father of the three thrashings
you've given me this week, and show him my arm, which is
black to the shoulder. "
Hindley put out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears.
" You had better do it at once, " he persisted, escaping to the
porch (they were in the stable), " you v^l have to, and if I
speak of these blows you'll get them again with interest. "
" Off, dog ! " cried Hindley, threatening him with an iron
weight, used for weighing potatoes and hay.
WUTHERINC HEIGHTS. 35
" Throw it, " he replied, standing still, " and then I'll teH how
you boasted that you would turn me out of doors as soon as he
died, and see whether he will not turn you out directly. "
Hindley threw it hitting him on the breast and down he fell,
but staggered up immeoiately, breathless and white, and had
not I prevented it he would have gone just so to the master,
and got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, in-
timating who had caused it
" Take my colt, gipsy, then ! " said young Eamshaw, " and
I pray that he may break your neck, take him, and be damned,
you beggarly interloper ! and wheedle my father out of all he
has, only afterward show him what you are, imp of Satan — and
take that, I hope he'll kick out your brains \ "
HeathclifThad gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own
stall — ^he was passing behind it, when Hindley finished his
speech by Isnocking him under its feet, and without stopping to
examine whether his hopes were fulfilled, ran away as fast as
he could.
I was surprized to witness how coolly the child gathered
himself up, and went on with his intention, exchangring saddles
and all ; and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to overcome
the qualm which the violent blow occasioned, before he entered
the house.
I persuaded him easily to let me lay the blame of his bruises
on the horse ; he minded little what tale was told, since he had
what he wanted. He complained so seldom, indeed, of such
stirs as these, that I really thought him not vindictive. — I was
deceived, completely, as you will hear.
CHAPTER V.
In die eourse of time Mr. fiarnshftw began to fail. He kad
been active and healthy, yet his strength left hhn suddetdy ; and
when he was confmed to the chinmey-oonier he grew giievoQsly
kritabla A nothing vexed him, and avspected slig^tB oi im
authority nearly threw him mto fks.
This was especially to be remarked if any one lAtenspDed to
impose upon, or domineer over his favorite ; he was painfully
Jealous lest a word should be spc^en amisB to him, aeeratng to
^ave got into his head the notion that, because he hked Headi**
< cliff, all hated, and longed to do him an ill-tnm.
It was a disadvantage to die lad, finr dbe kinder among tos did
not wish to fret the master, so we humored his partiaMty; and
that humoring was xich nourishment to the cdnld's pride and
black tmnper. Still it became in a manner necessary ; twice,
or thrice, Hindley's roanifestajtions of scorn, whUe lits fether was
near, roused die old man to a £bry. He seized has stick to strike
him, and shook with rage that he could not do it.
At last our curate (we had a curate then, who made die living
answer by teaching the Ittde Lantoira and Earnahaws, and & nxi-
ing his bit of land himself), he advised that the yonisg man should
be sent to college, and Mr. Eainshaw agreed, tlmigh widi a
heavy spirit, for he said—
" Hindley was naught, and would never thrive as where he
wandered. "
I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt me to
think the master should be made uncomfoitable by his own good
deed. I fancied the discontent of age and disease arose from
his family disagreements, as he would have it that it did — ^really
you know, sir, it was in his sinking frame.
We might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for two
people — Miss Cathy, and Joseph the servant ; you saw him, I
dare say, up yonder. He was, and is yet, most likely, the weari-
Bomest self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to
rake die promises to himself, and fling the curses on his neigh-
bors. By his knack of sermonizing and pious discoursing,
he contrived to make a great impression on Mr. Eamshaw;
WVrBBB|N« HCICSTfl. 87
mad the man feeble tke miMtM: became* tiw moin mAaeace be
gained.
He waA releiitless in wottylog him about bis eoni'ii concerns,
aiicl abotit rdiQg his cfaidroift i^gidlv. He encoiiraged hkm to
regard Hindiey «s a reprobate; aiid» vigbt after iiigbt» beregu
larly grumbled out a long string of tales against I^allidtff «id
Gatibmse^ «lwajre mmdiDg to flatter Eamshaw's weakaess by
beaptng tbe beaviest blame < m the last.
Certainly, sbe bad ways vnth ber ancb as I neyer saw a cbild
Uke up before ; and Ae put «n of us past ^ux patience fifty
tiaaes aad < »ftpiier in a day : from the boar sbe camedown staki^
till the hour she went to bed, we had not a «iikittte's security thai
sbe would'nt be in mischie£ Her epMls were elways at bigh-
!Nrater mark, ber tongue eiways goin g oitoriBg , lasghing, imd
plaguing «Tery body who would net do the same. A wild»
wicked slip abe was^-^bat she had the boonieA eye^ and sweetest
Uniie, and lightest ioat in the piuish; and, rafter dl, I believe she
ctieant no barm; for, when once dhe made you cry in good earft*
eat, it eeldom happened that she «voyld not keep you company {
and oblige you to be quiet that you tnSgbt eonw > rt her.
She was < Bucb too fond of Heathelifi: The flteatast pun-
jsloDent we oould invent for ber was lo keep ber eeparat*
from him ; yet, she got chided more than any of us on bis ac-
count.
, In ^ay, Ae Hked exceedingly to act the little mistress ; using
her hands freely, and commanding ber companions : she did so
.to me, but I would not beai* slapping and ordering; and se I let
ber know.
Now Mr. Eamshaw did not understand jokes from baiB olnl-
dren : he had always been strict and grave with lliem ; and
Catharine, on ber part, bad no idea why her ftitber should be
grosser and less patient in his ailing condition, than he was in
ins prime.
His peerie^ reproofs wakened in ber a neughty delight to
provoke him ; she vras never so happy as when we were all
scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy
look, and ber ready words ; tumiog Joseph's religious curses
into ridicule, baitmg me, and doing just what ber faxher hated
most ; shovring how her pretended insolence, which he thonght
real, had more power over Heathchff than his kindness ; how
the boy would do her bidding in any thing, and hii only when
it suited bis^Wn ineUnation.
38 WUTHERINO HEtGBTS.
Afber behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes
came fondling to make it up at night.
" Nay, Cathy, " the old man would say, " I can not love thee ;
thou'rt worse than thy brother. Go, say thy prayers, child, and
ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue that we
ever reared thee ! "
That made her cry, at first ; and then, being repulsed con-
tinually hardened her, and she laughed if I told her to say she
was sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
But the hour came at last, that ended Mr. Eamshaw's trou-
bles on earth. He died quietly in his chair one October evening,
seated by the fire-side.
A high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney : it sounded vnld and stormy, yet it was not cold, and
we were all together — ^I, a little removed from the hearth, busy
at my knitting, and Joseph reading his Bible near the table (for
the servants generally sat in the house then, after their work
was done). Miss Cathy had been sick, and that made her still ;
she leaned against her father^s knee, and Heathcliff was lying
on the floor with his head in her lap.
I remember the master, before he fell into a doze, stroking
her bonny hair — ^it pleased him rarely to see her gentle — and
saying—
" Why canst thou not always be a good lass > Cathy V*
And she tunied her face up to his, and laughed, and answered,
" Why can not you always be a good man, father? "
But as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand,
and said she would sing him to sleep. She began singing very
low, till his fingers dropped fi'om hers, and his head sank on his
breast. Then I told her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should
wake him. We all kept as mute as mice a full half-hour, and
should have done longer, only Joseph, having finished his chap-
ter, got up and said that he must rouse the master for prayers
and bed. He stepped forward, and called him by name, and
touched his shoulder, but he would not move— so he took the
candle and looked at him.
I thought there was something wrong as he set down the
light ; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them
to " frame up-stairs, and make little din — they might pray alone
that evening — ^he had summut to do. "
" I shall bid father good-night. first, " said Catherine, putting
her arms round his neck, before we > could hinder her.
WCTHBEINO HBIOHT8.
The poor thing discovered her loM directly--«he screamed
out —
'* Oh, he's dead, Heathcliff ! he's dead ! "
And they both set up a heart-braaking cry.
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bilter ; but Joseph asked
what we could be thinking of^ to roar in that way over a saint in
Heaven.
He told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton for the
doctor and the parson. I could not guess the use that either
would be oC then. Howevever, I went, through wind and rain,
and brought one, the doctor, back with me ; the other said he
would come in the morning.
Leaving Joseph to explain matten, I ran to the children's
room : their door was ajar ; I saw they had never laid down,
though it was past midnight ; but they were calmer, and did
not need me to console them. The little souls were comforting
each other with better thoughts than I could have hit on ; no
parson in the world ever pictured Heaven so beautifully as they
did, in their innocent talk ; and, while I sobbed and listened,
I could not help wishing we were all there safe together.
CHAPTER VI.
Mr. Hindlet came home to the funeral ; and — ^a thing that
amazed us, and set the neighbors gossiping right and left — ^he
brought a wife with him.
What she was, and where she was bom, he never inform*
ed us ; probably she had neither money nor name to recom-
mend her, or he would scarcely have kept the union from his
father.
She was not one that would have disturbed the house much
on her own account. Every object she saw, the moment she
crossed the threshold, appeai*ed to delight her ; and every cir-
cumstance that took place about her, except the preparing for
the burial, and the presence of the mourners.
I thought she was half silly, from her behavior while that
went on ; she ran into her chamber, and made me come with
her, though I should have been dresnng the children ; and there
40 wtrTxs & fNo & xi«BT«yL
tkn Bat cfaivenag^ aad i:lM|»im; htr hvadA, and nskmg xsepeat-
edly —
" Are they gone y^ i "
Theo she began tkoseribiitg Wtk hytfeiicd eaQodon the efect
it produced on her to see blade, «nd started!, and trammed, and
Bt last fell a wee»phig ; and when I asked What yrau tlie matter,
answered she didn't know, but she felt so afraid of dying !
I imagined ber ws Httle likely to die as myBeMl Sie was
rather tJain, b«t young, and fresh-complexioaMd, and ter eyes
aparkled as bright as dianxnids. I did remark, to be Bai'e,'lii«t
mounting the stairs made her bres^e very quick, lliat the least
sudden noise set her all in a quiver,, axid that she couglied brow-
blesoniely sonnetinaes ; hat I knew nothing of what tl^e syifeip-
toisis port)ended, and had no smpulse to sympathiie with lien
We don't in ^net^l take to foreigners h & te^ Mr, Lockwood;
unless they take to os first.
Young Eamdhaw was altered ooOBsiderabiT in th« tlaree y^oa
of his absence. He had grown aparet, and k»t his oc^or, and
c^ke and dressed qait« diffi^'eatly ; and, oa tbe ^v^dry day of
his return, he told Jose;^ and me we maat thenceforth quarter
ourselves in the back-kitchen, and leave the house for him.
Indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a small spare
room for a parlor ; but his wife expressed such pleasure at the
white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes
and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to
move about in, where, they usually »at» that he thought it un-
necessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.
She expressed pleasure^ too, at finding a sister among her
new acquaintance, atkl she pratded to Catherine, and kissed
her, and ran about with her, and gave her qmandties of pres*
eats, at the beginning. Her siSectkm tired very aooa, however,
and when ehe grew peevish, Hindley became tyrannical. A
few words from her, evinckig a dislike to HeathcHff, were
enough to rouse in liim all his old hatred of the boy. He
drove him from ^aek company to the servants, deprived him of
the instructions of the curate, and insisted that he shoald labor
out of d^oors instead, cotnpeltiag him to do so, as hard as any
other lad en the & rm.
He bore his degradation pretty well at first, because Oatiiy
taught him what she learned, and worked or played with him
in the fields. They both promised fair to grow up as rude as
•ava^eap the young masler being eotirdy i»sgMgeiit how they
WflTTUBKIBro heichtk ^1
bebftTedy and wbat they did, so thej kept clear of faim. He
would not even have Been after their going to church on Sun*
days, only Joseph and the ^curate fvpriroaoded his cardesBnoss
when they Ahgented l^iemselves, aiid Chat reinind«i him to
order Heathoiiff a floggitig, and Oatfherine a iaat fiem diauer or
Aopper.
£ttt k was one ^£ th«r chief amusemeBls to run away to l^o
Aoorg Hn llie storaing and remiun there all day, and the after*
puais^fieaX gxew a nobre thmg to iaugh mt. Ilie curate might
set as many drtiplero as he pleased for Catherine to get by
beaat, atad Joseph in%ht thmrii HeathdHT till his ami ached \
^y ^i^et every thn^ the minute ihey were togedier again, at
least the minute they had contiived eonie naughty plan of re^
^f^nge ; and many a time I've cried to myself to wateh them
growiag more reddess datly^ and I not darmg to speak a syila'-
ble, for fear of losing the small power I still retained ov«r the
«nfti«ided creaCtures.
One Sunday evening, it chanced that diey w«re banished
irom the eltti^g-room, Ifer making a noise, or a light oflense of
the kind, and when I went to call dwm to rapper, I could dit*
iDover them nowhei^.
We eeaixshed the house, above and below, and the yaid, and
•CaUee-^^ey were invisible ; and at last, Hia^y, in a passion,
told us to bolt the doors, and swtyre nobody ehould kt them in
Ihat tilght.
The household went Co bed ; and i, too mmctous to lie down,
topened my laCttoe, and put my head out lx > hearicen, tiiough it
tained, determined to admit them, in spite of the prohibition,
jBhould they return.
In a while, I vHafcinguiBhed steps coming up the road, and the
light of a laitiem ^immei^ through the gate.
I threw a «hawl over my head, and ran to prev^mt them irom
waking Mr, Eaxnshaw by knocking. There was Healhcljff by
hiiR9elf ; it gave me a start to see him alone.
" Where is MisB Catherine V I cried, huiriediy. •• No acci-
dent, i hope V
" At ThrushcrosB Grange, " he amvvered ; •* and I would
have been there too, but they had not the xminnera to ask rae
to stay.^'
" Well, yott will catch it T I said; < *TMi*il never be conl»tit
till you're sent about yoor bushiees. Whut in the w & ld led
you wandecMiig to Thnnhcroaa Ghrange (^
42 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
'* Let roe get off my'wet clothes, and Fll tell you aU about
it, Nelly, " he replied.
I bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he un-
dressed, and I waited to put out the candle, he continued —
^* Cathy and I escaped from the wash-house to have a ramble
at liberty, and, getting a glimpse of the Grange lights, we
thought we would just go and see whether the Lintons passed
their Sunday evenings standing shivering in comers, while their
father and mother sat eating and drinking, and singing and
laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. Do you
think they do ? Ov reading sermons, and being catechised by
their man-servant, and set to learn a column of Sciipture names,
if they don't answer properly V
" Probably not, " I responded. " They are good children, no
doubt, and don't deserve the treatment you receive for your bad
conduct. "
" Don't you cant, Nelly, " he said, " nonsense ! We ran from
the top of the Heights to the park, without stopping — ^Catherine
completely beaten in the race, because she was barefoot. You^Il
have to seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. We crept
through a broken hedge, groped our way up the patb, and
planted ourselves on a flower-pot under the drawing-room vdn-
dow. The light came from thence ; they had not put up the
shutters, and the curtains were only balf closed. Both of us
were able to look in, by standing on the basement and clinging
to the ledge, and we saw — ah ! it was beautiful-r-a splendid
place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and
tables, and a pure white ceiling bordered by gold, a shower of
glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the center, and shim-
mering with little soft tapers. Old Mr. and Mrs. Linton were
not there. Edgar and his sister had it entirely to themselves ;
shouldn't they have been happy 1 We should have thought
ourselves in heaven ! And now, guess what your good childi'en
were doing ? Isabella — ^I believe she is eleven, a year younger
than Cathy— lay screaming at the farther end of the room,
shrieking as if witches were running red-hot needles into her.
Edgar stood on the health vsreeping silently, and in the middle
of the table sat a little dog sbaking its paw and yelping, which,
from their mutual accusations, we understood they had nearly
pulled in two between them. The idiots ! That was their
pleasure ! to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair;
and each begin to cry because both, afier struggling to get it,
WUTHSRIHO HEIGHTS. 43
refosed to take it. We laugiied outright at the petted things,
we did despise them ! When would you catch me wishing to
have what Catherine wanted ? or find us hy ourselves, seeking
entertainment in yelling, and sohbing, and rolling on the ground,
divided by the whole room ? I'd not exchange, for a thousand
lives, my condition here, for Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross
Grange — ^not if I might have the privilege of flinging Joseph
off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with Hind-
ley's blood ! "
" Hush, hush ! " I interrupted. " Still you hare not told me,
Heaihcliff, how Catherine is left behind V*
" I told you we laughed, " he answered. The Lintons heard
us ; and with one accord they shot Hke arrows to the door.
There was silence, and then a cry,'Oh, mamma, mammal Oh,
papa! Oh, mamma, come here. Oh, papa, Oh!'They really
did howl out something in that way. We made frightful noises
to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off the ledge,
because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
better flee. I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging her on,
when all at once she fell down.
'''Run, Heathcliff, run ! she whispered ;'they have let the
bull-deg kx)6e, and he holds me !'
" The devil had seized her ancle, Nelly ; I heard his abom-
kiable snorting. She did not yell out — no 1 She would have
scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a
mad cow. I did, thoughr} I vociferated curses enough to anni-
hilate any fiend in Gbflitendom ; and I got a stone and thrust it
between his jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down
. his throat. A beast of a servant came up widi a lantern, at last,
shouting —
'''Keep fast. Skulker, keep fast !'
" He changed his note, however, when he saw Skulker's
game. The dog was throttled off— his huge, purple tongue
hanging half a foot out. of his mouth, and his pendent lips stream-
ing with bloody slaver.
" The man took Cathy up — she was sick ; not from fear, I'm
certain, but from pain. He carried her in ; I followed, grum-
bling execrations and vengeance.
"'What prey, Robert 1 hallooed Linton from the entrance.'
"'Skulker has caught a little girl, sir,'he replied, and there's
a lad here,'he added, making a clutch at me,'who looks an
oat*aiid-outer! Very Hke, the robbers were for putting them
44 WUTHBRIVa HXIOHTS.
'■''■'.11.1.1 I ■ . I I I I .^1
through tlM wiadow, to open the Joors to the gang, after «U
were asleep, tliat they nught murder us at their ease. Hokl
your tongue, you foul-mouthed thie^ you 1 you shall go to Che
gallows for thk. Mr. Linton, sir, don't lay hy your gun V
<'< No, no, Robert]'said the old fooL < The raseals knew diat
yesteorday was my rent day; they thought to have me idevexly.
Come in ; I'll furnish th^Bi a rec^tioo. There, John, fasten the
chain. Give Skulker some water, Jenny. To beard a magis
trate in his strong-hold, and on the Sabbath, too ! where wil
their iasolenee step? < %, my dear Maty, look herel Don't
be afraid, it is but a boy— yet, the viUain scowls so plainly in
his fece, would it not be a kmdne/ss to ihe ^kwntry to hang him
at once, before he shews his luiture in actsi, < bs well as fealwres ?'
''He pulled me under the -chandelier, and Mrs. Linton placed
her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in honror. The
cowardly children crept neaiPW^ also, Isabella lisping^^
" * Fiightful thing! Put hkn in the cellar, papa. He'a ex-
actly like the sen of ^ fortuae-teller« that stele my tame pheaaanft.
Isn't he, Edgai*]'
" < " While they examined me, Oadiy < iame rouad ; the heasd
the last speech, and laughed. Edgar Linton, after an wquisitive
stare, collected sufficient wit to recognise her* They see us at
diurch, you know, though we seldom meet them elsewhere.'
** * That's Miss Eamshaw !'he whispered to his molhery * and
look how Skulker has bitten her — how her fool bleeds V
"'Miss Eamshaw ? Nonsense !'cried the dwne,'Miss Eann
shaw scouring the country with a gipi|y i Axud yet, my deai-,
the child is in mottmin,fl^-^'«ureiy it is-^-^and she may be lanwd
for life!'
« < What culpable carelessness in her brother!'exclaimed Mr.
Linton, turning from me to Catherine.'I've understood from
SbieldeiB (that was the curate, sir) that he lets her grow up in
absolute heathenism. But who is this ? Where -did she pick
up this companion 1 Oho ! I declare he is that strange acqui-
sition my late neighbor made in his journey to Liverpoo!--*
little Lascar, or an American or Spanish castaway.'
" * A wicbsd boy, at «ll invents,'remarked the old lady, < and
quite unlit for a decent house ! Did you notice his language,
Linton 1 I'm shocked that my childi^en shouldlaave beard it.'
" I recommenced cursing — don't be angry, Nelly — and so
Kobeit was ordered to ti^e me off. I recused to go without
Cathy ; he draped me into the garden, pushed the lantern int^
WUTHRRING HEIGHTS. 45
my hand, assured me that Mr. Eamshaw should be informed
of my behavior, and biding me march directly, secured the door
again.
** The curtains were still looped up at one comer ; and I re-
sumed my station as spy, because, if Catherine had wished to
retmn^ I intended shattering tfaetr great glass panes to a million
ftagmantB, unloss they kt her out.
: " She sat on the so^ quietly, Mrs. Lintoa took off the gray
ckmk of the dairy maid which we had borrowed for our excur*
sion^^^haidDg her head, and expostulating with her, I suppose ;
she was a young lady, and they made a disdnetioD between her
treatmcot and mine. Then the woman senrant brought a basin
of warm water, and wariied her feet, and Mr. Linton mixed a
tumbler of negus, and Isabella emptied a platefiil of cakes into
her lapi, and Edgar stood gaping at a distance. Afterward,
they dried and combed her beaudiul hair, and rave her a pair
of enormous slippers, and wheeled her to the & re ; and I left
her, as merry as she could be, diiriding her food between the
little dog and Skulker, whose nose sho pinched as he ate, and
kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of die Lintons
-—a dim reflection from her own enchanting faoe " < -I saw they
were full of stupid admiration ; she is so immeasurably superior
to them^ — ^to every body on earth ; is she not, Nelly ] "
** There will more come of this business than you reckon on/'
I answered, covering him up and extinguislnng die Wg^t; *'You
are incurable Heathcliff, and Mr. Hindley will h & ve to proceed
to extremities, see if he won't. "
My words came truer than I desired. The luckless adrentttro
made Eamshaw furious ; and then Mr. Linton, to mend matterB,
paid us a visit himself on the moiTow, and read die young mas-
ter such a lecture on the road he guided his family, that bi was
sdrred to look about him in earnest.
Heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first
word he he spoke to Miss Catherine should ensure a dismissal ;
and Mrs. Eamshaw undertook to keep her sisterwin-law in due
restraint v?hen she returned home, employing art, not Ibrce*^
with force she wwuld have found it impossible.
CHAPTER VIL
Catht stayed at Thrushcross Grange five weeks* till Christ-
mas. By that time her ankle was thoroughly cia-ed, and her
manners much improved. The mistress visited her often, in
the interval, and commenced her plan of reform, by trying to
raise her self-respect with fine clothes, and flattery, which she
took readily ; so that, instead of a wild, hatless little savage .
jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all breath-
less, there lighted from a handsome b]ack pony a very dignified
person with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered
l)eaver, and a long cloth habit which she was obliged to hold
up with both hands that she might sail In.
Hindley lifted her fi:om her hoi-se, exclaiming, delightedly,
" Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty ! I should scarcely
have known you — you look like a lady now — Isabella Linton
is not to be compared with her, is she, Frances V*
''Isabella has not her natural advantages, " replied his wife,
" but she must mind and not grow wild again here. Ellen,
help Miss Catherine off v^th her things — stay, dear, you will
disaiTange your curls — let me untie your hat. "
I removed the habit, and there shone foith beneath a grand
plaid silk frock white trousers and burnished shoes ; and, while
her eyes sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to
welcome her, she dare hardly touch them lest they should fawn
upon her splendid garments.
She kissed me gently, I was all Hour making and Christmas
cake, and it would not have done to give me a hug ; and, then,
she looked round for Heathcliff. Mr. and Mrs. Eamshaw
watched anxiously their meeting, thinking it would enable
them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for
hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.
Heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. If he were care- .
less and uncared for, before Catherine's absence, he had been
ten times more so since.
Nobody but I even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week ; and children of his age
seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water. Therefor^,
not to mention his clothes, which had seen three months'service»
WUTHERINGHSI6HT0. 47
•
in mire and dust, and his thick uncombed hair, the surface cf
hi^ face and hands was dismally beclouded. He might well
skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a bright, graceful
damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed counteipart
to himself, as he expected.
" Is Heathcliflf not herel " shi9 demanded, pulling off her
gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully whitened with doing
nothing, and staying in doors.
" Heathcliff, you may come forward, " cried Mr. Hindley en-
joying his discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding
young blackguard he would be compelled to present himself.
'* You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like the
other servants. "
Cathy, catching a glimpe of her friend in his concealment,
flew to embrace him, she bestowed seven or eight kisses on nis
cheek within the second, and then stopped and, drawing back,
burst into a laugh, exclaiming,
" Why, how very black and cross you look ! and how —
how fiinny and grim ! But that's because I'm used to Edgar
and Isabella Linton. Well, Heathcliff, have you forgotten me.1 "
She had some reason to put the question, for shame and
pride threw double gloom over his countenance, and kept him
immovable.
''Shake hands, Heathcliff, " said Mr. Eamshaw, condescend-
ingly ; ** once in a way» that la permitted. "
*'I shall not ! " replied the boy, finding his tongue at last,'* I
shall not stand to be laughed at, I shall not bear it ! "
And he would have broken from the circle, but Miss Cathy
seized him again.
" I did not mean to laugh at you, " she said,'* I could not
hinder myself, Heathcliff; shake hands, at least! What are
you sulky for? It was only that you looked odd. If you
wash your face and brush your hair it will be all right. But
you are so dirty ! "
She gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her
own, and also at her dress, which she feared had gained no em-
bellishment from its contact with his.
" You needn't have touched me! " he answered, following
her eye, and snatching away his hand. ^ I shall be as dirty as I
please, and I like to be dirty, and I will be dirty. "
With that he dashed head foremost out of the room, amid the
meniment of the master and mistress, and to tho serious distoib- .
WUTRBBINff HBIGffTS.
ance of Catberine, wko could not comprehend . how her re-
marks shcmld have produced auch an exhibition: of bad tem-
per.
After playing lady's maid to the new comer, and putting Tny
cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful
with great fires befitting Christmas eve, I prepared to sit down
and amuse myself by singing carols, all ak > ne; regardless of
Joseph's affirmations that he considered the merry tunes I chose
as next door to songs.
He had retired to private prayer in bn chamber, and Mr.
and Mrs. Earashaw were engaging Miser's atten{i < m by sundry
gay trifles bought for her to present to the little Lintona, as an
acknowledgment of their kindness.
They had invited them to spend die morrow at Wuthering,
Heights, and the invitation had been accepted on one condition :
Mrs. Linton begged thi^ her darlings might be kept carefully
apart from that " naughty, swearing boy.'*
Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I mnelled the
rich scent of the heating spices, and admired the sldning kitchen
utensils, the polished clock decked in holly, Aie sfiver mugs
ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled ale for supper,
and, above all, the speckless purity of my particular care — the
scoured and well-swept floor.
I gave due inward applause to every object, and then I re-
membered how old Earnshaw used to come in when all was
tidied, and call me a cant lass, and slip a shilling into my hand
as a Christmas-box ; and from that I went on to think of his
fondness for Heathclifl^ and lus dread lest he should suffer neg-
lect afler death had removed him ; and that naturally led me to
consider the poor lad's situation now, and f^m singing I changed
ray mind to crying. It struck me soon, however, there would
be more sense in endeavorine to repair some of his^ wrongs than
. shedding tears omr them, 1 got up and walked into the court
to seek him.
He was not & r. I foi^nd him smoothing the glossy coat of
the new pony in the stable, and j^seding the other beasts, accord-
ing to custom.
" Mak» baste, Heatheliff, " I said, ** the kitchen is so oomfort-
al)le, and Joseph is up-stairs. Make haste, and let me dress you
smart before Miss Cathy comes out, and then you can sit to-,
gether, with the whole hearth to yourselves, and have a long
chattee tiil bedstone. "
WUTBS1INOHBIOHT8. 49
He proceeded with his task, and never tunied his head to-
ward me.
" Come — are you commg 1 " I continued. " There's a little
cake for each of you, nearly enough ; and you'll need half an
hour's donning. "
1 waited five minutes ; hut, getting no answer, then left him.
Catherine supped with her brother and sister-in-law; Joseph
and I joined at an unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on
one side and saucinesson the other. His cake and cheese re-
mained on the table all nigbt for the fairies. He managed to
continue work till nine o'clock, and then marched dumb and
dour to his chamber.
Cathy sat up late, having a world of things to order for the
reception of her new friends : she came into the kitchen once
to speak to her old one, but he was gone, and she only staid to
ask what was the matter with him, and then went bacL
- In the morning he rose early ; and, as it was a holy day, car-
ried his ill-humor into the moors, not reappearing till the fkmily
were departed for church. Fasting and reflection seamed to
have brought him to a better spirit. He hung about me for a
while, and, having screwed up his courage, exclaimed abruptly,
" Nelly, make me decent : I'm going to be good. "
*'His^h time, Heathclifl*, " I said ; " you have grieved Cathe-
rine ; she's sorry she ever came home, I dare say. It looks as
if you envied her because she is more thought of than you. "
The notion of envying Catherine was incomprehensible to
him ; but the notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.
" Did she say she was grieved ? " he inquii-ed, looking very
serious.
" She cried when I told her you were off again this morning. "
*« Well, I cried last night, " he returned, " and I had more
reason to cry than she. "
" Yes, you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart
and an empty stomach, " said I. " Proud people breed sad sor-
rows for themselves. But if you be ashamed of your touchiness,
you must ask pardon, mind, when she comes in. You must go
up and offisr to kiss her, and say — ^you know best what to say,
only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her converted into
a stranger by her grand dress. And now, though I have dinner
to get ready, I'll steal time to arrange you so that Edgar Linton
shall look quite a doll beside you, and that he does. You are
youDgitr, and yet I'll be bound you wa taUor and twice as broad
C
50 wuTfliiftrNO flifoHTfl.
across the shoulders : you couM knock him dowii itt k'twinkling
—don't you feel that you could V
Heathcliff's face brightened a moment, thfen it ^fiB bVercast
afresh, and he sighed.
" But, Nelly, if I knocked him down twenty times^thdt wouldn't
make him less handsome or me more so. I wish 1 had light hair
and a fair skin, and was dressed, and behaved iftil Well, and had
a chance of hieing as rich as he will be !^
" And cried for mamma at every turn, " I Addbd, * " knd tiiem-
blod if a country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat tt home
all day for a shower of rain, O, Heathcliff, you are showing a
poor spirit 1 Come to the glass, and 1*11 let jroU see what you
should wish. Do you mark those two lines between your eiyes,
and those thick brows, that, instead of rising arched, sirtk in the)
ihiddle ; and that couple of black fien\is, so deeply ijuried, ^hb
never open their windows boldly, but liirk glinting under them,
like devil's spies % Wish and learn to bmooth away the sfcirly
wrinkles, to raise your lid & frankly, land change the fiends to con-
fident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and
always Iseeing friends where they are hot sur* ot fbi & s. I > 6n't
fet the expression of a vicious cur that appeal's to know the
icks it gets are its desert, and yet h^tes iall the world, as well
BB the kicker, for what it suffers.'*
" 111 other words, I must vnsh for Edgar Linton's great blue
eves ahd even for^ead, " he replied. " I do, and & at won't
hfelp me to them.*'
** A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad, " I con-
tinued, " if you were a regular black, and a bad one will turn
the bonniest into something worse than u^ly. And noW that
we'viB done washing, and combing, and sulkin?, tell me'^^her
ybu don't think yourself rather handsome % 1*11 tell yoto, I do.
You*^ fit for a prince in disguise. Who knows but yxMt fkthist
was Emperot " of China and your mother an Indian queeh, each
of thtem able to buy up, with one week*s income, Wtithfering
Heights atld Thrushcross Grange together 1 Attd ybti wtere kid-
napped by wicked sailors, and brought to England. Wierfe I in
your place, I would frame high notk > niB of my bir^, ahd the
thoughts of What I was should giv« me courage ^nd dignity to
Buppiort the oppressions of a little fermfer !*'
So I chatted on ; and HeathcHff grWoaliy lobt his fr6wn, tod
tl^gan to look miite pleasant, when^ kll lit oncb, our coavetBatiofi
tv & a interrufiitM by t ramb^^ 8bW8 tiiorviiig lipL die wid tad
WVttEtlltO HftttttTft. ftl
Mitdting ^d c^ntL He rtin to thd whidofr nr,d I to tlie door,
J«i» ilk titnd to behold the two LimotM deseend itom the family
^itrfiagej fltiiothered in ckcJcs iitid fafB/iiod tlie £«rmbawi dis^
mottnt frott their hotBea : ^ey often rode to church in winter.
Catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
iiAo tlie boube and «et them belbre the fire^ which quickly put
eek^t into tlieir white tin & BB.
I urged my compfttiloii to heaten now, and show his amiable
humor, and he willingly obeyed ; but ill Ittck would have it
that» ud he optsned the doer leading ftx > m the kitchen on oue side,
Iti^ey opetied it on the cfther. They met ; and the master,
ktkiBMd Ht seeing him clean and cheeiiul, or perhaps eager to
keep his promise to Mrs. Linton, shoved him back with a sud-
den ^irust, and angrily bade Joseph " keep the fellow out of the
r6om*— send him into & e garret till dinner is over. He'll be
eraiftming his fingers in the taxts, snd stealing the firuit, if left
alone vdth them a minute. "
*• Nay > Sir, " I could not e.void answering, " hell touch noth-
ibg) not he-*Hatid, I sU]^ > ose) he mest have Us share of the dain*
ties as well as we. "
** He shdl h»xe hii share of my hand, if I catch him down
gtuks ligiuti till d«rk, " cried Hindley. " Begone, you vaga*
bowll Whut! you ate attempting the coxcomb, are yout
Wait tin I get hold of those elegant loc ks se e if I won't pull
them a bit longer ! "
** fhey aire long enough ahetidy, " observed Master Linton,
peepinf fh > i & the door-way, " I wonder diey don't make his
head ache. It's like a colt's mane over his eyes ! "
He ventured this resaftrk without any intention to insult ; but #
Heathclii^s violent firamre w«mi not prepsred to endure the ap«
peatufioe ef impetvltience ftom one vrhom he seemed to hate,
«f««i then, %e a iiv«iL He seized a tureen of hot apple-sauce,
like 1fif%t thing thAt emne under his gripe, and dashed it full
Hgidnet tte i^peekerli ftce and neck^^wlio instantly commenced
a lameet thlit btought Issbelle and Catherine to the place.
Mr. EatnshawsniBLtefaed up the eulprit ditectiy, and conveyed
him to his chamber, where, doubtless, he administered a tough
Mtttedy te eool the fit of passion, for he reappeared red and
breathless. I gt > t the dishekih, end, rather spitefuHy, scrubbed
Sdgar'^ nose iMid 4nMC^, sffirmmg it served nim right for med-
dling. His sister began weeping to go home, and Cathy stood
^ imf & mJuA^ bliithtogftr «1L
58 WUTHERIN6BEIOBT8.
''You should not have spoken to him! " she expostulated
with Master Linton. " He was in a bad temper, and now
you've spoiled your visit, and he'll be flogged — I hate him to be
flogged * I can't eat my dinner. Why did you speak to him,
Edgar r
" I didn't, " sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and
finished the remainder of the purification with his cambric
pocket-handkerchief. " I nromised mamma that I wouldn't say
one word to him, and I didn't ! "
" Well, don't cry! " replied Catherine contemptuously.
" You're not killed— don't make more mischief— my brother is
coming — be quiet ! Give over, Isabella ! Has any body hurt
youV
" There, there, children — ^to your seats! " cried Hindley,
bustling in. " That brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.
Next time. Master Edgar, take the law into your own fists — ^it
will give you an appetite ! "
The little party recovered its equanimity at the sight of the
fi:'9grant feast. They were hungry, after their ride, and easily
consded, since no real harm had befallen them.
Mr. Eamshaw carved bountiful platefuls ; and the mistress
made them merry with lively talk. I waited behind her chair,
and was pained to behold Catherine, with dry eyes and an in-
different air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose before
her.
" An unfeeling child, " I thought to myself, " how lightly she
dismisses her old playmate's troubles. I could not have imag-
ined her to be so selfish. "
She lifted a mouthful to her lips ; theo* she set it down again :
her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. She
slipped her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth
to conceal her emotion. I did not call her unfeeling long, for I
perceived she was in purgatory throughout the day, and weary-
ing to find an oppoitunity of getting by herself, or paying a visit
to Heathcliff, who had been locked up by the master, as I dis-
covered on endeavoring to introduce to him a private mess of
victuals.
In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that he might
be liberated then, as IsabejUa Linton had no partner: her en-
treaties were vain, and I was appointed to supply the defi-
ciency.
We got rid of all gloom in thq excitemQut of the exercise, and
WUTHIEIMO fl BIGHTS. .58
our pleasure was increased by the arrival of the Gimmerton
band, musteringfifteen strong; a trumpet, a trombone, clarion-
jDets, bassoons, French horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
Thej go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every Christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate
treat to hear them.
After the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees. Mrs. Eamshaw loved the music, and so they gave
us plenty.
. Catherine loved it too ; but she said it sounded sweetest at
the top of the steps, and she went up in the dark : I followed.
They shut the house door below, never noting our absence, it
was so full of people. She made no stay at the stair's head, but
mounted farther to the garret where Heathcliff was confined ;
and called him. He stubbornly declined answering for a while
— she persevered, and finally persuaded him to hold communion
with her through the boards.
I let the poor things converse unmolested, till I supposed the
songs were going to cease, and the singers to get some refresh-
ment : then I clambered up the ladder to warn her.
Instead of finding her outside, I heard her voice within. The
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the
roof, into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost
difficulty I could coax her out aeaiu.
. When she did come, HeathchfT came with her ; and she in-
sisted that I should take him into the kitchen, as my fellow-ser-
vant had gone to a neighbor's to be removed from the sound of
our " devil's psalmody, " as it pleased him to call it
I told them I intended by no means to encourage their tricks ;
but as the prisoner had never broken his fast since yesterday's
dinner, I would wink at his cheating Mr. Hindley that once.
He went down ; I set him a stool by the fire, and offered him
a quantity of good things ; but he was sick, and could eat little :
and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. He leaned
his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and re-
mained wrapt in dumb meditation. On my inquiring the sub-
ject of his thoughts, he answered, gravely —
" I'm trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley back. I don't
care how long I wait, if I can only do it at last. I hope he will
not die before I do 1 "
" For shame, Heathclifi*! " said I. < «It is for God to punish
wicked people ; we should learn to forgive.''
94 WUTHl«Iir« HIIOBTS.
'* No. Ood WQo'i; hAv« |li« flmtiafiielioR fiiat I ^all/* he r»-
tiiroed. " I only wwb I knew tH« boit way I Let me alone,
and I'll pUn it out : while I'm tlnnking of th^t I dcm't fbel
pain, " —
But, Mr. liockwood, I forget thewn talesi can Bot divert yon.
I'm annoyed how I should dream of chattering on at such a
rate ; and your gruel cold, and you nodding for bed ! I could
have told HeathcUff'9 history, all that you need hear, in half^a*
dozen words. —
Thus interrupting heraelf, the housekeeper rose, and pro*
ceeded to lay aside her sewing ; but I fek incapable of moving
from the hearth, and I was very far from nodding.
" Sit still, Mrs. Dean, " I qried, ** do sit still another half»hourf
You've done just right to teU the story leisurely. That is the
method I like ; and you must fini9h in the same style. I am in*
terested in every chara«:ter ypu have mentioned, more or less. "
" The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir. "
*'No matter-««*rm not accustomed to go to bed in the long
hours. One or two is ^p\y enough for a person who lies till
ten. "
'* You shouldn't lie till teut There'9 the very prime of the
morning gone long before that time. A person who has not
done one half his day's work by ten o^elock, runs a chance of
leaving the other half undone* "
''Nevertheless, Mrs. Dean, resume yomr chair ; because to-
morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon. I prog-*
QQsticate fi > r myself ai» obatinAte cold, at leaat. "
" I hope not, sir. Well, you muit allow me to leap ove»
some three years* During that spaee, Mrs. Eamshaw " -«*
'* No, no, I'll allow nptlung of the sort Are you acquainted
with the mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and
the cat licking its kitten on the rug before you, you would
watch the operation so intently that puss's neglect of one far
would put you seriously out < rf temper 1 "
" A terrible l«wpy mood, I ^hm$ld say/':
<'On the contrary, a tiresemely aettve one. It is mine «t
present, and therefore eontinine minutely. I perceive that peo^
pie in these regioofs aequire ov«r people in towns the value that
a spider in a dungeon doe9 over a spider in a cottage, to their
various occupants ; and yet the deepened attraction is not en»
tarely owing to the eituation of liie lookerKin. They €20 live
more in earnest, more in tbems^riim, and less in isurfiMse cluuige
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 55
and frivolous external things. I could fancy a love for life here
atni4)8t possible ; and I was a fixed unbeliever in atiy love of a
year's standing. One state resembles setting a hungry man down
to a single dish, on which he may concentrate his entire appe-
tite, and do it justice— the other, introducing him to a table laid
out by French cooks ; he can perhaps extract as much enjoy-
ment from the whole ; but each part is a mere atom in his regard
and rewembrance. "
" Oh i here we are the same as any where else, when you get
tp know us, " observed Mi-s. Dean, somewhat puzzled at my
speech.
" Excuse nae, " I responded ; " you, my good friend, are a
striking evidence against that assertion. Excepting a few pro-
vincialisms of slight consequence, you have no marks of the
manners thai I am habituated'to consider as peculiar to your
class. I am sure yo^ have thought a great deal more than the
generality of servants think. You have been compelled to cul*
tivate your reflective faculties, for want of occasions for fritter-
ing your life away ^n silly trifles.*'
Mrs. Dean laughed.
*'I certainly esteem myself a steady* reasonable kind of body/'
she said^ " not exactly from living among the hills, and seeing
one set of faces, and one series of actions, from year's end to
year's end : but I have undergone shaip discipline, which has
taught me wisdom ; and then 1 have read more than you would
fancy, Mr. Lock wood. You could not open a book in this li-
brary th^t I have not looked into, and got something out of
also ; unless it h^ that fangp of Greek and Latin^ and that of
Frencn ; and those { knov^ one from anotbei'— it is as much as
you can expect of a poor man's daughter.
" However, if 1 am to follow my story in true gossip's ^himi,
I had better go on ; ^nd instead of leaping three years, I will
J)e content to pass to the next summer — the summer of |.778—
that i^ nearly twenty-three years ago. "
CHAPTER VIII.
On the morning of a fine June day, my first bonny little nurs-
ling, and the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock, was born.
We were busy with the hay in a far-away field, when the
. girl that usually brought our breakfasts came running, an hour
too soon, across the meadow and up the lane, calling me as she
ran.
" Oh, such a grand bairn ! " she panted out. •* The finest lad
that ever breathed ! but the doctor says missis must go ; he says
•he's been in a consumption these many months. I heard him
tell Mr. Hind ley — and now she has nothing to keep her, and
she'll be dead before winter. You must come home directly.
You're to nurae it, Nelly — ^to feed it with sugar and milk, and
take care of it, day and night— I wish I were you, because it
will be all yours when there is no missis ! "
" But is she very ill ] " I asked, flinging down my rake, and
tying my bonnet.
" I guess she is ; yet she looks bravely, " replied the girl,
** and she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man.
She's out of her head for joy, it's such a beauty. If I were her
I'm certain I should not die. I should get better at the bare
sight of it, in spite of Kenneth.. I was fairly mad at him. Dame
Archer brought the cherub down to master, in the house^ and
his face, just began to light up, then the old croaker steps for-
ward, and, says he,'Earnshaw, it's a blessing yoiurwife has
been spared to leave you this son. When she came, I felt con-
vinced we shouldn't keep her long ; and now, I must tell you,
the winter will probably finish her. Don't take on, and fret
about it too much ; it can't be helped. And besides, you should
have known better than to choose such a rush of a lass. "
" And what did the master answer 1 " I inquired.
" I think he swore — but I didn't mind him, I was straining
to see the bairn, " and she began again to describe it raptur-
ously. I, as zealous as herself, hui-ried eagerly home to admire,
on my pait, though I was very sad for Hindley's sake ; he had
room in his heart only for two idols — ^his wife and himself — he
doted on both, and adored one; and I couldn't conceive how he
would bear the loss.
WUTHERINGBEIORTB. 57
When we got to Wuthering Heights, there he stood at the
front door ; and, as I passed in, I asked how was the baby ]
" Nearly ready to run about, Nell ! " he replied, putting on a
cheerful sraile.
" And the mistress? " I ventured to inquire, " the doctor
says she's — "
" Damn the doctor ! " he interrupted, reddening. " Frances
is quite right — she'll be perfectly well by this time next week.
Are you going up-stairs 1 will you tell her that I'll come, if
she'll promise, not to talk. I lefl her because she would not
bold her tongue; and she must — ^tell her Mr. Kenneth says
she must be quiet. "
I delivered this message to Mrs. Earnshaw; she seemed in
flighty spirits, and replied merrily —
" I hardly spoke a word, Ellen, and there he has gone out
twice, crying. Well, say I promise T won't speak ; but that
does not bind me not to laugh at him ! "
Poor soul ! Till within a week of her death that gay heart
never failed her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay,
furiously, in affirming her health improved every day. When
Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless at that
stage of the malady, and he needn't put him to further expense
by attending her, he retorted —
*• I know you need not — she's well — she does not want any
more attendance from you ! She never was in a consumption.
It was a fever ; and it is gone— her pulse is as slow as mine now,
and her cheek as cool. "
He told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe
him ; but one night while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of
saying she thought she should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit
of coughing took her — a very slight one----he raised her in his
arms ; she put her two hands about his neck, her £ice changed,
and she was dead.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly
into my hands. Mr. Earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy,
and never heard him cry. Was contented, aa far as regarded
him. For himself he gi'ew desperate ; his sorrow was of that
kind that will not lament; he neither wept nor prayed; he
cursed and defied ; execrated God and man, and gave himself
up to reckless dissipation.
The servants coiild not bear his t3rrannical and evil conduct
long. Joseph and I were th« only two that woidd stay. I bad
.^.UK-Xl. -.1. . ■ — • ^
not the beavt to leav« jny diaiige j and bMde^, you ]u»ow J bad
been hi0 foster^t^, and fi^oused U» behavior movQ readily
tib«B a •tfimg^ wovld.
Joseph remained to hector over tenants and laboreiB ; and
because U wa^ hk vpcaJioii to b^ whem ba bad plenty of wick-
edness to reprove.
The master's bad ways mad bad cojupaniooa farmed a pretty
example for Catberina and Hoatbcliff. Hib treaUnent of thi^
bitter was enough to mtk^ a Send pf a aawt And (nily it ap-
peared aa if the lad wer^ po«^es^^d of some & ing diabolical at
that period. He dejigjited to witnow Uindley degrading him-
self past redemption ; and became daily more iioublofei^'liavage
aulIennaiB ^oA ferocity*
I could not half tell what an infeii^al bouae we bad. The
ctti-aie dixi^iied cailkig, aad nobody decent came aeer ua at last ;
mSem Edgjar Linton'e visito to Miss Cathy wight be an excep-
tion. At fifteen she was the queen of the eountry-eide; abe bad
no peer { aod she 4id tveru o\it a haughty, headstrong ci^eature !
I imn I did xkot, iike ber» after her in & n«y wae past ; and I
jveated her fieque»tjy by trying to bring down bar arrogance;
ehe na^er took m ^verfian U > me, ibough. She bad a wondrous
0oo0tai^y to old attachments ; even HeathcUfif k^t has hold on
her affections unalterably ; and yoang Linton, with all bis supe^
riority, fcuad k difiicult to naake an equally deep impression.
He «!i^as oiy kite meeter ; thait ia his portrait over tbe fireplace.
Xt uaed te ha»g on one aide, and bia wife's on the other ; but
hers has been removed, or else you mi^^t see something of
what ^e waa. Can you «»ake that out V^
Mrs. Dean raiaed the cai»dle, and I di^QeipDed a aofl^featured
face, exceedingly re^enibliiig tbe you^ng lady at the Heights, but
moi^ peasive and amiable in expression. Jt formed a awee(;
picture. Tbe Imig bghl; hair curled c^igbtJy on the temples |
the eyes were large and serious ; the figure alniost too gracoi-
ful. I did not fanrvel bow Catherine £arnsbaw icould forget
ber fifst friend for aucb a« .individual I marveled apuch how
he, witb a fniod to fn^rmptimd to hi^ pofaon, fK > uld & ncy my
idea ofQai^imm^ J^jm^ahwisr*
" A very a^greeaWe porirail;,*'J obawwd tp the bousefceeper.
^-IiiitBker
Yes, she answered ; but he looked bet^r when be was ani^
niatedf tbie^ U ia§ 0jr0fy^y pouAAemaoei be wanted spirit
iofamiDil
Catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the LiatooB since
her five weeks'reijiaence, among them ; and as she had no temp-
tation to show her rough side in their company, and had tha
pense to be ashamed of being ru.de where she experienced such
iavaiiablex^ourtesy ; she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and
genileqfiaQ by her inopenuous cordiality ; gained the admiration
of Isabella, and th^ heart and soul of her brother — acquisitions
that flattered her fi-om the first, for she was full of ambition, and
led her to a4opt a double character, without eicactly intending
to deceive any one.
In the phuce whens she heard Heathclifi* termed a''vulgar
youpg rufiian, " and " woi^se than a brute, " she took care not to
act like him ; bi^t at home she had small inclinatii)n to practice
politeness that would onl^ be laughed at, and i-estrain an unruly
nature when it would bnng her neither credit nur praise.
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering
Heights openly. He had a terror of Eamshaw's reputation,
and shrunk fiozn encountering him ; and yet he was always re-
ceived with our best attempts at civility: the master himself
avoided offending him, .knowing why he came ; and if he coul4
not be gracious, kept out of the way. I rather think his appear-
jance thefce waa distfUJteful to Oatheiine ; she was not aitful—
never played the c-qqi^tt^e, and had evidently an objection to her
two fk-iends ipaeeting at a^l ; for when Heathcliff expressed con-
tempt of jLipton, in ^ presence, she could not half /coincide, ae
jBhe did in l^ absence ; a^ when Linton evinced disgust an4
antipathy to Heathdifi) she dared not treat his sentiments with
indinerence, as if depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely
^any consequence to i^e^*.
I've had many a laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles,
which she vainly sti'ove to hide from my mockery. That soimds
iU-n$LtMTed— rfbut fi^e ^as so prpud, it became really impossible
to pity her distresses, till she should be chastened into mor^
humility.
;$he did bring beraelf finally to confess, a^d confide in me.
There was not a soul else thatjshe might fashion into an adviser.
* Mr. Hindley bad gone from home one aflemoon, and Heath-
cliff piiesum^d to give himsfdf ^, holiday on the strength of it.
Re had reached the age of sixteen then, I think, and without
having bad features or being deficient in intellect, he contrived
to convey an imprea^ion of inward and outward repulsiven
that his pi^jM^at asj^^ x^tai^ n$ > jtraf^ f^
60 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
In the first place, lie had, by that time, lost the benefit of his
early education : continual hard work, begun soon and concluded
late, had extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit
of knowledge, and any love for books or learning. His child-
hood's sense of supenority, instilled into him by the favors of
old Mr. Eamshaw, was faded away. He struggled long to
keep up an equality vnth Catherine in her studies, and yielded
vdth poignant though silent regret ; but he yielded completely,
and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way
of moving upward, when he found he must necessarily sink be*
neath his former level. Then personal appearance sympathized
with mental deterioration ; he acquired a slouching gait and ig-
noble look ; his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated
into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness ; and he
took a grim pleasure, apparently, in exciting the aversion, rather
than the esteem, of his few acquaintance.
Catherine and he were constant companions stil), at his sea-
sons of respite from labor ; but he had ceased to express his
fondness for her in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion
from her girlish caresses, as if conscious there could be no grat-
ification in lavishing such marks of affection on him. On the
before-named occasion he came into the house to announce his
intention of doing nothing, while I was assisting Miss Cathy to
arrange her dress. She had not reckoned on his taking it into
his head to be idle ; and, imagining she would have the whole
place to herself, she managed, by some means, to inform Mr.
Edgar of her brother's absence, and was then preparing to re-
ceive him.
" Cathy, are you busy this afternoon? " asked Heathcliff.
** Are you going any where V*
** No— it is raining, " she answered.
" Why have you that silk fi-ock on, then 1 " he said. " Nobody
coming here, I hope ] "
" Not that I know of, " stammered Miss ; " but you should be
in the field now, Heathcliff-«-it is an hour past dinner time ; I
thought you were gone. "
" Hindley does not often fi-ee us from his accursed presence, "
observed the boy; " I'll not work any more to-day — ^I'U stay
with you. "
" O, but Joseph will tell, " she suggested— you'd better go ! "
" Joseph is loading lime on the ftirther side of Pennistow
Crag; it will take him till dark, and he'll ne^ver know. "
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS. 6f
So saying, lie lounged to the fire, and sat down. Catherine
reflected an instant with knitted brows She found it needful
to smooth the way for an intrusion.
" Isabella and Edgar Linton talked of calling diis afternoon/'
she said, at the conclusion of a minute's sflence. " As it rains, I
hardly expect them ; but they may come, and if they do, you
run the risk of being scolded for no good. "
" Order EUen to say you are engaged, Cathy, " he persisted ;
** don't turn me out for those pitiful siDy friends of yours ! I'm
on the point, sometimes, of complaining that they — but I'll not — "
" That they what? " cried Catherine, gazing at him with a
troubled countenance. " Oh, Nelly! " she added, petulantly
jerking her head away from my hands ; " you've combed my
hair quite out of curl ! That's enough — ^let me alone. What
are you on the point of complaining about, Heathcliff ? "
" Nothing— only look at the almanac, on that wall; " he
pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window, and
continued :
" The crosses are for the evenings you have spent with the
Lintons, the dots for those spent witn me. Do you see, I've
marked every day V
" Yes — very foolish ; as if I took notice ! " replied Catherine
in a peevish tone. " And where is the sense of that ? "
" To show that I do take notice, " said Heathdiff.
" And should I always be sitting with you 1 " she demanded,
growing more irritated. " What good do I get ? what do you
talk about ] You might be dumb or a baby, for any thing you
say to amuse me, or for any thing you do either ? "
" You never told me before that I talked too little, or that
you disliked my company, Cathy ! " exclaimed Heathcliff, in
much agitation.
" It is . no company at all, when people know nothing and
say nothing, " she muttered.
Her companion rose up, but he had not time to express his
feelings further; for a horse's feet wei-e heard on the flags,
and, having knocked gently, young Linton entered, his face
brilliant with delight at the unexpected summons he had
received.
Doubtless Catherine marked the difference between her
friends as one came in and the other went out. The contrast
resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly coal-
country for a beautifuly fertile valley; and hit voice and greeting
•9 i^97||^ii;n/9 u^^Q^^nf
wer« «8 Qpp < ;»|»i|;0 iui his .a^eiict. Jie had a ^weet, loiy inaianer
of Bpeaking, an4 pix > nounqBcl his worjd? bs yq\i do, that is, leas
grun that! we talk here, and softer.
* < I'm not Gome too sooop am I }''j^ m4, C9S!^g ^. look at
me. I had begun to wipis tibe pl^i a^d tidy ^fm draiyer^ a},
^he far epd in the dreas^r.
" No, " answered Cathj^rfw- ^'W^t ar/9 ypu 4pipg l*ie^e,
NeUy] "
" My work, Miss/'I jr^plied. (Mr. Hindjey had j^ven ina
dirjections to ®si]tp fa tWrd p?Lity i^ luiy pnym ^kk^ Linton
chose to pay.)
She stepped jbehipd me md whimpered CPQSsly» ** Tafc? ypw-
4?elf and your dustem oflfj Wb^n ^XMppa^y arp ip ih^ bous#,
^rvants don't conuneoce ^oi^iing and eleapipg in tl^ rQoqpi
where they ar© 1 "
" It's ^ good oppOTt^nity, jPQW that mafitpr ip wyfl^y, " I
a2]^wered aloud^ " he hate^ me to he fidgeting oyei: t^iss^ Umff
in his presence. I'm sure Mr. Edgar will excuse mp. "
" I hate yo^ to he fidjjetiug m my pr^epce, " ^iccljaiwed the
mung lady imperiously, not allowing her jguest tii^^ to spealp:.
She had failed to recover her equanimity siaq^ the IxtiJie ,4,iAp-i^f^
with Heathcliff.
<'I'm spiTy for it, IVIEj^s Cathjeiiiie I " was my respcNptSip ; Ap^ I
proceeded assiduously with my ojpcupatipo.
8be^ supposing @dgar cpula oQt $ee hei*, snatched the cloth
from my hand^ land pMched me, with a prplopged $v^Q£h, yiury
4^pitefully, on the arm.
I have said I did not love her; and ratiber rolishi^d i^jjiortifying
her vanity now and then; besides, fhe lipr|t me ^,:l^tc^n)^}y, sol
atarted up from my knees, and scream^ out-rr
" O, Miss, that's a nasty trick ! you have no ijlg)it to pijp ^,
and I'm not going to bear it ! "
" I did'nt touch you, you lying creat4rer'oxipd s^, h^
fingei-s tingling to repeat the ^ct, and her ^b^ t^ with |:9ge.
She never had power to cqi^ceal hPT p^ssio^, it ^.v^ays ^t %g^
whole complexion in a blaz;/^.
" What's that ^hfui " J j;etpi1;i^, show^g j|i decided pttrpfc)
witness to refute her.
She stamped her foot, wavered a jpoinefft, and ]t}«m, irresist-
ibly impelled by the paughty jspirjt withjui^ lipr, ^l^pped me on
the .chejsk a stinging blow that lillefd both ^yes with ivuter.
WIJT|I««*N^ B«I«P7iiU
ioet I sbpckecl at & a Rouble fantC ^ i|il»^oo4 and vioto^ce wbicfa his
ha • idol bad ^pxiymitte^-
( " Leave the room, Ellen ! " ah» repeated, tre^QbHog all over;
si'Little Huretop, wbo folhw^ Vo» mrerj where, and was
ai j sitting n»i^v npup op the di^r^ at seeing my tem, commenced
crying bin^fliB^ sod sobb^ 4put e(MQpl«)»ts against " wicked
re, aunt Gatky/'wbi < ^ dri9W W fiPi > 7 ¥pw his unlucky bead :
she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor child
D£ wa^ed Evidrlind £4gi^ thoiigfadapa^ laid hold of her hands
to deliver him. In «!» im^ant one w^ wnpfig free^ and the
astonished youi^ miu) felt it apptied over his own ear ifi a way
tht^t could not be mi«jt«kiin Sor je^.
{ie di39w bac)^ in ceff#tenwtion^ lifted Hareton in my
jj arms, wd walked off jto iJie kitcbw with him, leaving the door
of comoumication (j^en ; for I w^ ^urioii^ |o wfttch how they
I would settle their disagre#ixienL
I The insulted visitor moved to the ^spot wfaern h^ h^d laid his
bat, pale and with i^ quiveripg lip^
*• tbaj's right I " I «aid tp myself, ** ^alse warpiog, pnd be-
gone ] It*^ a kiffidu98s (o let yixu bave i^ gli«ipse of biar genuine
43ispo9i^iw/'
'* Wher^ «xe y9U going 1 " demai^ded Catb«ane» adyftpciiig
p9 the door.
He swei-ved aside, and attempted to pasp.
*'You must not go ! " she exclaimed energetically.
" I must and shall ! " he replied in a subdued voice.
'* No, " she persisted, grasping the handle, " not yet, Edgar
Linton — sit down, you shall not leave me in that temper. I
should be nnserable all night, and I won't be miserable for you! "
*'Can I stay after yon h^ve sduek meV* asked Linton.
Catherine was mute.
" Yoju'v^ made me ^raid» ftnd asha m ed of ypu/'be con-
tinui9$lf " VU not come hpre again! "
ISjt^x & jp» b^gan4;o glison and her lid0 (o twinkle,
**4na you tdd a deliberate untruth! " h^ said.
'* I di^n^t !''she cxiedf recoy^ng h^ speech : ** I did
nptbing d^iiber^ely. Well, go if vou |d«i89 > *-^et away. And
m > w rjl cry-r^I'a cry myjaelf sick! "
She dropped down on her knees by a ^air^ and set to
weeping in seiiou* enme^t.
Edgar persevered in hi^ p^polution as < & r as the court i there
64 WUTHBRI S-Q H E I O H T fl.
" Miss is dreadfully wayward, sir ! " I called out. " As bad
as any marred child. You'd better be riding home, or else
she will be sick, only to grieve us. "
The soft thing looked askance through the window — ^he
possessed the power to depart, as much as a cat possesses the
power to leave a mouse half killed, or a bird half eaten.
Ah, I thought, there will be no saving him. He is doomed,
and flies to his fete !
And so it was ; he turned abruptly, hastened into the house
again, shut the door behind him ; and when I went in- a while
after to infoi*m them that Earnshaw had come home rabid
dinink, ready to pull the old place about our ears (his ordi-
nary ftame of mind in that condition), I saw the quarrel had
merely effected a closer intimacy — had broken the outworks of
youthful timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of
fnendship, and confess themselves lovers.
Intelligence of Mr. Hindley's arrival drove Linton speedily
to his horse, and Catherine to her chamber. I went to hide
little Hareton, and to take the shot out of the master's fowling-
piece, which he was fond of playing with in his insane excite-
ment, to the hazard of the lives of any who provoked, or even
attracted his notice too much ; and I had hit upon the plan of
removing it, that he might do less mischief, it he did go the
length of firing the gun.
CHAPTER IX.
He entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear ; and caught
me in the act of stowing his son away in the kitchen cupboard.
Hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror of encounter-
ing either his wild-beast's fondness, or his madman's rage — for
in one he ran a chance of being squeezed and kissed to death,
and in the other of being flung into the fire, or dashed against
the wall — and the poor thing remained perfectly quiet wherever
I chose to put him.
" There I've found it out at last ! " cried Hindley, pulling me
back by the skin of the neck, like a dog. " By Heaven and
Hell, you've sworn between yqn to murder that child ! I know
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS. C5
how it is, now, that he is always out of my way. But, with the
help of Satan, I shall make you swallow the carving knife,
Nelly ! you needn't laugh ; for I've just crammed Kenneth
head downmost, in the Blackhorse marsh ; and two is the same
as one^-and I want to kill some of you ; I shall have no rest
tin I do! "
" But I don't like the carving knife, Mr. Hindley, " I an-
swered ; " it has been cutting red herrings — I'd rather be shot
if you please. "
** You'd rather be damned ! " he said, " and so you shall. No
law in Engltod can hinder a man from keeping his house
decent, and mine's abominable ! open your mouth. "
He held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between
my teeth : but, for my part, I was never much afraid of his
vagaries. I spat out, and affirmed it tasted detestably — " I would
not take it on any account. "
> " Oh ! " said he, releasing me,'< I see that hideous little villain
is not Hiareton — ^I beg your pardon, Nell — if it be, he deserves
flaying alive for not running to welcome-me, and for screaming
as if I were a goblin. Unnatural cub, come hither ! 1*11 teach
thee to impose on a good-hearted, deluded father. Now don't
- you think the lad would be handsomer cropped 1 It makes a
dog £ercer, and I love something fierce. Get me a pair of
scissors — something fierce and trim I Besides, it's infernal
affectation— devilish conceit, it is to cherish our ears — we're
asses enough without them. Hush, child, hush ! well then, it is
my darling ! wisht, dry thy eyes — there's a joy ; kiss me ! What I
it won't 1 Kiss me, Hareton ! Damn thee, kiss me ! By Grod,
as if I would rear such a monster ! As sura as I'm living, I'll
break the brat's neck. "
Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father's arms
with all his might; and redoubled his yells when he canied
him upHStairs and lifted him over the bannister. I cried out
that he would frighten the child into fits, and ran to rescue him.
As I reached them, Hindley leaned forward on the rails to
Csten to a noise below; almost forgetting what he had in his hands.
" Who is thati " he asked, hearing some one approaching the
stair's foot.
I leaned forward, also, for the purpose of signing to Heath-
cliff, whose step I recognized, not to come further ; and, at the
instant when my eye quitted Hareton, he gave a sudden spring,
delivered himsefr from the careless grasp that held him, and fell
j69 wvT9« & ^WopEieB7i|.
There . was sisarc^ly tia^p tp as^p^nenee a tHfiU of bqiiTor.
before we saw that the little wretch was sfife. |ieathcUff s^r;-iv^4
uudei'ueath juilt ^^ the enseal |i)praei)t| ^y a^ p^^r^) i^ipulse ^e
arrested liis despeot, ^^d ^tting hi^ on ]i\s fef t, IqpK^^ ^B ^P
dbpover the author of the accident.
A raiser who has paited with a lucky lottery ticket ibr Qy^
shiltings, ^d finds next day he h^ lost in $i|^ ]:)§.rg§Lii| five
thousand poqnds, cou}4 Y^^l Bhow a 1[ > |^K^ cpmitdnan^f) ]^p
he did on beholding the figure of Mr. Eamsha^ s^l^oyp* St
expressed, plainer than wpr4s coiilfl 4f}i 4^ ?i)l!ll^t ^i^guish
at having inade bini^plf the instrupient pf thYV^artifig l)i§ ^v^
revenge. Ha4 it been dark I d^re say he wpuld h^yf tFiQ4 U >
remedy the ssistake by sni^shii^g Ils^^^eton's ^kull pn th^ 9teps ;
but w9 wi^esiBied his §alvation; apd J was p^pppntly bplpWs
with iqy prpcio^s phfirgf pr^ed to pdy b^^ft.
Hindley descended more leisurely, sobered aiid »bft8he4.
. " It is your fauU, lilies, " he s«^id, ** yo^ pUoiild feeye kept him
out of sight; ypu shQi^M k^ye laJieR \^m fropi m§l fe kP
injured any > vbpre I "
" Injured! " I eried, ftPgnly, *♦ Jf he's m% kiljpd W^\ ^ IIP
i4ipt I Oh ! J wpii499^ bia ?nQth^r 4p@9 i»t mp few h^v gl^?^
to 9ep hpw ypu use liinij, Yqu'v^ wpi-^p than » hpf^thflUTrrrtrftat-
ing your own 9§9h an4 blpod in thfit mupjipr !'^
{ip attprppted to touch thp child, whp pn finding himself witti
jne, sobbed off his jterfpr djreptly. ^t tfee fim 8ng«r hi* fcthgr
}aid on hm, howpypr, bp ^hn^kiad ^g9m louder than M^rp, anil
straggled an if be would gp into ppuvuJsions.
" You dhaii npt mpddlp with him I " I ppmimied^ " Up b^^s
you-r^hpy all hi^te you^ — thfit's thp trgtfa I A btppy fiw»ly yo»
have ; and a pi-etty state you're come to !*'
•^ I shidl cpQie to a prpttipp, yet I NplJy,-')«agbp4 tbp jnis-
guided man, rpcpypiing hi« band.npsiu " At present, pq^ypy
yourself and hii» away.— ?A^4, hark you, Heatbcliff 1 plpar yosx
jtoo, quite from n^y rpi^ch and hPltring.^.I wouldn't murdpr ydu
to-night, unless, perhaps^ I apf; the housp lon fire ; but tb^t's as
my fancy goei»r-f "
Wbilp saying this bfi tpok a pint bottjp of bn^n4y from the
dresser, and poured some into a tumbler.
*f Nay don't \ " I entreated, *■ Mr. ijindlpy, 4o takp waroing.
Have morcy 09 |ibi« iwfoirtunai^ boy, if you j^mjp ootbing ibr
ypsirpplfl "
" Have loercy xm vour ewo aoulT'I md, endeavonng i(»
snatch tbe glaas from Mis bandr
" Not I! on tbe contraiy, I shall have gi^^t pleasure iii
sending it to perdition, to pi||iiab its ^If^l^er*'* exclaimed tbe
blasphenaer, " Here's to its hearty damnation I "
He drank tbe spirits, ^ad impatiently bade us go; termina-
ting bii command with » fe < )^eJ of homd imprecations, too bad
to repeat or reniember.
" It's a pity be e^n not kill himself with drink. " observed
I{eathcUfl^ muttering sin echo of cnraes back, wh^n tbe door
was shut. " He's doing bin yerv utmost ; bMt fait^ constitution
defies him. — Mr. Kennetl^ s^ys he would Wf^ger bis mare that
he'll outlive any inan on tHis side GKmmeiton. and go to the
grs^ve 9, )ioary dinner ; unless «ome happy chance, out of the
pommoo cQu^e, befall him-''
I went into the kitchen, and s^ down to lull my little lamb
to sleep. H^atbcliff, as I thongbt, walked thi-ough to the bam.
It turned out afterward that he only got ^ f^r w^ the other side
of the sfttle, when he flnng himself on a bench by |he wall,
removed frpm (he fire, ond r^inained ^il^nt*
I w»9 rocking H^reton on pn^ knee, »nd bumming e song
th^ began,
" It waB far in the night, and the baimies grat,
The mither beneatt 4ie mools heard tb^ "
when Miss Cathy, who had listeni^d tp tbe bnbbub from her
room, pw* ber he^ in, and wbispowd,
" Are you alone, Nelly]'*
" Yes, Mis^,*'I replied.
She entei-ed and ctpproached the hearth. I, jBupposing she
was going to say something, looked up. The expression of her
f9.ce sampled disturbed and ansdoua* Her Upf went half asunder,
jss if she meant to speak; and she drew a breatbi bu( it escaped
in a sigh instead of a sentence.
I resumi^ my wig'> not having fi?rgott#|| b^ r^^nt be-
havior.
« Where's HeathclifFr'abe said, interrvptiiig m(9-
" About his work in the atable, " waa my aP9wer,
He did not contradict ma ; perhaps, ba bad W\^ V^9 a doze.
There followed another Jong pante, dnrmg wbich I per-
ceived a drop Qv tYfo ^kJ^ WW C9Ximm*§ abeajt to the
fiaga.
68 WUTBBRINO HBI6BT8.
** Is she sorry for her shameful conduct V* I asked myselE
" That will be a novelty, but, she may come to the point as she
will — I shan't help her ! "
No, she felt small trouble regarding any subject save her
own concerns.
" Oh, dear ! " she cried at last. " I am very unhappy ! "
" A pity,** observed I, " you're hard to please — so many
friends and so few cares, and can't make yourself content J "
" Nelly, will you keep a secret for me 1 " she pursued, kneel-
ing down by me and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with
that sort of look which turns off bad temper, even when one has
all the right in the world to indulge it.
" Is it worth keeping ? " I inquired less sulkily.
" Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out ! I want to
know what I should do. To-day Edgar Linton has asked me
to marry him, and I've given him an answer. Now, before I
tell you whether it was a consent or denial, you tell me which
it ought to have been. "
" Really, Miss Catherine, how can I know? " I replied.
" To be sure, considering the exhibition you performed in his
presence this afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse
him ; since, if he asked you after that, he must either be hope-
lessly stupid^ or a venturesome fool. "
" If you talk so, I won't tell you any more, " she returned
peevishly, rising to her feet ; " I accepted him, Nelly ; be quick,
and say whether I was wrong ! "
" You accepted him 1 then what good is it discussing the
matter ] You have pledged your word, and can not retract. "
" But say whether I should have done so— dol " she ex-
claimed in an irritated tone ; chafing her hands together and
frowning.
" There are many things to be considered before that ques-
tion can be answered properly, " I said sententiously ; " first
and foremost, do you love Mr. Edgar 1 "
■ " Who can help it ] of course I do, " she answered.
Then I put her through the following catechism ; for a girl
of twenty-two it was not injudicious.
" Why do you love him. Miss Cathy 1 "
" Nonsense, I do-^that's sufficient. "
" By no means ; you must say why 1 "
" Well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be with.*'
" Bad, " was my commentaiy. v.
WUTHBRIHO BBI0HT8. 60
** And because he is young and cheerful. "
" Bad, still. "
«'And because he loves me. "
" Indifferent ; coming there. "
" And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest woman
of the neighborhood, and I shall be proud of having such a
husband. "
" Worst of alL And, now, say how you love him 1 "
" As every body loves. You're silly, Nelly. "
** Not at all. Answer. "
" I love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head,
and every thing he touches, and every word he says ; I love all
his looks, and all his actions, and him entirely, and altogether.
There now! "
" And why 1 "
" Nay — ^you are making a jest of it ; it is exceedingly ill-
natured 1 It's no jest to me ! " said the young lady, scowling
and turning her face to the fire.
" I'm very far from jesting, Miss Catherine, " I replied. " You
love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and young, and cheer-
ful, and rich, and loves you. The last, however, goes for nothing.
— You would love him without that, probably, and with it you
wouldn't, unless he possessed the four former attractions. "
" No, to be sure not — ^I should only pity him — ^hate him, per-
haps, if he were ugly and a clown. "
** But there are several other handsome, rich young men in
the world ; handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is. What
should hinder you from loving them V*
" If there be any, they are out of my way — I've seen none
Hke Edgar. "
" You may see some ; and he won't always be handsome,
and young, and may not always be rich. "
'" He is now ; and I have only to do with the present. I
wish you would speak rationally. "
** Well, that settles it. If you have only to do with the present,
marry Mr. Linton. "
. " I don't want your permission for that — ^I ihall many him ;
and yet, you have not told me whether I'm right "
** Perfectly right ; if people be right to marry only for the
present. And now let us hear what you are unhappy about.
X our brother will be pleased ; the old lady and gentleman will
not object, I think ; you will escape fiom a disocderly, comforts
less home, into a wealthy, respectable oM ; and y < Ml love Edgar,
and Edgar loves you. All seems smooth and easy^^where is
the obstacle V*
''Here! and hereT replied Catb^ne, ^tfikinff tmt hand on
her forehead titid thd other on her breast. * " Ifi v^teH & ver j > lace
the soal liVes-^in my Botil and vt my hetirt, I'm ddhviiieed I'm
wrong ! "
•* That's very dtrange 1 I can not m^e it < jut.**
" It's my secret; but if yott will not mock at »e, Pfl < 6Xplain
it ; I can't do it distinctly — but I'll give yOtt a feeling of how I
feel. "
She seated herself by tne Again : her c6tinteftance greW ftaddef
and graver, and her clasped bands tn^nbl^d.
" Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams 1 " she dUid sud-
denly, after some minutes'reflection.
" Yes, now and thfen/'I answer^*
" And so do I^ Vxt dreamed in rty life dreamt that hkvo
staid with me ever after, and changed taiy ideas ; they've gOti^
through and through toe, lik« witte tbttyugh Water, and altered
the color of Utif ttiittd. And thift is ohe— -I'm going to tell it^-*
but tak'e car* not to sinile at any part of it. "
" Ohi don't. Miss Ctttherine! " 1 cn*d. " W^'ro disrtjal
enough Without cohjttrihg np ghosts tiVrd visions to perptex us.
Come, come, be merry, And Kfce ycmfs^if 1 Look at little Hare-
ton — Jie^s dreaming nothing dreary. How «Wieetly he BiAites iA
bis sleep ! "
**Yes; atld hdW «Weifetly Ms fktbfef oliW^S fe his «olJtttde !
You remember him, I dare fe^y, whett be wa« jliftt feuch tinother
As that chubby thiog-^Jneariy as young and bittocfeot. How-
ever, Nelly, I shall oblige you to listen — it's not long^ and l*vd
no prtwer to be teefh-y tt > -night. "
" I won't hear it, I won^ hfeat it!** I ftpfeatfed, ba«tfly.
I WAS Snp€frSti^ttb abont dreaMS th%n, And Afb Still; and
Catherine had an unusual gloom in ber ASp < act, thAt made mf6
dread BO«cietbing frotn which I ttiight sbapfe A prophefey, and
foresee a fearful catastrophe.
She was vexed, bm she dM " ftot proceed. Apparendy taking
up another sulsjeet, she i-fe-comitte^dBd ih A short time.
" Ifi were in heAV6n, NelTy, I shoilikl be extrettiely mtseraWe. "
*• Because i^u ArO not fit to gO tbtere,*'I answered. ** All
sinners Would bA fftiSAtttbte in beai^feh.''
«'B«t it is hot «Mr \\M. I ^tc^iSmtA, otiie, ^t I wAA ItorA;^
** t tdi you I Won't heRtki^n to jou^ dte^am, Miiss Catherine !
I'll go to bed, " I intemijpted again.
Sbe laughed, and held in6 doWil, for I tnade a motion to
)ieave tny chair.
" This is nothing,^'criied lihd \ ** I wa6 Oiily goitig to say that
heaven did not seem to be my hotne; ahd I broke tny heatt
with weepitig tO cbiti^ l^ck to earth ; isild thi^ atigels Were so
angry tbat they flung m6 out into the tniddte of the heath on
the top of Wuthering Heights ; trhero I woke tobbing for joy.
That will do to (dxpiain my secret, as W611 as the othei*. Fve
no itadre bu^ness to tuarry Edgar Lintoil than I hare to be in
b^aVeU ; and if the wicked liian in there had h6t brought Heath-
cliif so loW I shouldn't have thought of it. tt Would degrade
md to liiarry HeathclidT tiow ; so bd sball ii«»ver know how I
We bitn; and that not because he's handsottie, Nelly, but be-
cause he's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are
diade of, his and mine are the Mine; and Linton's is as different
as a ndoonbeaih from ligfathing, or frost frotn fire. "
fine this 8]^eech ended I beciime sensible of HeathclifT's pres-
ence. Hayitag noticed a (slight movement, I turned my hend,
aad ftaW bite rise from the bench, and iBteal out noiselessly. He
hhd listened till he beard Catherine say it would degrade her
to lUatry hib^» aiid then he araid to hear no farther.
My coi»jpaBion, sitting ei) tbe gtound^ wait j^reveiited by the
bi & ck of the settle frt > ii^ i*einarklng bil {presence ot departure ;
but I staHed, alAd bade her ha^.
" Why V^ Hbe asked, ga«iiig tterfousty ffmnA.
" Joseph U het^'^ I answeted, catcbibg opportutiely the roll
6rhis amwheela ti^p tlie road; " and Heathclifr will come in
witb bim. I'm n < ft bura whether he were not ht the door this
ilid^etit/'
*'Oh, be be^ldn't tdvetbeat m^ at the doot ! " eiftid (ibe.'* Give
tne H4retbA wbile you get the supper^ and Wbett it Is ready ask
me to sup \^tb you. I want to cheat liay uftcomfbrtable con*
scieiice, & nA be Convinced tbat Heatheliflf had no eolion of these
thiiig^-^be hm tiot > bas he t He does «iot kboW what bei^g in
love is r
" I s^e tie reastifa tiiat he iibeuld net kttoW to wen as you, " I
returned; ** aad if y^are his choice^ be*ll be the niost unfor-
tunate creature that bSret Wis bom ! As ibon as you becoTne
Mrs. Linton, be Jbsei iinend, and lo^^ and all ! Have yot
c^sMeiiid lew yettll betv tke Mpa^itoii» nuid beW he'll
T2 WUTBB»ING HBIOBT0.
bear co be quite deserted in the world 1 Becanse, Miss Cath-
diine "
** He quite deserted ! we separated ! " she exclaimed, with an
accent of indignation. " Who is to separate us, pray ] They'll
meet the fate of Milo ! Not as long as I live, Ellen — ^for no
moital creature. Every Linton on the fac9 of the earth might
me)t into nothing, befcN^ I could consent to forsake HeathclifF.
Oh. that's not what I intend — that's not what I mean ! I
shouldn't be Mrs. Linton were such a price demanded ! He'll
bo as much to me as he has been all his lifetime. Edgar must
shrike off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least. He will,
w/ien he learos my true feelings toward him. Nelly, I see now,
you think me a selfish wretch, but did it never strike you that if
l/eathcliiF and I married we should be beggars 1 whereas, if I
ly.arry Linton I can aid Heathcliff to rise, and place him out of
Vij brother's power. "
" With your husband's money. Miss Catherine] " I asked.
* You'll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon ; and,.
^-^ough I'm hardly a judge, I think that's the worst motive
ou've given yet for being the wife of young Linton. "
" It is not, " retorted she, " it is the best ! The others were
^96 satisfaction of my whims; and for Edgar's . sake, too, to
•^tisfy him. This is for the sake of one who comprehends in
his person my feelings to Edgar and myself. I can not expi'ess
it ; but surely you and every body have a notion that there is^
or should be, an existence of yours beyond you. What were
the use of my creation if I were entirely contained here 1 My
great miseries in this world have been HeathclijBf's miseries,
and I watched and felt each firom the beginning ; my great
thought in living is himself. If all else perished, and ^a re-
mained, I should still continue to be; and, if all else remained,
and he were annihilated, the universe would turn to a mighty
stranger. I should not seem a part of it. My love for Linton
is like the foUage in the woods : time will change, it^ I'm well
aware, as winter changes the trees. My love ibr Heathcliff
resembles the eternal rocks beneath : a source of little visible
delight, but necessary. Nelly, I am Heath cliiir— he's always,
always in my mind— not as a pleasure, any more than I am al-
ways a pleasure to myself— but as my own being ; so don't talk
of our sepai-atiou again — it is impracticable ; and "
She paused, and hid her face in the folds of^my gown ; but I
jerkfld it forcibly away. I wa« out of patimica widi h«r folly.
WUTHBRING HBIOHTB. 73
.''If I can make any s^nse of your nonsense, miss, " I said.
'* it only goes to convince, me that you are ignorant of tho duties
you undertake in marrying, or else that you are a wicked, un-
principled girL But trouble me with no more secrets ; I'll not
promise to keep them/'
r''You'll keep that V she asked, eagerly.
" No, I'll not promise, " I repeated.
. She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph finished
our conversation ; and Catherine removed her seat to a comer,
and nursed Hareton, while I .made the supper.
'After it was cooked, my fellow-servant and I began to quar-
rel who should carry some to Mr. Hindley ; and we didn't settle
it till all was nearly cold. Then we came to the agreement that
we would let him ask, if he wanted any, for we feared particu-
larly to go into his presence when he hsid been some tiQae alone.
''Und hah isn't that nowt corned in frougfa th'field, be this
time 1 What is he abaht 1 girt eedle seeght ] " demanded the
old man, looking round for Heathclifi.
" I'll call him, " I replied. " He's in the bam, I've no doubt. "
I went and called, but got no answer. On returning,
I whispered to Catherine that he had heard a good part of
what she said, I was sure ; and tolcl how I saw him quit the
kitchen just as she complained of her brother's conduct regard-
ing him.
She jumped up in a fine fright — flung Hateton upon the set-
tle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not taking leisure to
consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk would have
affected him.
. She was absent such a while that Joseph proposed we should
wait no looger. He cunningly conjectured they were staying
away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. They
were''ill eneugh for ony fahl manners, " he affirmed. And, on
dieir behalf, he added that night a special prayer to the usual
quarter. of an hour's supplication before meat; and would have
tacked another to the end of the grace, had not his young mis-
tress broken in upon him with a hurried command that he must
run down the road, and wherever Heathcliff* had rambled, find
and make him re-enter directly !
''I want to speak to him, and I must before I go up-stairs,'
she said. " And the gate is open, he is somewhere out of hear-
ing ; for he wpuld not reply, though I shouted at the top of the
fold as loud as I could. " ...
D
74 wvtmniktv^ kti^fi^Si
Josepti objected at fitsti flbe was Wo iam€h in eameilc, how-
ever, to Buffer contradietion ; and aft last K« placed has htA en
his head, ahd walked grtttfibHng fbt^*
Meantime Catherine paced ap and d < ^it the floor, cai€Miih >
ing —
" I wonder where he ia--^I WMdir Wfaetd he fftm he ! What
did I say, Nelly 1 I've forgtittea. Was he texed at lay bad
humor this afieriiooti % Dear ! a^l ffie what I'i% said to gridve
him 1 I do wish he'd ^me. I do wish he Woald I'*
" What a noise fbr nothmg !^ I ctied, thcmgh rather aaea^
niyself. *'What a trifle scares yea ! It's surely no great cause
of ahum that Heathcliff should tak6 a iiioonlig;ht sauBter en the
moors, or et^ he, too salky to speak to us^ in the hay-l < ^. I'B
engafi^e he's hirking th^ne. Sae, if I don't IbtiiSt hiht ent !**
1 departed to renew my search ; its result Was dkappointmenty
and JoBeph^l quest endea in the fiame.
^*Yon lad gets war un war! " observed he on re-entering.
" He's left th'yate ut t'full swing, and Miss's pony has trodden
dahn two rigs ub com, un plotteted through, raigl^ o'er intuh t'
meadow ! Hahsomdiver, t'maister'uU play t'divil to-morn,
and he'll do Weel. He's patience itsseln wi'sich careless, offiild
crateiti — patitoce itsseln he k! Bud he'll nut be soa alla^^
yah's see, all im ye ! Yah mun'n*t drive him aht uf his heead
for nowt ! "
** Have you i^nd Heatheliff, you assi " interrupted Catherine.
< < Have you beeti lookkig £or him, as I ordered V
" Aw Bttd more Mkker look for th'horse, " he replied. ••It'ud
be tub more sense. But, aw can look for norther house, nur
man uf a neeght loike thia-— as black as t'chimney! und Heath-
cliff's noaii t'chap tuh eoom ut metta whistle — ^hai^pea he'll be
less hard ah hearing vri'ye / "
It wd8 a Vety dai% evening iGs > r summer ; the clouds appeared
inclined to thunder, and I said we had better all int down ; the
approaching rain would be certain to bring him heme widhoitt
further trouble.
However^ Oath^ne would not be persuaded into tranquility.
She kept wandering to and fit > , from the gate to the door, in a
state of agitation which permitted no repose : and at length took
up a permanent situation on one side (^ die waU, near the road ;
where, heedless of my expostulations, and the growling thuhder,
and the great dropa diat began to plash around her^ she re-
mainedi calling at intervals, and then listenings and ^n crying
•tttrigbt. She bdftt Hargton, or any ohiki, at a good, paidioiiate
fit of crying.
About midnight, while We 0till aat up, the itofiii oame fatdiMt
over the Heights in fuU fi^rj. Thefe was a tiotenc wind m wefi
aa thunder, and either one or the other ti^it a tree off at the
comer of the baiMiDg; a huge bough feu aorota ibe rae^ aad
knocked down a portion of the east chimney-atack, sendklg 4
elaiter of atonea and aooc into the ldt < ^ien flra»
We dKragbt a bolt had Mien in the niddla of tm, and JoMpb
awong upon his knees, beseeeliing the Laid to ramember uie
Patriarchs^ Noah and Lot; and, as in fertaer timaa, apare te
righteous, though he smote the ungodly. I Ibtt soiae sentimeiit
that it must be a judgment en us Sso. The Jonah, in my mind»
was Mr« Eamshaw, aad I shook die handle of his den that I
might ascertain if he were yet living. He replied aadibly
enough, in a fashion which made my eompanton vociferate more
clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might be drawn
between saints like himself and sinners fike his master. But
the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all nn-
faarmed, exceptmg Cathy, who got thoroughly drenched fer her
obstinacy in refusing to take shelter, and standing bonoetleia
and shawlless to catch aa much water as she eould with h^ hair
and clothes.
She came in, and lay down on the settle, aU soaked as she
waa, tundng her face to Uie back, and putting her hands be-
fore it
''Well, Miss r* I exclaimed, teaching her dionlder; " you are
Dot bent on getting your death, are youl Do you know what
o^ckwk it is 1 Half-past twelve. Come I oome to bed ; diers'b
no use waiting longer fot that foofish boy-^heHl be gone to QitOr
flierton, and fae'U stay there now. He guesses we shouldn't v^ake
far him till this late hour^ at least, lie guesses that only Mr.
Hindley would be up ; and he'd rather avoid having the door
OfMoed by the master. "
" Nay, nay, he's noan at Gimmerton ! " said Joseph. •* Aw*a
Mver wonder, bud he's at t'bothom uf a beg'-hoile. Tl^ visita-
tion wom't for nowt, und aw wod hev ye tub look aht, MSs»*^
yah muh be t'nekt. Thank Hivin fer all ! All walks togither
£)r gooid tuh thera as is chozaen, and piked aht free'th'rub-
bidge I Yah knaw whet t'Scripture sea — "
And he began quoting sevMraltext^^fefatiag us to the «top-
%m ttnd vecaea where we might find them.
96 WU.TH BRING B B I 6 H T 0.
1, after having vainly beeged the willful eirl to rise and re-
move her wet things, left him preaching, and her shivering, and
betook myself to bed with little Hareton ; who slept as fast ai^
if every one had been sleeping round him.
I heard Joseph read on a while afterward; then I distin-
guished his slow step on the ladder, and th^n I dropped
asleep.
Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by the sun-
beams piercing the chinks of the shutters,. Miss Catherine still
seated near the fireplace. The house door was ajar too ; light
entered from its unclosed windows ; Hindley had come out, and
stood on the kitchen hearth* haggard and drowsy.
" What ails you, Cathy? " he was saying when I entered;
" you look as dismal as a drowned whelp. Why are you so
damp and pale, child V
" I've been wet, " she answered reluctantly; " and I'm cold,
that's all "
" Oh, she is naughty 1 " I cried, perceiving the master to be
tolerably sober; " She got steeped in the shower of yesterday
evening, and there she has sat, the night through, and I couldn't
prevail on her to stir. "
Mr. Eamshaw stared at us in surprise. ** The night through, "
he repeated. " What kept her up ? not fear of the thunder,
«urely 1 That was over, hours since. "
Neither of us wished to mention Heathcliff's absence, as long
as we could conceal it ; so, I replied, I didn't know how she
took it into her head to sit up ; and she said nothing.
The morning was fresh and cool ; I threw back the lattice,
and presently the room was filled with sweet scents fi:t)m the
garden : but Catherine called peevishly to me.
" Ellen, shut the window. I'm starving ! " And her teeth
.chattei^d as she shrunk closer to the almost extinguished em-
bers.
" She's ill, " said Hindley, taking her wrist, " I suppose that's
the reason she would not go. to bed. Damn it! I don't want
to be troubled vrith more sickness here. What took her into
the rain? "
" Running after t'lads, as usuald ! " croaked Joseph, catching
an opportunity, from our hesitation, to thrust in his evil tongue.
" It aw wur yah, maister, aw'd just slam t'boards i'their
fiuses all on'em, gentle and simple ! Never a day ut yah're
off, but yon cat uh Linton comes sneaking faitibe] > ^aiDd MIm
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS. 77
Nelly sboo's a fine lass 1 shoo sits watching for ye i't'kitchen ;
and as yah're in at one door, he's aht at t'other. Und, then»
wer grand lady goes a coorting uf hor side ! Its bonny be-
havior, lurking amang t'fields, after twelve ut'night, wi that
fs^l, flaysome divil uf a gipsy, HeathclilT! They think avfm
blind; but aw'm noan, now't ut t'soart! Aw seed young
Linton, boath coming and going, and aw seed yah (directing
his discourse to me). Yah gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch ! nip
up and bolt intuh th'hahs, t'minute yah heard t'maister's hone
fit clatter up t'road.
" Silence, eavesdropper ! " cried Catherine. " None of your
insolence before me ! jSdgar Linton came yesterday by chance,
Hindley: and it was J who told him to be off: because I knew
you would not like to have met him as you were. "
" You lie, Cathy, no doubt,** answered her brother, " and
you are a confounded simpleton ! But never mind Linton at
present. Tell me, were you not with Heathcliff last niehtt
Speak the truth now. You need not be afraid of harming him. .
Though I hate him as much as ever, he did me a good turn a
short time ago that will make my conscience tender of break-
ing his neck. To prevent it I shall send him about his business
this very morning; and after he*s gone I'd advise you all to
look sharp. I shall only have the more humor for you !'*
*'I never saw Heathcliff last night, " answered Catherine, be-
ginning to sob bitterly : " and if you do turn him out of doors
I'U go with him. But perhaps you'll never have an opportunitT
— perhaps he's gone. " Here she burst into uncontrolfaDle grief,
and the remainder of her words were inarticalate.
Hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bid
her get to her room immediately, or she shouldn't err for
nothing ! I obliged her to obey ; and I shall never forget what a
scene she acted when we reached her chamber. It terrified me.
I thought she was going mad, and I begged Joseph to run fi > r
the doctor.
It proved the commencement of delirium ; Mr. Kenneth, as
soon as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill ; she had a
fever.
He bled her, and he told me to let her live on whey and water-
gruel ; and take care she did not throw herself down stain or
out of the window ; and then he left, for he had enough to do in
the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary distance
•between cottage and cottage.
79 WUTHEEINOfi9I|»|IT0b
Though I can not Bay I made a geodf ii{»te» and Jowvph aad
the master were no better; and though our patient was as weari«-
pome and as headstrong as a patient opuld be, she weathered
it through.
Old Mrs. Linton paid us aeveral visitis to be sure, and set
things to rights, and scolded and ordered ua all; and when
Catherine was convalescent, she insisted on conveying her to
Thmshcross Grange; fibr which delivfarance we were very grate^
ful. But the pQpr dame bad reason to repent of her kindneaai
she and her husband took the fever, and died within a few days
< ^each other.
Our young lady returned to us saucier and more paasioaate
and haughtier than even Heathcliff had never been heard of
since the evening of the thunder*«torm ; and one day I had the
misfor^ne, when she had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the
blame of his disappearance on her (where indeed it belonged,
as she well knew). From that period, for several months, she
ceased to hold any communication with me, save in the relaiion
of a mere servant. Joseph fell under a ban also ; he vfould
speak his mind, and lecture her sll the same as if she were a
bttle girl ; and she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress ;
and thought that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated
vnth consideration. Then the doctor had said that she would
not bear crossing much ; she ought to have her own way ; and
it was nothing less than murder, in her eyes, for any one to
presume to stand up and contradict her.
From Mr, Eamshaw and his companions she kept aloof;
and, tutored by Kenneth and by serious threats of a fit that
often attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she
pleased to demand, and generally av(»ded aggravating her fiery
temper, He was rather too indulgent in humoring her caprices ;
not firom affection, but from pride ; he wished earnestly to see
her bring honor to the family by an alliance with the Lintons;
and as long as she let him alone, she might trample us like
alaves, for aught he cared !
Edgar Linton, as multitudes have been before, and vrill be
after him, was infatuated ; and believed himself the happiest
man alive on the day he led her to Gimmerton chapel, three
years subsequent to bis father's death.
Much against my incUnaUon, I was peronaded to leave
WuAeriag Heights and aecompanv her here. Little Hareton
was nearly five years old, and I hao juat begun to teach Um his
VUTKBRINO MEIQBT8. 79
lettei^ We made a sad parting, bat Cadieiine's teara were
more powerful than ours. When I refused to go, and when
she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting
to her hasband and brother. The former offered me munificent
wages ; the latter ordered me to pack up-— lie wanted no women
in ttie house, he said, now that there was no mistreas ; and as
to Hareton, the curate should take him in hand, by and by.
And so I had but one choice left — to do as I was oraered. I
told tbe master he got rid of all decent people only to run to
ruin a little faster ; I kissed Hareton good by ; and, since then,
he has been a stranger, and it's very queer to think it, but I'to
no doubt, he has completely forgotten all about EUen Dean,
and that he was ever more than all tiie world to her, and die to
him!- < -
At this point of the housekeeper's story she chanced to glance
toward the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amaze-
ment, on seebg uie minute-hand measure half-past one. She
would not hear of staying a second longer. In truth, I felt
rather disposed to defer the sequel of her narrative, myself : and
now, that she is vanished to her rest, and I have meditated for
another hour or two, I shall summon courage to go also, in
spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.
CHAPTER X.
A cHAKMiNa introduction to a hermit's life ! Four weeks'
torture, tossing, and sickness! Oh, these bleak winds, and
bitter, northern skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory coun-
try surgeons I And, oh, this dearth of the human physiognomy,
and, worse than all, the terrible intimation of Kenneth that I
need not expect to be out of doors till spring !
Mr. Heathcliff'has just honored me with a call. About seven
days affo he sent me a brace of grouse— the last of die season.
Scoundrel! He is not altogether euiltless in this illness of
mine; and that I had a great mind to tell him. But, alas!
how could I offend a man who was charitable enough to sit at
mv bedside a good hour, and talk on some other subject than
jpi & 4 and drau^ts, Uisten and leechest
80 WUTHERINO HEIGHT ■«
This is quite an easy interval. I am too weak to read,*yet I
feel as if I could enjoy something interesting. Why not have
up Mis. Dean to finish her tale 1 I can recollect its chief inci-
dents, as far as she had gone. Yes, I remember her hero had
run off, and never been heard of for three years: and the
heroine was married. I'll ring; she'll be delighted to find me
capable of talking cheerfiilly.
Mrs. Dean came.
" It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine, " she
commenced.
" Away, away with it ! " I replied ; " I desire to have — "
*♦ The doctor says you must drop the powders. "
*'With all my heart I Don't interrupt me. Come and take
your seat here. Keep your fingers fi-om that bitter phalanx of
phials. Draw your knitting out of your pocket — ^that will do —
now continue the history of Mr. Heathcliff, from where you left
off, to the present day. Did he finish his education on the Con-
tinent, ana come^ back a gentleman 1 or did he get a sizer's
place at college] or escape to America, and earn honors by
drawing blood firom his foster country ] or make a fortune more
promptly on the English highways ] "
" He may have done a little in all these vocations, Mr. Lock-
wood ; but I couldn't give my word for any. I stated before
that I didn't know how he gained his money ; neither am I
aware of the means he took to raise his mind fi*om the savage
ignorance into which it was sunk; but, with your leave, I'll
proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse, and
not weary you. Are you feeling better this morning 1 "
" Much. " —
That's good news. I got Miss Catherine and myself ^to
Thrushcross Grange ; and, to my agreeable disappointment, she
behaved infinitely better than I dared to expect. She seemed
almost over fond of Mr. Linton; and even to his sister she
showed plenty of affection. They were both very attentive to
her comfort, certainly. It was not the thorn bending to the.
honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn.
There were no mutual concessions; one stood erect, and
the . others yielded ; and who can be ill-natured and bad-tem-
pered when they encounter neither opposition nor indifference ]
I observed that Mr. Edgar had a deep-rooted fear of ruffling
her humor. He ccMicealed it from her ; but if ever he heard
me answer sharply, or saw any oth^: servant gi*o w cloudy at
WUTHBRINO HEIGHT fl. 81
some imperious order of hers, he would show his trouble by a
frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account.
He, many a time, spoke sternly to me about my pertness ; and
* averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict a wozBe pang
i than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed.
Not to giieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy; and»
I for the space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as harmless as
J sand, because no fire came near to explode it. Catherine had
seasons of gloom and silence, now. and then; they were re-
spected with sympathizing, silence by her husband, who as-
cribed them to an alteration in her constitution, produced by
her perilous illness, as she was never subject to depression
of spirits before. The return of sunshine was welcomed by
answering sunshine from him. I believe I may assert that
they were really in possession of deep and growing happi-
It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the long run ;
the mild and generous are only more justly selfish than the
domineering — and it ended when circumstances caused each to
feel the one's interest was not the chief consideration in the
other's thoughts.
On a mellow evening in September, I was coming from the
garden with a heavy basket of apples which I had been gather-
ing. It had got dusk, and the moon looked over the high wall
of the court, causing undefined shadows to lurk in the coiners
of the numerous projecting portions of the building. I set my
burden on the house steps by the kitchen door, and lingered
to rest, and di'aw in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet air
my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when
I heard a voice behind me say —
" Nelly, is that you] "
It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was
something in the manner of pronouncing my name which made
it sound familiar. I tuined about to discover who spoke,
fearfully, for the doors were shut, and I had seen nobody on
approaching the steps.
Something stirred in the porch ; and moving nearer, I dis-
tinguished a tall man, dressed in dark clothes, with dark face
and hair. He leaned against the side» and held his fingers on
the latch, as if intending to open for himself.
" Who can it be V* I thought. " Mr, Eamshaw 1 Oh, »o !
The voice has no resemblance to his, "
82 WITTBBKIIfO HlIOHTf.
" I have waited here an hour, " he xesunaed* while I cootin-
ued staring ; •* and the whole of that time all round has been
at etill aa death, I dared not enter. You do not know me 1
Look, I'm not a etranger V
A ray fell on his featnret ; the cheeks were eallow, and half
eo^red with Wack whiskers ; the brows lowering, the eyes
deep set and singular. I remembered the eyes.
••What! " I cried, unceitain whether to regard him as a
-#oridly visitor, and I raised my hands in amazement. " What !
you come back 1 Is it really you 1 Is it 1 "
" Yes, Heathdiff,''he replied, glancing from me up to the
windows which reflected a score of glittering mornis, but
showed no lighu from within. ** Are they at home-^where is
she ] Nelly, you are not glad~you needn't be so disturbed.
Is she hero ? Speak ! I want to have one word with her'r*^
your mistress. Go, and say some person from Gimmerton do-
mres to see her. "
*'How will she take it? " I exclaimed, ^ what will she doi
The surprise bewilders me— it will put her out of her head I
And you are Heathcliff Y Bixt altered ! Nay, there's no com-
prehending it. Have you been for a soldier 1 "
** Gk), and carry my message, " he interrupted, impatienfly ;
I'm in hell till you do ! "
He lifted the latch, and I entered ; but when I got to the
parior where Mr. and Mrs. Linton wero, I could not persuade
myself to pi-oceed.
At length, I resolved on makinr an excuse to ask if they
would have the candles Hghted, and I opened the door.
They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back
against the wall, and displayed beyond the garden trees and
the wild green park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a long line
of mist winding nearly to ks top (for very soon after you pass
the chapel, as you may have noticed, the slough that runs from
the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of the glen) ;
Wuthering Heights rose above this silent vapor, but our old
house was invisible— it rather dips down on the other side.
'Both the room, and its occupants, and the scene they gazed
on, looked wondrously peac^l I rfirank rductantly from
peifonning my errand ; and was actually going away, leaving it
unsaid, after having -jpat my question about the candles, when a
" sense of my foUy compelled me to return, and mutter,
** A person from Gimmerton wishes to see you» ma'am. "
WUTHSBIVa HBIOHTS. 88
** Wliat does he waotl mked Mn. Linton.
''I did not question faim, " I answered.
" Well, dose the cnitains, Nelly, " she said, ** and bring up
tea. I'll be back again directly. "
She quitted die apaitment ; Mr. Edgar inqoinad eardeaalyy
who it was 1
** Some one the nristress does not expect, " I rapKed. ** That
Heathcliff, you recdlect him, sir, who used to live at Mr. Eam-
Bhaw's. "
•* What, the gipsy— the plough-boy 1 " he cried. ** Why did
you not say so to Catherine I "
*'Hush I you must not call htm by those names, master, " I
said. <'She'd be sadly grieved to hear yoo. She was nourly
lieart4)FDken when he ran off; I guess his return will make a
jubilee to her. "
Mr. Linton walked to a window on the other side of the
Toom that overlooked the court. He unfastened it, and leaned
out. I suppose they were below, for he exclaimed auicUy,
*'Don't stand there, love f Bring the person in, it it be any
one particular.*'
Ere long, I heard the click of the latch, and Catherine flew
up-fitairs, breathless and wild, too excited to show gladness ;
indeed, by her face, you would rather have surmised aa awftd
calamity.
" Oh, Edgar, Edo^r ! " she panted, flinging her arras around
Us neck. *'Oh, Edgar, darling ! Heatli«liff's come baok — he
is t " And she tightened her embrace to a squeeze.
''Well, well, " cried her husband, crossly, ** don't Strang
me for that ! He never struck me as such a marvelous trea-
sure. There is no need to be frantic ! "
" I know you didn't like him, " she answmed, represring a
little the intensity of her delight. " Yet for my sake, you must
be friends now. Shall I tell him to come up 1 "
•• Here, " he said, " into the parlor I "
<'Where else? " i^e asked.
He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a move suita-
ble place for him.
Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll expression— half angry,
half laughing at his fastidiousness.
" No, " she added, after a while, ** I cannot sit in the kitohen.
Set two tables here, Ellen, one for your master and Miss Isa-
bella^ being gentry ; the other for Heatheliff and myself, being
90 VVTVBH.INQ ^iieaTf.
work miii$)»0f ixiiifir a clo^kt I Bftua^d— ^I li«d # psesenliBiaQt,
in the bottom of my h^i^, tbi^l bfi bad \ > 0%t0c h%Yi^ r^majiied
♦w»y.
About tbe middle g£ the ni^hl, I w«s wakened fiom iny ^m
nap by Mm. LinUm gU4i»g into iny chamber, taking a 9eait on
my bed-side, and pulling me by the hair to rouse me,
** I can not rest, Ellen ; " she said by way €i apology.'^ And
X wanit some living crealwre to keep me company in my happi-
ness 1 Edgar is sulky, because Vm glad of a thing that doea
not interest him. He refuses to open his mouth, eaccept to ntter
pettish, silly speeches ; and he aiErmed I was cruel and sel^h
for wishing to talk when he was so sick and sleepy, He al-
ways contrives to be sick at the least cr€ > 8s 1 I gave a lew sen-
tences of commendation to Heathcliff, and he, j & ither for a head^
ache or a pang of envy, bcjgan to cry ; so I gojt ^p and left him. "
** What use is it prai9ing Heathcliff to biml " I answered*
" As ]ads they had an aversion to each oiJier, and Heathcliff
would hate just as much to hear him praiaed < -^it's human nature*
Let Mr. Linton alone about him, unless you would like an open
quarrel b^ween them. "
** But does it not show great wealmess ] " pursued she. " I'm
not envious — ^I never feel hurt at the brightness of Isabella'a
yellow hair, and the whiteaess of her skin ; at her dainty ele-
gance, and the fondness all the family exhibit for her. EveQ
you, Nelly, if we have a dispute scnnetimea, you back Isabella
at once ; and I yield, like a foolish mother. I call her a darling,
and flatter her into a good temper. It pleases her brother to
aee us cordial, and that pleases me. But they are very much
alike. They are spoiled children, and fancy the world was
made for their accommodation ; and, though I humor both, I
think a smart chastisement might improve them, all the same. "
" You're mistaken, Mrs. Linton, " said I, " They humor you
•r-I know what there would be to do if they did not ! You can
weU afford to indulge their passing whims, as long as their busi-
ness is to anticipate all your desires. You may, however, fall
out, at last, over aomething of equal consequence to both sides ;
and then those you tenn weak are very capable pf being as ob-
stinate as you 1 "
** And then we shall iight to the death, shant we, Nelly 1 " she
returned, laughing, " No ! I tell you, I have such & ith in Lin-^
ton's love that I beUeve I might kill him, and he wouldn't wish
to rafealiaba. "
WPTflBVINQ aXIOBTf. 6T
I adfyiaed her to value bim the more for Iris affeetioD.
^ I do, " she amwered, " but he needn't resort to whining fer
trifles. It is childish ; and instead of melting into tears because
I said that HeatbcKff was now wortitij of any one's regard, and
it would honor the first gentleman in the country to be Us friend,
he ought to haye said it for me, and been delighted from sym-
padiy. He must get accustomed to him* and he may as well
like him— considering how Heathcliff has reason to object to
him, I'm sure he behaved excellently! "
" What do you think of his going to Wuthering Heights V I
inquired. " He is reformed in every respect, apparently*-^uite
« Christianr^-ofiering the right hand of fiMlowship to his enemies
all round! "
''He explained it, " she replied. ** I wondered as nmch as
you. He said he caBed to gather inf)rmation coneeming me
from you, supposing you resided there stiU; and Joseph told
Hindley, who came out and fell to questioning him of what he
had been doing, and how he had been living, uid finally desired
htm to wsdk in. There were some persons sitting vi carda-^
Heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him;
and, finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that he would
«ome again in this evening, to which he consented. Hindley is
too reckless to select Ins acquaintance prudently ; he does'nt
tsouUe himself to reflect on the causes he might have for mis-
trusting one whom he has basely injured. But Heathcliff affirms
his principal reason for resuming a connection with his ancient
jpstaectttor is a wish to install himself in quarters at walking dis-
taoee from the Grange^ and an attachment to the house where
we lived together ; and, l & ewise, a hope that I shall have more
opportunities of seeing him tiiere than i could have if he settled
in Gimmerton. He means to offer liberal payment for pennia > -
aion to lodge at the H^hts ; and doubtless my brother*s covet-
ousness will prompt him to accept the terms ; he was always
gi^edy, though what he grasps with one hand, he flings away
with the other. "
** It's a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling in !'^
said I, ^ Have you no fear of the oKmsequences, Mrs. Linton 1 "
" None for my firiend, " she replied, ** his strong head will keep
him from danger : a littie for Hindley ; but he can't be made
morally worse than he is ; and I stand between him and bodily
hai-m. The event of this evening has reconciled me to God and
humanity! I had risen in angry xebeHion against providencflL
88 WUTHERINO HBIOHT».
Oh, I've endured very, very bitter misery. Nelly, if that crea-
ture knew how bitter, he'd be ashamed to cloud its removal with
idle petulance. It was kindness for him which induced me to
bear it alone : had I expressed the agony I frequently felt, he
would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently as
I. However, it's over, and I'll take no revenge on his folly. I
can afford to suffer any thing hereafter! Should the meanest
thing alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn the other,
but I'd ask pardon for provoking it; and, as a proof, I'll go
make my peace with Edgar instantly. Good night — I'm an
angel! "
In this self-complacent conviction she departed ; and the suc-
cess of her fulfillea resolution was obvious on the morrow. Mr.
Linton had not only abjured his peevishness (though his spirits
seemed still subdued by the exuberance of Catherine's vivaci-
ty), but he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella with her
to Wuthering Heights in the afbemoon ; and she rewarded him
with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return, as
made the house a paradise for sevei*al days ; both master and
servants profiting^from the perpetual sunshine.
Heathcliff — Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future — used the
liberty of visiting at Thrushcross Grange cautiously at first: he
seemed estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion.
Catherine also deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions
of pleasure in receiving him ; and he gradually established hi9
right to be expected.
He retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood
was remarkable, and that served to repress all startling demon-
strations of feeling. My master's uneasiness experienced a lull,
and further circumstances diverted it into another channel for a
space.
His new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated
misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible
attraction toward the tolerated guest. She was at that time a
charming young lady of eighteen ; infantile in manners, though
possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a keen temper, too, if
uritated. Her brother, who loved her tenderly, was appalled
at this fantastic preference. Leaving aside the degradation of
an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his
property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one's
power, he had sense to comprehend Heathcliff^s disposition — ^to
know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was un-
WUTHSRINO HEIGHTS. 69
changeable and unchanged. And he dreaded that mmd ; it re-
volted him ; he shrank forebodingly from the idea of committiog
Isabella to its keeping.
He would have recoiled still more had he been aware that
her attachment rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it
awakened no reciprocation of sentiment ; for the minute he dis-
covered its existence, he laid the blame on Heathcliffs deliberate
designing.
We had all remarked, during some dme, that Miss Linton
fretted^aud pined over something. She grew cross and weari-
some, snapping at and teasing Catherine continually, at the im-
minent risk of exhausting her limited patience. We excused
her, to a certain extent, on the plea of ill health ; she was
dwindling and fading before our eyes. But one day when she
had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast, com-
plaining that the servants did not do what she told them ; that
the mistress would- allow her to be nothing in the house, and
Edgar neglected her ; that she had caught a cold with the doors
being left open, and we let the parlor fire go out on purpose to
vex her; vrith a hundred yet more frivolous accusations, Mrs.
Linton peremptorily insisted that she should get to bed ; and,
having scolded her heartily, threatened to send for the
doctor.
Mention of Kenneth caused her to exclaim instantly that her
health was perfect, and it was only Catherine's harshness which
made her unhappy.
" How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling V cried
the mistress, amazed at the unreasonable asseition. " You aro
surely losing your reason. When have I been harsh, teQ
mer
" Yesterday, " sobbed Isabella, " and now ! "
" Yesterday ! " said her sister-in-law. " On what occasion 1 "
" In our walk along the moor ; you told me to ramble where
1 pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliff. "
«*And that's your notion of harshness] " said Catherine,
laughing. " It was no hint that your company waTsuperfluous ;
we didn't care whether you kept with us or not; I merely
thought Heathcliff's talk would have nothing entertaining for
your ears. "
" Oh, no,'* wept the young lady, " you vrished me away be-
cause you knew I liked to be there. "
** Is she sane 1 " asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to me.''I'll
90 WQ7H«i|iV« «ii«HTf.
repeat our oonvereatioii word for word Isabella, and you poiat
out any cbarm it could have had for you. "
" I don't mind the conversation, " she answered : I wanted to
be with " —
** Well I " paid Catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete
the sentence.
" With him s and I won't be always sent off 1 " she cootinued,
kindling up. ** You are a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desire
no one to he loved but yourself! "
''You axe an impertinent little monkey! " exclaimed Mm.
Linton, in surprise. " But I'll not believe this idiocy 1 It is
impossible that you can covet the admiration of Heatheliff
—-that you can consider him an agreeable person I I hope I
have misunderstood you, Isabella 1 "
" No« you have not, " said the infatuated giii. " I love him
more than ever you loved Edgar ; and he nught love me if yon
would let him ! "
" I wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then I " Cadierine de-
clared, emphatically — and ahe seemed to speak sincerely*
** Nelly, help me to convince her of her madness. Tell her what
Heatheliff is — an unreclaimed creature, without refinements—
virithout cultivation ; an arid wilderness of furze and wbinstone.
I'd as soon put that little canary into the park on a winter's day
as recommend you to bestow your heart on him I It is deplor-
able ignorance of his character, child, and nothing else, wnich
makes that dream enter your head. Pray don't imagine that
he conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneatib a stem
«xterior ! He's not a rough diamond — a peaii-containing ofwtw
of a rustic; he's a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. I never say to
him. Let this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungeop
erous or cruel to harm them. I say, Let thorn alone, hecause /
should hate them to be wronged : and he'd crush you, like a
^paiTOw's egg, Isabella, if he found you a troublesome charge.
I know he couldn't love a Linton ; and yet, he'd be quite capa-
ble of manying your fiDrtune and expectations. Avarice is
growing with him a besetting sin. There's my picture ; and
I'm his friend — so much so that had he thought seriously to
catch you, I should, perhaps, have held my tongue and let you
fall into this trap. "
Miss Linton remried her sister^a-law with indignation.
''For shame ! ror shame V* she repeated, angrily. ** You mn
wone Ami twen^ fiMS, you poisonous friend \ "
WUTHSmN^ HBIOHTff. 91
'^ Ah 1 you won't beliove tne then V* Mid CatberiiM. ** Yoa
thbk I speak from wicked Belfiafanessr'
" I'm certain you do, " retorted Isabella ; ** and I shudder at
you! "
" Good! " cried the other. " Try for youraelCif thatbe your
epirit ; I have done, and yield the argument to your saucy inso-
lence. "
" And I must suffer for her egotism ! " she sobbedi as Mrs.
Linton left the room. " AH, all is against me ; she has blighted
my single consolation. But she uttered falsehoods, didn't she 1
Mr. Heathcliff is not a fiend ; he has an honorable soul, and a
true one, or how could he remember her ? "
<'Banish him from your thoughts, Misit, " I said, ** He's a bird
of bad omen ; no mate for you. Mrs. Linton spcke strongly,
asd yet I can't contradict her. She is better acquainted wiUi
his baajt than I, or any one besides ; and she never would re^
resent him as worse than he 19. Honest people don't hide their
deeds. How has he been living ? bow has he get rich 1 why is
he staying at Wuthering Height»-*the house of a man whom he
abhors 1 They say Mr. Earnshaw is worse and worse since he
came. They sit up all night together continually : and Hindloy
has been boiTOwing money on his land ; and does nothing but
play and drink, I beard only a week ago ; it was Joseph who
told me — ^I met him at Gimmeiton. "
*'< Nelly,'he said, * we's hae a Crafanr's'quest enah, at ahr
folks. One on'em's a'most gettin his finger cut off wi'hauding
t'other froo'sticking hisseln loike a cawlf. That's maister, yah
knaw« ut's soa up uh going tub t'grand'sizes. He's noan fewod
uh t'Bench uh judges, norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nor
Mathew, nor noan on'em, nut be ! He & ir like's he langs tub
set his brazened fi^ce agean'em I And yon bonny lad Heath-
cliff, yah mind, he's a rare un 1 He can gim a laugh, as weel's
onybody at a raight divil's jest. Does he niver say nowt of his
fiue living amang us, when he goes tub t'Ghrange 1 This is t'
way ou't-^up at sun-dahn ; dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
can'le lught till next day, at nooin— -then t'fooil gangs banning
un raving tub his cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fin >
gers i'thur lugs for varry shaume ; un'th'knave, wah, he cam
cahnt his brass, un'ate, un'sleep, un'off tub his neighbor's tub
£8sip wi't'wife. I'course, he tells Dame Catherine hah hor
bar's goold runs intuh bis podcet, and her father's son gallops
dalm t'brofid road* while he fleea afore toh oppen t'pikeaP
92 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS.
Now, Miss Linton, Joseph is an old rascal, but no liar ; and, if
his account of Heathcliff's conduct be true, you would never
think of desiring such a husband, would you ? "
" You are leagued with the rest, Ellen ! " she replied. " I'll
not listen to your slanders. What malevolence you must have
to wish to convince me that there is no happiness in the world T'
Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herselfj
or persevered in nursing it perpetually, I Can not say ; she had
little time to reflect The day after there was a justice-meeting
at the next town ; my master was obliged to attend ; and Mr.
Heathcliff, aware of his absence, called rather earlier than
usual.
Catherine and Isabella were sitting in the library, on hostile
terms, but silent. The latter alarmed at her recent indiscre^
tion, and the disclosure she had made of her secret feelings in
a transient fit of passion ; the former, on mature consideration,
really offended with her companion ; and, if she laughed again
at her pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her.
She did laugh as she saw^ Heathcliff pass the window. I was
sweeping the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on her
Hps. Isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained
till the door opened, and it was too late to attempt an escape,
which she would gladly have done had it been practicable.
" Come in, that's right ! " exclaimed the mistress, gayly, pull-
ing a chair to the fire. ** Here are two people sadly in need of
a third to thaw the ice between them ; and you are the very
one we should both of us choose. Heathcliff, I'm proud to
show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you more than myself.
I expect you to feel flattered — nay, it's not Nelly ; don't look at
her ! My poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by mere
contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. It lies in
your own power to be Edgar's brother ! No, no, Isabella, you
shan't run off, " she continued, arresting, with feigned playful-
ness, the confounded girl who had risen indignantly. " We
Were quarreling like cats about you, Heathcliff; and I was
fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and admiration ; and,
moreover, I was informed that if I would but have the manners
to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, would
shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send
my image into eternal oblivion ! "
" Catherine, " said Isabella, calling up her dignity, and dis-
daining to struggle from the tight grasp that held her. ** I'd
WUTHEBING HEIGHTS*
thank you to adhere to the truth, and not slander me, even in
joke! Mr. Heathcliff, be kind enough to bid this friend of
yours release me-— she forgets that you and I are nol intimate
acquaintances, and what amuses her b painful to me beyond
expression. "
• As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked
thoroughly indi£ferent what sentiments she cherished concerning
him, she turned, and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to
ber tormentor.
. " By no means 1 " cried Mrs. Linton in answer. ** I won't be
named a dog in the manger again. You shall stay, now then 1
Heathcliff, why don't you evince satisfaction at my pleasant
news? IsabeUa swears that the love Edgar has for me, is
nothing to that she entertains for you. I'm sure she made some
speech of the kind, did she not, Ellen 1 And she has fasted
ever since the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and
rage that I dispatched her out of your society, under the idea
of its being unacceptable. "
''I think you belie her, " said Heathcliff, twisting his chair to
face them. ** She wishes to be out of my society now, at any
rate! "
And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might
do at a strange repulsive animal, a centipede from the Indies,
for instance, which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the
aversion it raises.
The poor thing couldn't bear that ; she grew white and red
in rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, l^nt the
strength of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of Cath-
erine, and perceiving that, as fiut as she raised one finger off her
arm, another closed down, and she could not remove the whole
together, she began to make use of her nails, and their sharpness
presently ornamented the detainer's with crescents of red.
'* There's a tigress ! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting her fr«e,
and shaking her hand with pain. ** Begone, for God's sake,
and hide your vixen face ! How foolish to reveal those talons
to him. Can't you fancy ^the conclusions he'll draw ] Look,
Heatlicl^! they are instruments that will do execution — ^you
must beware of your eyes. "
** I'd wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me, "
he answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her.
" But, what did you mean by teaming the creature in that. man-
gier, Cathy I You were not speaking the truth, were you? "
wvitmmutna ttsxasTib
" I A6sttre yon I wai/'ih« retuiticd^ ** Bhe ins been piaing
Ibr yotir sak^ s^t^rti)^ wadks ; and rating about you tbis mom-
ingi And poufi^f^brth a deluge of abtue^ beeanae I represeiited
yottt failitigia^a plain Kgbi^ for tbe purpose of mitigating her
adoration. T^ut don't notice it further. 1 wished to pwaiab her
0aueiaeiB,/that's all. I Hke her too well, my dear Htatbelii^ to
tot joo absolutely aeifte attd devoor her up "
" And 1 like her too ill to attempt it, " said be, " " eotcept in a
very ghoulish fashion. You'd hear of odd thin^, if t lired
Idone with that mawkish, waxen & €•, die most ordinary would
-ha painting on ita white the colors of the rainbow, and taming
thelihie ey^ Made, eter y day or two $ tliey ^testably HMtambto
Linton's.'^
'* Delectably, " observed Catheriae. ^ They are dove's 6yei
—angel's ! "
< * She's her brother's heir, is ahe not %'* he asked, after m btief
^etieofc
" I should be sorry to think so,'* returned hk coinpanioii.
** Half-a-dozen nephews shall erase her title, please Heavi^n !
Abstraet your mind fiom the subject, at jMreaent — ^you are too
prone to covet your neighbor's goods : remember thu neighbor's
goods are mine. "
*'If they were mme, they would be none the less thaty " said
Heatheliff,'* but thoogh Isabella Linton may be silly, she ia
scarcely mad; and — ^in short we'll dismiss the matter as yo«
advise. "
From their tongues, they did dismiss it ; and Catherine, prob*
ably, from her thoughts. The other, I felt cectain, recalled it
often in the course ^ the evening ; I saw him smile to himself
-^rin rather—- and lapse into ominous musing whenevw Mrs.
Linton had occasion to be absent & om the apartment
I determined to watch his movements. My heart invariably
cleaved to the master's, in preference to Catherine's side ; with
reason, I imagined, for he was kind, and trustful, and honors^
ble : and she — she could not be called the opposite, yet she
seemed to allow herself such wide latitude that I had little ftuth
in her principles, and still less sympathy for her feelings. I
wanted something to happen which might have the efiect of
freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Mr. Heath < «
cliff, quietly, leaving us as we had been prior to his advent.
His visits were a continual nightmare to me ; and, I suspected,
to my masfeor aka His abode at the Heights was an oppre»-
Mil paM; & xp]ttimng. I fell thttt €M h^ fbnftken the stray
iii#6|l tiMrto lb itA own Wkjcea tvftiidM'itigfiy Afia A & t$ni bean
proif l^ ^etweeik it itid thtf Md, waking hi^ timto to ftpring atid
iMIil^i II
CHAPTKH XL
ScMom9is», ii¥lliM meditating on tbeae tliinga in soKtude,
I kave got up in a sudden cerror, and put on my bonnet to go
see how all was at the fma ; I hare peretiaded my conscience
that it was a duty to warn Mm how people talked regarding
his ways; and then I have recollected his confirmed bad
habits, and iK^less of benefiting him, hare flinched fix > m
xe-enlering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be
taken at my word.
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a
journey to Gimmerton. It was about the period that my
narrative has reached — a bright, frosty afternoon ; the ground
bare, and the road hard and dry.
I came to a etone where the highway branches off on to the
moor at your left hand ; a rough sand-pillar, with the letters
W. H. cut on its north side, on the east G., and on the south-
west T, G. It serves as guide-post to the Grange, and Heights,
and village.
The sun shone yellow on its gray head, reminding me of
summer ; and 1 can not say why, but all at onoe a gush (S* child's
sensations flowed into my heart. Hindley and I held it a
favorite spoi twenty years before.
I gazed lone at the weather-worn block; and, stooping
down, perceived a hole near the bottom still fuH of snail-shells
and pebbles^ which we were fond of storing there with more
perishable tilings — ^and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I
beheld my early playmate seated on the withered tuif ; his
dai*k, squmre head bent forward, and his little hand scooping
out die earth with a piece of slate.
" Poor Hindley ! " I exclaimed involuntarily.
I started — ^my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary
belief that the child Itted its face and stared stnught into
96 WUTHB & INOHEIOHT0*
mme 1 It vanished in a twinkling ; bat immediately I felt an
irresistible yearning to be at the Beights. Superstition urged
me to comply with this impulse— supposing he should be dead!
I thought— or should die soon ! — supposing it were a sign of
death!
The nearer I got to the bouse the more agitated I grew :
and on catching sight of it I trembled in every limb. The
apparition had outstripped me ; it stood looking through the
eate. That was my first idea on observing an elf-locked,
brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars.
Fuither reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my Hare-
ton, not altered greatly since I left him, ten months since.
" God bless thee, darling ! " I cried, forgetting instantaneously
my foolish fears. " Hareton, it's Nelly — ^Nelly, thy nurse. "
. He retreated out of arm's length, and picked up a large
flint. ^
''I am come to see thy father, Hareton, " I added, guessing
from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all,
was not recognized as one with me.
He raised his missile to hurl it ; I commenced a soothing
speech, but could not stay his hand. The/Stone struck my bon-
net, and then ensued from the stammering lips of the little fel-
low a string of curses, which, whether he comprehended them
or not, were delivered with practiced emphasis, and distorted
his baby features into a shocking expression of malignity.
You may be certain this grieved more than angered me.
Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket, and offered it to
propitiate him.
He hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold, as if he
fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoint him.
I showed another, keeping it put of his reach.
" Who has taught you those fine words, ray bairn, " I in-
quired. " The curate ] "
" Damn the curate and thee ! Gie me that, " he replied.
" TeU us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it, "
said I. " Who's your master 1 "
" Devil daddy, " was his answer.
" And what do you learn from daddy 1 " I continued.
He jumped at the fruit ; I raised it higher. " What does he
teach you i " I asked.
" Naught, " said he, " but to keep out of his gait. Daddy
can not bide me, because I swear at him, "
WUTHEKING HEIGHTS. 97
'*Ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy 1 " I
observed.
** Ay — ^nay, " he drawled.
" Who then? "
" Heathcliff. "
I asked if he liked Mr. Heathcliffi
" Aye ! " he answered again.
Desiring to have his reasons for liking him, I could only
gather the sentences. " I known't — he pays dad hack what he
gies to me— ^e curses daddy for cursing me — ^he says I mun do
as I will "
''And the curate does not teach you to read and write,
then 1 " I pursued.
No ; I was told the curate should have his teeth dashed
down his throat, if he stepped over the threshold — Heath-
cliff had promised that.
I put the orange in his hand ; and hade him tell his father
that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to speak with
him, by the garden gate.-
He went up the walk, and entered the house; but instead
of Hindley, HeathclifT appeared on the door stones, and I turned
directly and ran dovm the road as hard as ever I could race,
making no halt till I gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared
as if I had raised a goblin.
This is not much connected with Miss Isabella's affair, except
that it urged me to resolve, further, on mounting vigilant guard
and doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence
at the Grange, even though I should wake a domestic storm by
thwarting Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
The next time Heathcliff came, my young lady chanced to be
feeding some pigeons in the court. She had never spoken a woi-d
to her sister-in-law for three days ; but she had likewise dropped
her fretful complaining, and we found it a great comfort.
Heathcliflf had not the habit of bestowing a single unneces-
sary civility on Miss Linton, I knew. Now, as soon as he be-
held her, his first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of
the house-front. I was standing by the kitchen window, but I
drew out of sight. He then stepped across the pavement to
her, and said something ; she seemed embarrassed, and desirous
of getting away ; to prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm :
she averted her face ; he apparently put some question which
she had no miud to answer. There was another rapid glance
E
98 WUTHERING BBIGHTS.
at the house, and supposing himself unseen, tlie scoundrel bad
the impudence to embrace her.
" Judas ! . Traitor ! " I ejaculated ; " you are a hypocrite too,
are you T A deliberate deceiver. "
" Who is, Nelly V said Catherine's voice at my elbow — I bad
been over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her en-
trance.
" Your worthless friend ! " I answered warmly, " the sneaking
rascal yonder — ah, he has caught a glimpse of us — ^he is coming
in ! I wonder will he have the art to find a plausible excuse,
for making love to Miss, when he told you he hated her V*
Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself fi^e, and run into the
garden ; and a minute after, Heathcliff opened the door.
I couldn't withhold giving some loose to my indignation ; but
Catherine angrily insisted on silence, and threatened to order
me out of the kitchen, if I dared be so presumptuous as to put
in my insolent tongue.
" To hear you, people might think you were the mistress ! "
she cried. " You want setting down in your right place!
Heathcliff, what are you about, raising this stir ? I said you
must let Isabella alone ! I beg you will, unless you are tired
of being received here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts
against you ! " •
" G-od forbid that he should try ! " answered the black villain
— I detested him just then. " God keep him meek and patient!
Every day I grow madder after sending him to heaven 1 "
" Hush ! " said Catherine shutting the inner door. " Don't
vex me. Why have you disregarded my request 1 Did she
come across you on purpose 1 "
" What is it to you 1 " he growled, I have a right to kiss her,
if she chooses, and you have no right to object — I'm not t/our
husband ; you needn't be jealous of me 1 "
** I'm not jealous of you ; replied the mistress; " I'm jealous
for you. Clear your face, you shan't scowl at me ! If you like
Isabella, you shall marry her. But, do you like her ] Tell the
truth, Heathcliff. There, you won't answer. I'm certain you
don't. " ^
" And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying that
man 1 " I inquired.
" Mr. Linton should approve, " returned my lady decisively.
" He might spare himself the trouble, " said Heathcliff, " I
Qould do 83 well without his approbation; and, as to you,
WUTBERIN6 HEIGHTS* 99
Catherine, I have a mitid to speak a few words now, while we
are at it — I want you to be aware that I know you have treated
me infernally — ^infernally ! Do you hear 1 And, if you flatter
yourself that I don't perceive it you are a fool — and if you think
I can be consoled by sweet words you are an idiot — and if you
& ncy I'll suffez unrevenged, I'll convince you of the contrary in
a very little while ! Meantime, thank you for telling me your
sister-in-law's secret I swear I'll make the most of it, and
stand you aside ! "
* < What new phase of his character is this ? " exclaimed Mrs.
Linton, in amazement.''I've treated you infeinally — and
you'll take revenge ! How will you take it, ungrateful brute ]
How have I treated you infernally 1 "
''I seek no revenge on you, " replied Heathcliff less vehement^
ly. " That's not the plan. The tyrant giinds down his slaves
and they don't turn against him, they crush those beneath them.
You are welcome to torture me to death fi^r your amusement ;
only allow me to amuse myself a little in the same style. And
refrain from insult as much as you are able. Having leveled
my palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently admire your
own charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you
really wished me to marry Isabella, I'd cut my throat. "
*'Oh the evil is that I am no/jealous, is it ? " cried Catherine.
" Well,! won't repeat my oflfer of a wife. It is as bad aa
offering Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting
misery. You prove it. Edgar is restored from the ill-temper
he gave way to at your coming; I begin to be secure and
tranquil; and you, restless to know us at peace, appear re-
solved on exciting a quaiT^.. Quarrel with Edgar if you
please, Heathclifl*, and deceive his sister; you'll hit on exactly
the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me. "
The conversation ceased ; Mrs. Linton sat down by the fire,
flushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her was growing
intractable : she could neither lay nor control it. He stood on
the hearth, with folded arms, brooding on his evil thoughts; and
in this position I lef^ them, to seek the master who was wonder-
ing what kept Catherine below so long.
" Ellen, " said he, when I entered, ** have you seen your mis-
tress T
" Yes, she's in the kitchen, sir, " I answered. " She's sadly
put out by Mr. Heathclifl^s behavior : and, indeed, I do think
it's time to forange his visiti on another footing. There's harm
100 WUTHERING RBIOHT8.
in being too soft, and now it's come to this — . " And I related
the scene in the court, and, as near as I dared, the whole sub-
sequent dispute. I fancied it could not be vei*y prejudicial to
Mrs. Linton, unless she made it so afterward, by assuming the
defensive for her guest.
Edgar Linton had difficulty in hearing roe to the close. His
first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of blame.
*'This is insufferable ! " be exclaimed. " It is disgraceful that
she should own him for a friend, and force his company on roe !
Call roe two men out of the hall, Ellen. Catherine shall linger
no longer to argue with the low ruffian — ^I have humored her
enough. "
He descended, and, bidding the servants wait in the passage,
went, followed by me, to the kitchen. Its occupants had re-
commenced their angry discussion ; Mrs. Linton, at least, was
scolding with renewed vigor; Heathcliff had moved to the
window, and hung his head, apparently somewhat cowed by
her violent rating.
He saw the master first, and made a hasty motion that she
should be pilent; which she obeyed abruptly, on discovering
the reason of his intimation.
" How is this ] " said Linton, addi^essing her ; ** what notion
of propriety must you have to remain here, after the language
which has been held to you by that blackguard 1 I suppose
because it is his ordinary talk you think nothing of it ; you are
habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps, imagine I can get used
to it too ! "
** Have you been listening at the door, Edgar 1 " asked the
mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her hus-
band, implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation.
Heathcliff, who had raised his eyes at Uie former speech,
Save a sneering laugh at the latter, on purpose, it seemed, to
raw Mr. Linton's attention to him.
He succeeded; but Edgar did not mean to entertain him
with any high flights of passion.
" I have been so far forbearing virith you,. sir, " he said,
quietly ; " not that I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded
character, but I felt you were only partly responsible for that ;
and Catherine, vrishing to keep up your acquaintance, I ac-
quiesced — ^foolishly. Your presence is a moral poison that
would contaminate the most virtuous ; for that cause, and to
prevent worse oonsaqaenoes, I shall deny yon hereafter admb-
WUTHSRINO BBIOHTS. 101
sion iuto this house^ and give notice now that I require your
instant departure. Three minutes'delay will render it in-
voluntary and ignominious. "
Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker
with an eye full of derision.
" Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull ! " he said.
*'It is in danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. By
'God, Mr. Linton, I'm mortally sorry that you are not worth
knocking down ! "
My master glanced toward the passage, and signed me to
fetch the men — he had no intention of hazarding a personal
encounter.
I obeyed the hint; but Mrs. Linton suspecting something,
followed, and when I attempted to call them, she pulled me
back, slammed the door to, and locked it.
" Fair means! " she said, in answer to her husband's look
of angry surprise.''If you have not the courage to attack him,
make an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will cor-
rect you of feigning more valor than you possess. No, I'll
swallow the key befi^re you shall get it! I'm delightfully
rewarded for my kindness to each I After constant indulgence
of one's weak nature, and the other's bad one, I earn, for
thanks, two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity I
Edgar, I was defending you and yours; and I wish Heath*
cliff may flog you sick, for daring to think an evil thought
of me! "
It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that
effect on the master. He tried to wrest the key from
Catherine's grasp; and for safety she flung it into the hottest
part of the fire ; whereupon Mr. Edgar was taken with a
nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.
For his life he could not avert that access of emotion ; mingled
anguish and humiliation overcame him completely. He leaned
on the back of a chair, and covered his face.
" Oh! Heavens! In old days this would win you knight-
hood! " exclaimed Mrs. Linton. " We are vanquished! Heath-
clifl* would as soon lift.a finger at you as the king would march
his army against a colony of mice. Cheer up, you shan't be
hurt ! Your type is not a lamb, it's a sucking leveret. "
" I virish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy! " said
her friend. " I compliment you on your taste : and that is the
slavering, shivering thing you preferred to me ! I would not
102 WUTB BRING HEIGHTS.
Btrike him with my fist, but I'd kick him with my foot, and ex-
perience considerable satisfaction. Is he weeping, or is he going
to faint for fear V*
The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton
rested a push. He'd better have kept his distance : my master
quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the throat a blow that
would have leveled a slighter man.
It took his breath for a minute; and, while he choked, Mr.
Linton walked •ut by the back door into the yard, and from
thence to the front entrance.
" There ! you've done with coming here, " cried Catherine.
" Get away, now — ^he'll return with a brace of pistols, and half-
a-dozen assistants. If he did overhear us, of course, he'd never
forgive you. You've played me an ill turn, Heathcliff ! But
go — ^make haste ! I'd rather see Edgar at bay than you. "
" Do you suppose I'm going with that blow burning in my
gullet ] " he thundered. ** By Hell, no ! I'll crush his ribs in
like a rotten hazle-nut before I cross the threshold ! If I don't
floor him now, I shall murder him sometime ; so, as you value
his existence, let me get at him ! "
" He is not coming, " I interposed, framing a bit of a lie.
" There's the coachman, and the two gardeners ; you'll surely
not wait to be thrust into the road by them ! Each has a blud-
geon, and master will, very likely, be watching from the parlor
windows to see that they fulfil his ordera. "
The gardeners and coachman were there, but Linton was with
them. They had already entered the court. Heathcliff, on
second thoughts, resolved to avoid a struggle against three
underlings; he seized the poker, smashed the lock from the
inner door, and made his escape as they tramped in.
Mrs. Linton, who was very much excited, bid me accompany
her up stairs. She did not know my share in contributing to the
disturbance, and I was anxious to keep her in ignorance.
" I'm nearly distracted, Nelly ! " she exclaimed, throwing her-
self on the sofa. " A thousand smiths'hammers are beating in
my head ! Tell Isabella to shun me — this uproar is owing to
her; and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at
present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to Edgar, if you see
him again to-night, that I'm in danger of being seriously ill — ^I
wish it may prove true. He has startled and distressed me
shockingly! I want to frighten him. Besides, he might come
and begin a string of abuse or complainings ; I'm certain I
!^UTBER1N6 HEIGHT 8. lOS
> .
should recriminate, and God knows where we should end!
Will yoQ do so, my good Nelly 1 You are aware that I am no
way blamable in this matter. What possessed him to turn lis-
tener? HeathclifTs talk was outrageous after you left us ; but
I could soon have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant
nothing. Now, all is dashed wrong by the fool's craving to hear
evil of self, that haunts some people like a demon ! Had Edgar
never gathered our conversation, he would never have been the
worse for it. Really, when he opened on me in that unreason-
able tone of displeasure, after I had scolded Heathcliff* till I was
hoarse for him, I did not care, hardly, what they did to each
other, especially as I felt that, however the scene closed, we
should all be driven asunder, for nobody knows how long!
Well, if 1 can not keep Heathclift* for my friend, if Edgar will
be mean and jealous, Til try to break their hearts by breaking
my own. That will be a prompt way of finishing all, when I
am pushed to extremity ! But it's a deed to be reserved for a
forlorn hope — I'd not take Linton by surprise with it. To this
point he has been discreet in dreading to provoke me; you must
represent the peril of quitting that policy ; and remind him of
my passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy. I wish
you could dismiss that apathy out of your countenance, and look
rather more anxious about roe I "
The stolidity with which I received these instructions was, no
doubt, rather exasperating ; for they were delivered in perfect
sincerity ; but I believed a person who could plan the turning of
her fits of passion to account beforehand, might, by exerting her
will, manage to control herself tolerably, even while under their
influence ; and I did not wish to " frighten " her husband, as she
said, and multiply his annoyances for the purpose of serving her
selfishness.
Therefore I said nothing when I met the master coming to-
ward the parlor ; but I took the liberty of turning back to listen
whether they would resume their quarrel together.
He began to speak first.
" Remain where you are, Catherine,'* he said, without any
anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. " I
shall not stay. I am neither come to wrangle, nor be reconciled :
but I wish just to learn whether, after this evening's events, you
intend to continue your intimacy with — "
**0h, for mercy's sake, " interrupted the mistress, stamping
her foot, " for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now!
104 WUTBERIN6 HEIGBTB.
Your cold blood can not be worked into a fever — ^your veins
are full of ice- water — but mine are boiling ; and the sight of such
chillness makes them dance. "
" To get rid of me— answer roy question, " persevered Mr.
Linton.. " You must answer it; and that violence does not
alarm me. I have found that you can be as stoical as any one
when you please. Will you gfive up Heathcliff hereafter, or
will you give up me ] It is impossible for you to be my friend
and his at the same time, and I absolutely rehire to know which
you choose.*'
'* I require to be let alone ! " exclaimed Catherine, furiously.
** I demand it ! Don't you see I can scarcely stand ] Edgar,,
you — ^you leave me ! "
She rung the bell till it broke witl\ a twang : I entei*ed leisure-
ly. It was enough to tiy the temper of a saint, such senseless,
wicked rages ! There she lay, dashing her head against the
arm of the sofa and grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy
she would crush them to splinters !
Mr. Linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and
fear. He told roe to fetch some water. She had no breath for
speaking.
I brought a glassful, and, as she would not drink, I sprinkled
it on her face. In a few seconds she stretched hei'self out stiff,
and turned up her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and
livid, assumed the aspect of death.
Linton looked terrified.
" There is nothing in the world the matter, " I whispered. I
did not want him to yield, though I could not help being afraid
in my heart.
" She has blood on her lips ! " he said, shuddering.
" Never mind ! " I answei-ed, tartly ; and I told him how she
had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of
frenzy.
I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she heard roe, for
she started up — ^her hair flying over her shoulders, her eyes
flashing, the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preter-
naturally. I made up my mind for broken bones at least ; but
she only glared about her for an instant, and then rushed from
the room.
The master directed me to follow; I did, to her chamber
door ; she hindered me from going farther by securing it against
me.
WUTHBftING HEIOHTB. 105
As she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I
went to ask whether she would have some carried up.
" No! " she replied, jjeremptorily.
The same question was repeated at dinner and tea, and again
on the morrow after, and received the same answer.
Mr. Linton, on his part, spent his time in the library, and did
not inquire concerning his wife's occupations. Isabella and he
had had an hour's interview, during which he tried to elicit from
her some sentiment of proper horror for HeathclifiTs advances ;
but he could make nothmg of her evasive replies, and was obliged
to close the examination unsatisfkctorily, adding, however, a
solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage that
worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship be**
tween herself and him.
CHAPTER XII.
Whole Miss Linton moped about the park and gardei^ always
silent, and almost always m tears, and her brother shut himself
up among books that he never opened, wearying, I guessed, with
a continual vague expectation that Catherine, repenting her con-
duct, would come of her own accord to ask pardon and seek a
reconciliation — and she fasted pertinaciously, under the idea»
probably, that at every meal Edgar was ready to choke for her
absence, and pride alone held him from running to cast himself
at her feet — I went about my household duties, convinced that
the Grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged
in my body.
I wasted no condolences on Miss, nor any expostulations on
my mistress, nor did I pay attention to the sighs of my master,
who yearned to hear his lady's name, since he might not hear
her voice.
I determined they should come about as they pleased for me ;
and though it was a tiresomely slow process, I began to rejoice
at length in a faint dawn of its progress, as I thought at first.
Mrs. Linton on the third day unbarred her door, and having
finished the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired a re-
newed supply and a basin of gruel, for she believed she was
dying. That I set down as a speech meant for Edgar's ears. I
100 WUTHERING HEIGHT 8.
believed no such thing ; bo I kept it to myself, and brought her
some tea and dry toast.
She ate and drank eagerly ; and sank back on her pillow,
agam clenching her hands and groaning.
" Oh, I will die, " she exclaimed, " since no one cares any thing
about me. I wish I had not taken that. "
Then a good while after I heard her murmur,
" No, I'll not die — ^he'd be glad — ^he does not love me at all
—he would never miss me ! "
" Did you want any thing, ma'am]** I inquired, still pre-
serving my external composure, in spite of her ghastly counte-
nance, and strange, exaggerated manner.
" What is that apathetic being doing] " she demanded, push-
ing the thick entangled locks from her wasted face. " Has he
fallen into a lethargy, or is he dead ? "
" Neither, " replied I ; " if you mean Mr. Linton. He*s toler-
ably well, I think, though his studies occupy him rather moi-e
than they ought ; he is continually among his books, since he
has no other society. "
I should not have spoken so, if I had known her true con-
dition, but I could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part
of her disorder.
" Among his books ! " she cried, confounded. " And I dying !
I on the brink of the grave ! My God ! does he know how
I'm altered 1 " continued she, staring at her reflection in a mir-
ror, hanging against the opposite wall. " Is that Catherine
Linton? He imagines me in a pet — in play, perhaps. Can
not you inform him that it is frightful earnest ] Nelly, if it be
not too late, as soon as I learn how he feels, I'll choose between
these two : either to starve, at once— that would be no punish-
ment unless he had a heart — or to recover and leave the coun-
try. Are you speaking the truth about him now ] Take care.
Is he actually so utterly indifferent for my life ] "
" Why, ma'am, " I answered, " the master has no idea of
your being deranged ; and, of course, he does not fear that you
will let yourself die of hunger. "
" You think not 1 Can not you tell him I will V* she return-
ed ; " persuade him — speak of your own mind — say you are
certain I will ! "
"'No, you forget, Mrs. Linton, " I suggested, " that you have
ealen some food with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you
will x > erceive its good effects. "
WUTHERINO HEIGHT 8. 107
•* If I were only sure it would kill him, " she interrupted,
" I'd kill myself directly ! These three awful nights, I've never
closed my lids — and oh, I've been tormented ! I've been haunt-
ed, Nelly! But I begin to fancy you don't like me. How
strange ! I thought, though eveiy body hated and despised
each other, they could not avoid loving me — and they have all
turned to enemies in a few hours. TJiey have, I'm positive ;
the people here. How dreary to meet death, surrounded by
their cold faces ! Isabella, terrified and repelled, afi'aid to en-
^ ter tbe room, it would be so dreadftil to watch Catherine go.
And Edgar standing solemnly by to see it over; then offering
prayers of thanks to God for restoring peace to his house, and
going back to his books ! What, in the name of all that feels,
has he to do with hooks^ when I am dying 1 "
She could not bear the notion which I had put into her head
of Mr. Linton's philosophical I'esignation. Tossing about, she
increased her feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the
pillow with her teeth ; then, raising hereelf up all burning, de-
sired that I would open the window. We were in the middle
of winter, the wind blew strong from the northeast, and I ob-
jected.
Both the expressions flitting over her face, and the changes
of her moods, began to alaim me terribly ; and bix»ught to my
recollection her former illness, and the doctor's injunction that
she should not be crossed.
• A minute previously she was violent ; now, supported on one
arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey her, she seemed to find
childish diversion in pulling the feathera from the rents she had
just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to their
different species : her mind bad strayed to other associations.
•* That's a turkey's, " she murmured to herself; " and this is
a vnld-duck's ; and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they put pigeons'
feathers in the pillows — no wonder I couldn't die ! Let me
take care to throw it on the floor when I lie down. And here
is a moor-cock's ; and this — I should know it among a thousand
— ^it's a lapwing's. Bonny bird ! wheeling over our heads in
the middle of the moor. It wanted to get to its nest, for the
clouds touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. This feather
was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot-^we saw
its nest in the v^dnter, full of little skeletons. HeathclifT set a
trap over it, and the old ones dare not come. I made him
promise he'd never shoot a lapwing afler that, and he di & n't
JOS WUTBERINO HEI6HTB.
Yes, here are more ! Did he shoot my lapwings, Nelly 1 Are
they red, any of them ] Let me look. "
" Give over with that baby- work ! " I interrupted, dragging
the pillow away, and turning the holes toward the mattress, for
she was removing its contents by handfuls. " Lie down and
shut your eyes, you're wandering. There's a mess I The down
is flying about like snow ! "
I went here and there collecting it
''I see in you, Nelly, " she continued, dreamily, " an aged
woman-^you have gray hair and bent shoulders. This bed is
the fairy cave under Penistone Crag, and you are gathering elf-
bolts to hurt our heifers ; pretending, while I am near, that they
are only locks of wooL That's what you'll come to fifty yeai-s
hence ; I know you are not so now. I'm not wandering, you're
mistaken, or else I should believe you really were that withered
hag, and I should think I vxu under Penistone Crag ; and I'm
conscious it's night, and there are two candles on the table^
making the black press shine like jet. "
" The black press t where is that ] " I asked. " You are talk-
ing in your sleep ! "
" It's against the wall, as it always is, " she replied.'* It
does appear odd — I see a face in it ! "
" There is no press in the room, and never was, " said I, re?
suming my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch
her.
" Don't you see that face 1 " she inquired, gazing earnestly at
the mirror.
And, say what I could, I was incapable of making her com-
prehend it to be her own; so I rose and covered it with a
shawl.
" It's behind there still ! " she pursued, anxiously. " And it
stirred. Who is it 1 I hope it will not come out when you are
gone ! Oh, Nelly, the room is haunted ! I'm afraid of being
alone ! "
I took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed, §cxc a suc-
cession of shudders convulsed her frame, and she waM keep
straining her gaze toward the glass.
" There's nobody here, " I insisted, " It was yourself, Mrs.
Linton ; you knew it a while since. "
" Myself! " she gasped, " and the clock is striking twelve!
It's true, then ; that's dreadful ! "
Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her
WUTBERIN6 HEIGHT B. 109
eyes. I attempted to steal tQ tbe door with an intention of
calling her husband, but I was summoned back by a piercing
shriek. The shawl had dropped from the frame.
" Why, what is the matter ] " cried I. " Who is coward now!
Wake up ! That is the glass — the mirror, Mrs. Linton ; and
you see yourself in it, and there am I, too, by your side. "
Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the horror
gradually passed from her countenance ; its paleness gave place
to a glow of shame.
" Oh, dear ! I thought I was at home, " she sighed. " I thought
I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Heights. Because I'm
weaky my brain got confused, and I screamed unconsciously.
Don't say any thing, but stfty with me. I dread sleeping ; my
di'eams appall me. "
** A sound sleep would do you good, ma'am, " I answered ;
'* and I hope this suffering will prevent your trying starving
again. "
" Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house ! " she
went on bitterly, wringing her hands. *'And that wind sound-
ing in the firs by the lattice. Do let me feel it — ^it comes
straight down the moor-— do let me have one breath i "
To pacify her, I held the casement ajar a few seconds. A
cold blast rushed through ; I closed it, and returned to my post.
She lay still now, her face bathed in tears. Exhaustion of
body had entirely subdued her spirit ; our fiery Catherine was
no better than a wailing child !
" How long is it since I shut myself in here 1 " she asked,
suddenly reviving.
« < It was Monday evening, " I replied,''and this is Thursday
night, or rather Friday morning, at present. "
" What ! of the same week 1 " she exclaimed. " Only that
brief timer
" Long enough to live bn nothing but cold water and ill-tem-
per, " observed L
" Well, it seems a^ weary number of hours, " she muttered,
doubtfully ; " it must be more — I remember being in the parlor
after they had quarreled ; and Edgar being cruelly provoking,
and me running into this room desperate. As soon as ever I
had barred the door, utter blackness overwhelmed me, and I
fell on the floor. I couldn't explain to Edgar how certain I felt
of having a fit, or going raging mad, if he persisted in teasing
me I i had no command of tcnigue or brain, and he did not
.A
110 WUTHEBINO REI0HT8.
guoBs my agony, perhaps ; it barely left me sense to try to
escape from him and his voice. Before I recovered sufficiently
to see and hear, it began to be dawn ; and, Nelly, I'll tell you
what I thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till
I feared for my reason : I thought, as I lay there with my
head against that table leg, and my eyes dimly discerning the
gray square of the window, that I was inclosed in the oak-
paneled bed at home; and my heart ached vnth some great
grief which, just waking, I could not recollect. I pondered
and worried myself to discover what it could be ; and, most
strangely, the whole last seven years of my life grew a blank !
I did not recall that they had been at alL I was a child ; my
father was just buried, and my misery arose from the sepai*ation
that Hindley had ordered between me and Heathcliff. I was
laid alone, for the first time, and rousing from a dismal doze
afber a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to push the panels
aside ; it struck the table-top ! I swept it along the carpet, and
then memory burst in — ^my late anguish was swallowed in a
pamxysm of despair. I can not say why I felt so wildly wretch-
ed ; it must have been temporary derangement, for there is
scarcely cause. But, supposing, at twelve years old, I had been
wrenched from the Heights, and every early association, and
my all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, and been convert-
ed at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the lady of Tfarushcross Gi*ange,
and the wife of a stranger, an exile and outcast thencefoith
from what had been my world — you may fancy a glimpse of
the abyss where I gix)veled ! Shake your head as you will,
Nelly, you have helped to unsettle me! You should have
Spoken to Edgar, indeed you should, and compelled him to
leave me quiet. Oh, I'm burning ! I wish I were out of doors.
I wish I were a girl again, half savage, and hardy, and free, and
laughing at injuries, not maddening under them ! Why am I
so changed 1 why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a
few words ] I'm sure I should be myself were I once among
the heather on those hills. Open the window again wide, fasten
it open ! Quick ! why don't you move V*
" Because I won't give you your death of cold, " I an-
swered.
** You won't give me a chance of life, you mean, " she said
sullenly. " However, I'm not helpless yet, I'll open it myself. "
And sliding from the bed before I could hinder her, she
crossed the room» walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and
WUTHERINO HEIOHTB. Ill
bent out, careless of the frosty air, that cut about her shoulders
as keen as a knife.
I entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire. But
I soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she
was delirious I became convinced by her subsequent actions
and ravings).
There was no moon, and every thing beneath lay in misty
darkness ; not a light gleamed from any house, fiir or near; all
had been extinguished long ago; and those at Wuthering Heights
were never visible — still she asserted she caught their shining.
" Look ! " she cried eagerly, " that's my room, with the
candle in it, and the trees swaying before it — and the other
candle is in Joseph's garret — Joseph sits up late, doesn't he 1
He's waiting till I come home that he may lock the g^te : well,
he'll wait a while yet. It's a rough journey, and a sad heart
to travel it ; and we must pass by Gimmerton Kirk, to go that
journey ! We've braved its ghosts often together, and dared
each other to stand among the graves, and ask them to come.
But Heathclifi^ if I dare you now, will you venture 1 If you
do, I'll keep you. I'll not lie there by myself; they may bury
me twelve feet deep, and throw the church down over me ; but
I won't rest till you are vrith me — I never will ! "
She paused, and resumed with a strange smile,'* He's con-
sidering — ^he'd rather I'd come to him ! Find a way, then I
not through that kirkyard. You are slow ! Be content, you
always followed me ! "
Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was plan-
ning how I could reach something to wrap about her, without
quitting my hold of herself, for I could not trust her alone by
the gaping lattice ; when to my consternation, I heard the
rattle of the door-handle, and Mr. Linton entered. He had
only then come from the library ; and, in passinff through the
lobby, had noticed our talking, and been attracted by curiosity
or fear to examine what it signified, at that late hour.
" Oh, sir! " I cried, checking the exclamation risen to his
lips at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of
the chamber, " my poor mistress is ill, and she quite masters
me ; I can not manage her at all ; pray, come and persuade
her to go to bed. Forget your anger, for she's hard to guide
any way but her own. "
" Catherine ill 1 " he said, hastening to us. " Shut the win-
dow, Ellen! Catherine! why — "
119 WUTHEKINO BBIOHTS.-
He was silent ; the hageardness of Mrs. Linton's appearance
smote him speechless, ana he could only glance &'bm her to-
me in horrified astonishment.
** She's been fretting here, " I continued, ** and eating scarcely
any thing, and never complaining ; she would admit none of
us till this evening, and so we couldn't inform you of her state,
as we were not aware of it ourselves-*but it is nothing. "
I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master
frowned. " It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean 1 " he said sternly.
" You shall account more clearly for keeping me ignorant of
this ! " And he took his wife in his arms, and looked at her
with anguish.
At first she gave him no glance of recognition — ^he was
invisible to her abstracted gaze. The delirium was not fixed,
however; having weaned her eyes from contemplating tho
outer darkness, by degrees she centered her attention on him,
and discovered who it was that held her.
** Ah ! you are come, are you, Edgar Linton ? " she said, with
angry animation.'* You are one of those things that are ever
fiMind when least wanted, and when you are wanted, never ! I
suppose we shall " have plenty of lamentations, now — I see we
shall — ^but they can't keep me from my narrow home out yon-
der^ — my resting place where I'm bound before spring is over !
There it is, not among the Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof;
but in the open air with a headstone, and you may please your-
self, whether you go to them or come to me ! "
" Catherine, what have you done ] " commenced the master.
" Am I nothing to you, any more ] Do you love that wretch,
Heath— "
** Hush ! " cried Mrs. Linton. " Hush, this moment ! You
mention that name, and I end the matter instantly by a spring
fit)m the window ! What you touch at present, you may have ;
but my soul vrill be on that hill-top before you lay hands on me
again. I don't want you, Edgar ; I'm past wanting you. Re-
turn to your books ; I'm glad you possess a consolation, for all
you had in me is gone. "
" Her mind wanders, sir, " I interposed. " She has been
talking nonsense the whole evening; but let her have quiet
and proper attendance, and she'll rally. Hereafter, we must
be cautious how we vex her. "
•* I desire no further advice fix)m you, " answered Mr. Linton.
** You knew your mistress's nature, and you encouraged me to
WUTHBSXNO HKIOBTt. 118
harass ber. And not to give me one hint of how she has been
these three days ! It was heartless ! months of sickness could
not cause such a change T'
I began to defend myself^ thinking it too bad to be blamed
for another's wicked waywardness!
" I knew Mrs. Linton's nature to be headstrong and domineer-
ing, " cried I ;'* but I didn't know that you wis^d to fiwter her
fierce temper ! I did not know that, to humor her, I should wink
at Mr. Heathcliff. I performed the duty of a £uthfnl senrant in
telling you, and I have got a faithful servant's wages ! WeU,
it will teach me to be careful next time. Next time you may
gather intelligence for yourself] "
" The next time you bring a tale to me, you shall quit my
service, Ellen Dean, " he replied.
" You'd rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then,
Mr. Linton t " said I. " Heathcliff has your permissioD to
come a courting to Miss, and to drop in at every opportunity
your absence offers, on purpose to poison the mistress against
youl "
Confused as Catherine was, her wits were alert at applying
our conversation.
" Ah ! Nelly has played traitor, " she exclaimed, passionately,
" Nelly is my hidden enemy — ^you witch ! So you do seek elf >
bolts to hurts us ! Let me go, and I'll make her rue ! I'll make
her howl a recantation 1 "
A maniac's fury kindled under her brows; she struggled
desperately to disengage herself from Linton's arms. I felt no
inclination to tarry the event ; and resolving to seek medical
aid on my own responsibility, I quitted the chamber.
In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a
bridle book is driven into the wall, I saw something white
moved irregularly, evidently by another agent than the wind.
Notwithstanding my hurry, I staid to examine it, lest ever afber
I should have the conviction impressed on my imagination that
it was a creature of the other world.
My surprise and perplexity were great to discover, by touch
more than vision. Miss Isabella's springer, Fanny, suspended
to a handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp.
I quickly released the animal, and lif^ it into the garden*
I had seen it follow its mistress up-stairs, when she went to
bed, and wondered much how it could have got out there, and
what mischievous person had treated it so.
114 WUTB BEING H E I 6 H T ft.
While untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me
that I repeatedly caught the beat of horses'feet galloping at
some distance ; but there were such a number of things to oc-
cupy my reflections that I hardly gave the circumstance a
thought, though it was a strange sound, in that place, at two
o'clock in the morning.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to
see a patient in the village as I came up the street ; and my
account of Catherine Linton's malady induced him to accom-
pany me back immediately.
He was a plain, rough man; and he made no scruple to
speak his doubts of her surviving this second attack ; unless she
were more submissive to his directions than she had shown her-
self before.
" Nelly Dean, " said he, " I can't help fancying there's an ex-
tra cause for this. What has there been to do at the Grange 1
We've odd reports up here. A stout, hearty lass like Catherine
does not fall ill for a trifle ; and that sort of people should not
either. It's hard work bringing them through fevers, and such
things. How did it begin 1 "
" The master will inform you, " I answered ; " but you are
acquainted with the Eamshaws'violent dispositions, and Mrs.
Linton caps them all. I may say this : it commenced in a
quarrel. She was struck during a tempest of passion vvrith a
kind of fit. That's her account, at least ; for she flew off in the
height of it, and locked herself up. Afterward, she refused to
eat, and now she alternately raves, and remains in a half dream,
knowing those about her, but having her mind filled with all
soils of strange ideas and illusions. "
" Mr. Linton will be sorry] " observed Kenneth, interroga-
tively.
" Sorry 1 he'll break his heart should any thing happen ! " I
replied. " Don't alarm him more than necessary. "
" Well, I told him to beware, " said my companion, " and he
must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning! Hasn't
he been thick with Mr. Heathcliff lately ? "
" Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grange, " replied I,
** though more on the strength of the mistress having known
him when a boy, than because the master likes his company.
At present, he's discharged from the trouble of calling ; owing
to some presumptuous aspirations after Miss Linton which he
manifested. I hai'dly think he'll be taken in again. "
WUTHBIINO HEIGHTS. 115
** And does Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on bim 1 " was
the doctor's next question.
'* I'm not in her confidence, " returned I, reluctant to con«
tinue the subject.
" No, she's a sly one, " he remarked, shaking his head. " She
keeps her own counsel ! But she's a real little fool. I have it
from good authority, that, last night, and a pretty night it was !
she and Heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back
of your house above two hours ; and he pressed her not to go
in again, but just mount his horse and away with him 1 My
informant said she could only put him off by pledging her word
of honor to be prepared on their first meeting after that ; when
it was to be, he did'nt hear, but you urge Mr. Linton to look
sharp! "
This news filled me with fresh fears ; I outstripped Kenneth,
and ran most of the way back. The little dog was yelping in
the garden yet. I spared a minute to open the gate for it, but
instead of going to the house door, it coursed up and down,
snufiing the grass, and would have escaped to the road, had I
not seized and conveyed it in with me.
On ascending to Isabella's room, my suspicions were con-
firmed ; it was empty. Had I been a few houra sooner, Mrs.
Linton's illness might have arrested her rash step. But what
could be done nowl There was a bare possibility of over-
taking them if pursued instantly. I could not pursue them,
however; and I dare not rouse the family, and fill the place
with confusion ; still less unfold the business to my master, ab-
sorbed as he was in his present calamity, and having no heart
to spare for a second grief!
I saw nothing for it, but to hold my tongue, and suffer mat-
ters to take their course ; and Kenneth being arrived, I went
with a badly composed countenance to announce him.
Catheiine lay in a troubled sleep ; her husband had suc-
ceeded in soothing the access of frenzy ; he now hung over
her pillow, watching every shade, and eveiy change of her
painfully expressive features.
The doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hope-
fully to him of its having a favorable termination, if we could
only presei-ve around her perfect and constant tranquillity. To
me, he signified the threatening danger was, not so much death
as permanent alienation of intellect.
I did not close my eyes that night, nor did Mr. Linton ; in-
110 WUTHERINO HEIGHT*.
deed, we never went to bed ; and the servants were all up long
before the usual hour, moving through the house with stealthy
tread, and exchanging whispers as they encountered each other
in their vocations. Every one was active but Miss Isabella;
and they began to remark how sound she slept. Her brother
too asked if she had lisen, and seemed impatient for her
presence, and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her
sister-in-law.
I ti'embled lest he should send me to call her; but I v^ras
spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight. One
of the maids, a thoughtless girl, who had been on an early
errand to Giramerton, came panting up-stairs, open-mouthed,
and dashed into the chamber, crying,
" Oh, dear, dear ! What mun we have next 1 Master,
master, our young lady — "
*'Hold your noise ! " cried I hastily, enraged at her clamorous
manner.
" Speak lower, Mary. What is the matter V* said Mr. Linton.
" What ails your young lady V*
" She's gone, she's gone 1 Yon'Heathcliff's run off wi'her ! "
gasped the girl.
" That is not true ! " exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation.
" It can not be. How has the idea entered your head T Ellen
Dean, go and seek her — ^it is incredible — ^it can not be. "
As he spoke, he took the servant to the door, and then re-
peated his demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
" Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here, " she
stammered, " and he asked whether we wern't in trouble at the
Grange. I thought he meant for Missis's sickness, so I answered,
yes. Then says he, *They's somebody gone after *em, I guess.'
I stared. He saw I knew naught about it, and he told how a
gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse's shoe fastened
at a blacksmith^s shop, two miles out of Gimmerton, not very
long afler midnight ! and how the blacksmith's lass had got up
to spy who they were ; she knew them both directly. And she
noticed the man. Heathcliff it was, she felt certain, nob'dy
could mistake him ; besides he put a sovereign in her father's
hand for payment. The lady had a cloak about her face ; but
having desired a sup of water, while she drank it fell back, and
she saw her very plain. Heathcliff held both bridles as they
redo on, and they set their faces from the village, and went as
fast as the rough roads would let them» The lass said nothing
WUTHERINO HBIGHTS. 117
to her fither, but she told it aH orer Gimmerton this mora-!
ing. "
I ran and peeped, fer form's sake, into Isabella's room : con
firming, when I returned, the servant's statement. Mr. Linton
had resumed his seat by the bed ; on my re-entrance, he raised
his eyes, read the meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped
them without giving an order, or uttering a word.
" Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing
her back, " I inquired. " How should we do V*
*'She went of her own accord, " answered the master;''she
had a right to go if she pleased. Trouble me no more about
her. Hereafter she is only my sister in name ; not because I
disown her, but because she has disowned me. "
And that was all he said on the subject ; he did not make a
single inquiry further, or mention her in any way, except direct-
ing me to send what property she had in the house to her finosh
home, wherever it was, when I knew it.
/^
CHAPTER XIII.
For two months the fugitives remained absent ; in those two
months Mrs. Linton encountered and conquered the worst shock
of what was denominated a brain fever. No mother could have
nursed an only child more devotedly than Edgar tended her.
Day and night he was watching, and patiently enduring all the
annoyances that initable nerves and a shaken reason could in-
flict : and, though Kenneth remarked that what he saved from
the gi*ave would only recompense his care by forming the source
of constant future anxiety ; in fact, that his health and strength
were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity, he
knew no limits in gratitude and joy when Catherine's life was
declared out of danger; and hour after hour he would sit be-
side her, tracing the gradual return to bodily health, and flatter-
ing his |oo sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would
settle back to its right balance also, and she would soon be eu-
tirely her former self
The first time she lefl her chamber, was at the commencement
of the following March. Mr. Linton had put on her pillow, in
118 WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS.
the monuog, a handful of golden crocuses ; her eye, long stranger
to any gleam of pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone de-
lighted as she gathered them eagerly together.
" These are the earliest flowers at the Heights! " she ex-
claimed. " They remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sun-
flhine, and nearly melted snow. Edgar, is there not a south
wind, and is not the snow almost gone ] "
** The snow is quite gone ; down here, darling ! " replied her
hushand, " and I only see two white spots on Sie whole range
of moors. The sky is blue, and the larks are singin?, and the
becks and brooks are all brim full. Catherine, last spring at this
time, I was longing to have you under this roof — ^now, I wish
you were a mile or two up those hills, the air blows so sweetly,
I feel that it would cure you. "
" I shall never be there, but once more !'* said the inyalid ;
" and then you'll leave me, and I ^hall remain, for ever. Next
spring you'll long again to have me under this roof, and you'll
look back, an3 think you were happy to-day. "
Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer
her by the fondest words ; but, vaguely regarding the flowers,
she let the tears collect on her lashes, and stream down her
cheeks unheeded.
We knew she was really better, and therefore decided that
long confinement to a single place produced much of this de-
spondency, and it might be partially removed by a change of
scene.
The master told me to light a fire in the many weeks'desert-
ed parlor, and to set an easy chair in the sunshine by the win-
dow ; and then he brought her down, and she sat a long while,
enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected, revived by the
objects round her, which, though familiar, were free fi*om the
dreary associations investing her hated sick-chamber. By even-
ing she seemed greatly exhausted; yet no arguments could
persuade her to return to that apartment, and I had to arrange
the parlor sofa for her bed, till another room could be pre-
pared.
To obviate the fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs,
we fitted up this, where you lie at present, on the same floor
wiUi the parlor : and she was soon strong enough to move from
one to the other, leaning on Edgar's arm.
Ab, I thought myself she might recover, so waited on as she
was. And there was double cause to desire it, tost on her exist-
WUTIIEBIN6 HErGBTS. 119
ence depended that of another ; we cherished the hope that in
a little while Mr. Linton's heart would he gladdened, and his
lands secured from a stranger's gripe, hy the hiith of an heir.
I should mention that Isahella sent to her brother, some six
weeks from her departure, a short note, announcing her mar-
riage with Heathcliff. It appeared dry and cold ; but at the
bottom was dotted in with pencil an obscure apology, and an
entreaty for kind remembrance and reconciliation, if her pro-
ceeding had offended him, asserting that she could not help it
then, and, being done, she had now no power to repeal it.
Linton did not reply to this, I believe; and in a fortnight
more I got a long letter which I considered odd, coming from
the pen of a bride just out of the honeymoon. I'll read it, for I
keep it yeL Any relic of the dead is precious, if they were
valued living. It begins —
" Dear Ellen,
" I came last night to Wuthering Heights, and heard, for the
first time, that Catherine has been, and is yet, very ill. I must
not write to her, I suppose, and my brother is either too angiy
or too distressed to answer what I sent him. Still, I must write
to somebody, and the only choice left me is you.
" Inform Edgar that I'd give the world to see his face again
— ^that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four
hours after I left it, and is there at this moment, full of warm
feelings for him and Catherine ! I canH follow it though-^
(those words are underiined) — ^they need not expect me, and
they may draw what conclusions they please, taking care, how-
ever, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient
afiection.
" The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I want to
ask you two questions : the first is —
" How did you contrive to preserve the common sympathies
of human nature when you resided here ? I can not recognize
any sentiment which those around share with me.
" The second question I have great interest in : it is this —'
" Is Mr. Heathcliff a man ] If so, is he mad 1 And if not, is
he a devil 1 I shan't tell my reasons for making this inquiry ;
but I beseech you to explain, if you can, what I have married
-^that is, when you call to see me ; and you must call, Ellen,
very soon. Don't write, but come, and bring me something
from Edgar.
120 WUTBKBINO HEIOHTft.
" Now you sbal] bear how I bave been received in my new
bomo, as I am led to imagine tbe Heigbts will be. It is to
amuse myself tbat I dwell on sucb subjects as tbe lack of exter-
nal comforts ; tbey never occupy my tbougbts except at tbe mo-
ment wben I miss tbem. I sbould laugh and dance for joy if I
found their absence was the total of my miseries, and the rest
was an unnatural dream ! ^
" Tbe sun set behind tbe Grange, as we turned upon the
moors ; by tbat I judged it to be six o'clock ; and my compan-
ion halted balf-an-bour to inspect the park and tbe gardens,
and, probably, tbe place itself, as well as he could ; so it was
dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of the farmhouse,
and your old fellow-servant, Joseph, issued out to receive us by
the light of a dip candle. He did it with a courtesy that re-
dounded to his credit. His fii*6t act was to elevate his torch to
a level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under lip»
and turn away.
" Then he took tbe two horses and led them into tbe stables,
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we
lived in an ancient castle.
''Heatbcliff staid to speak to him, and I entered tbe kitchen
— a dingy, untidy hole ; I dare say you would not know it, it
i» so chaqged since it was in your charge.
" By the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb and dirty
in garb, with a look of Catherine in bis eyes and about bis
mouth.
"'This is Edgar's legal nephew,'I reflected — * mine in a
manner; I must shake hands, and — yes — I must kiss him. It
is right to establish a good underatanding at the beginning.'
" I approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said,
" * How do you do, my dear V
** He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
'*'Shall you and I be friends, Hareton V was my next essay
at conversation.
''An oatli, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not
* frame off,'rewarded my perseverance.
"'Hey, Throttler, lad I'whispered tbe little wretch, rousing,
a half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a comer. * Now, wilt tub
be ganging 1'he asked, authoritatively.
''Love for my life urged a compliance ; I stepped over the'
threshold to wait till the others should enter. Mr. Heathcliff
was nowhere visible; and Joseph, whom I followed to the 8ta«
r
W17THBRIIfC BElOBTfl. 121
bles, aad requested to accompany me in, after staring and mut-
tering to himself screwed up his nose and replied —
" * Mins ! mim ! mim ! Did iver Christian body hear owt like
it 1 * Minching un'nmnching ! Hah can aw tell whet ye say V
"'I say, I wish yon te come with me into the house !'I cried,
thinking him^ dea( yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
"'Nor nuh me ! Aw getten summut else to do,'he answered,
and continued his work, moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and
surveymg my dress and countenance (the former a great deal
too fine, but the latter, I'm sure, as sad as he dould desire) with
sovereign contempt.
" I walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to anothet
door, at which I took, the liberty of knocking, in hopes some
more civil servant might show himsel£
" ,After a short suspense it was opened by a tall, gaunt man,
without neckerchief^ and otherwiBe extremely slovenly; his
features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his
shoulders ; and kis eyes, too, were hke a ghostly Cauierine's,
with all their beauty annihilated.
"'What's your business here 1'he demanded, grimly.'Who
are you V
"'My name was Isabella Linton,'I replied.'You've seen
me before, sir. I'm lately married to Mr. Heathcliflf; and he
has brought me here— I suppose by your permission.'
.'" Is he come back, then V asked the hermit, glaring like a
hungry wolf.
"'Yes — ^we came just how,'I said ;'but he left me by the
kitchen door; and when I would have gone in, your little boy
played sentinel over the place, and frightened me off by the help
of a buU-dog.'
''^'It's well the hellish villain has kept his word!'growled
my future host, searching the darkness beyond me in expecta-
tion of discovering Heathcliff, and then he indulged in a soliloquy
of execrations, and threats of what be would have done had the
'fiend'deceived him.-
" I repented having tried this second entrance ; and was almost
inclined to ^lip away before he finished caxsing, but ere I could
execute that intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened
the door.
** There was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge
iqpartment, whose fiber had grown a uniform giray ; and the once
DiiHiant pewter dishes, which used to attract my gase when I
P
128 WUTHXSINQ HXIOBT8;
was a girl, partook of a timilar obooantjf crealod by tanriah and
dust.
** I inquired whether I might call the maid, and be conducted
to a bed-room 1 Mr. Eamshaw vouchsafed no answer. Ha
walked up and down, with his hands in his pockets, apparently
quite forgetting my presence ; and his abstraction was eridently
so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropicidy that I shrank
from disturbing him again.
** You'll not be surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particularly
cheerless, seated in worse than solitude,, on that inhospitable
hearth, and remembering that four miles distant lay my delight-
ful home, containine the only people I loved on eaith : and
there might as well be the Atlantic to part us, instead < ^ those
four miles. I could not overpass them !
** I questioned with myself Where must I turn for comfort 1
and-— mind, you don't tell Edgar, or Catherine — above every
sorrow beside, this rose pre-eminent*— despair at finding nobody
who could oc would be my ally against Heathcliff !
" I had sought shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost gladly,
because I was secured by that arrangement from, living alone
with him ; but he knew the people we were coming among,
and he did not fear their intermeddling.
" I sat and thought a doleful time ; Uie clock struck eight, and
nine, and still iay companion paced to and fro, his head bent on
his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan > or a bitter ejacu-
lation forced itself out at intervals.
*'I listened to detect a woman's voice in the house, and filled
the interim with wild regrets, and dismal anticipations, which,
at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing, and weeping.
" I was not aware how openly I grieved, till Eamshaw halted
opposite, in his measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly
awakened surprise^ Taking advantage of his recovered atten-
tion, I exclaimed—*
" *I'm tired with my journey, and I want to go to bed!
Where is the maid-servant] Direct me to her, as she wcm't
come to nae 1'
"'We have none,'he answered ; < yon must wait on yourself!
''* Where must I dee|», then f I sobbed. I was beyond le-
garding self-respect, weighed down by fetigue and wretched-
ness.
" * Joseph win show you Headidiff's chamber,'said he ; * op«
that door— he^ in thersi'
WUTHKftlH« BBIOHTfl. 138
'^'I was gomg to obey, but he suddenly airssted me, and
added in the stningest tone^
« <'Be BO good as to torn year lock, and draw your bolt—
don't omit it I'
'^'WeUriaaid. «Botwhy,M^.£anahawr I did not leHsh
tlie notion of delibecatdy Jastming myself in with Heathcliff.
**'Look here V he replied, pnlHng fi:t > m his waistcoat a cnri-
onsly oonstmcted pistm, hairing a doable edged qvring kntib
attached to ^m barreL * That's a great tempter to a desperate
man, is it not 1 I can not resist going np wim this, every night,
and trying his door: if once I find it open, he's done for I 1 do
it inTsriably, even though the minute before I have been recall-
ing a hundred reasons & at should make me refirain— it is some
devil that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killmg him.
You fight against the devil, for love, as long as you may ; when
the time comes, not aU the angels in heaven shall save him !
'* I surveyed the weapon inquisitively ; a hideous notion struck
me. How powerfiil I should be possessing such an instrument t
I took it firom his hand, and touched the blade. He looked
astonished at the expression my fiice assumed during a brief
second. It was not horror, it was covetousness. He snatched
the pistol back, jealously ; shut the kniie, and retoned it to its
concealment.
'< < I don't care if you tell him,'said he.'Put him on his
guard, and watch for him. You know the terms we are on, I
see ; his danger does not shock you.'
< < < What has HeathcM done to you 1'I asked. *Inwhathaa
he wronged you, to warrant this appalling hatred 1 Wouldn't
it be wiser to bid him quit the house 1'
<''No,'thundered Sfaisflfaaw,'should he ofier to leave me,
he's a dead man ; persuade him to attempt it, and you are a
murderess 1 Am I to lose att^ without a chance of retrieval 1
Is Hareton to be a beggar? Oh, damnation! I wiU have it
back ; and I'll have kis gold too ; and then his blood ; and heU
sfaall have his soul 1 It wiU be ten times blacker with that
guest than erer it was before I'
. " You've acquainted me, Ellen, with your old master's habits.
He is clearly on the verge of madness— he was so, last night, at
least. I shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant'g
ill-bred moroseness as comparativriy ^reeable.*
:'* He BOW recommenced his moody walk, and I raised the
latch, and escaped into the kitchen.
124 WUTBERIN6 HEIGHTS.
*'Joseph was bending oyer the fire, peering into a large pan
that swung above it ; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on
the settle dose by. The contents of the pan began to boil, and
he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl; I conjectured that
this preparation was probably for our supper, and, being hungry,
I resolved it should be eatable— so crying out, sharply — * FU
make the porridge !'I removed the vessel out of his reach,
and proceeded to take off my hat and ridjmg habit'Mr. Eam-
shaw,'I continued,'directs me to wait on myself— I will. I'm
not going to act the lady among you, for fear I should starve.'
**'Grooid Lord !'he muttered, sitting down, and stroking his
ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle.'If they's tub be
firesh ortherings — just when aw getten used tub two maisters, if
aw mun hev a mistress set o'er my heead, it's loike time tub be
flitting. Aw niver did think tub say t'd & y ut aw mud lave th'
owld place-— but aw daht it's nigh at bend !'
** This lamentation drew no notice from me ; I went briskly
to work; sighing to remember a period when it would have
been all merry fun ; but compell^ speedily to drive off the
rranembrance. It racked me to recall past happiness, and the
greater peril there was of conjuring up its c^parition, the quicker
the thible ran round, and the faster the handfuls of meal fell
into the water. . .
" Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indigna-
tion.
"'Thear !'he ejaculated.'Hareton, thah wiU'nt sup thy
porridge tub neeght ; they'll be nowt bud lumps as big as maw
nave. Thear, agean ! A w'd fling in bowl un all, if aw wer
yah ! Thear, pale t'guilp off, un'then yah'll hae done wi't.
Bang, bang. It's a marcy t'bothom isn't deaved aht !'
" It tffos rather a rough mess, I own, when pom-ed into the
basins ; £ > ur had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new
milk was brought fix > m the dairy, which Hareton seized, and
commenced drinking and spilling fi*om the expansive lip.
" I eiqpostulated, and desired that he should have his in a
mug ; affirming that I could not taste the liquid treated so dirtily.
The old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety; as-
suring me, repeatedly, that * the bairn was every bit as gooid'as
I,'and every bit as wollsome,'and wondering how I could
fashion to be so conceited; meanwhile, the infant ruffian con-
tinued sucking ; and glowered up at me defyingly, as he slavered
into the jug.
WUTHBEING HEIGHTS. 125
*''I sball have my supper in another room/ I said.'Have
you no place you call a parlor V
" * Parlor /'he echoed, sneeringly, * parlor / Nay, we've noa
parlors. If yah dunnut loike wer company, they's maister's ;
im'if yah dunnut loike maister, they's us.'
"'Then I shall go up-stairs/ I answered ;'diow me a cham-
ber!'
*'I put my basin on a ti*ay, and went myself to fetch some
more milk.
" With great grumblings, the feHow rose, and preceded me
in my ascent : we mounted to the garrets ; he opening a door,
now and then, to look into the apartments we passed.
"'Here's a rahm,'he said, at last, flinging back a cranky
board on hinges.'It's weel eneugh tub ate a few porridge in.
They's a pack uh com i't'comer, thear, meeterly clane ; if
yah're feared uh muckying yer grand silk does, spread yer
bankerchir ut t'top on't.'
" The'rahm'was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of
malt and grain; various sacks of which articles were piled
around, leaving a vride, bare space in the middle.
"'Why, man !'I exclaimed, feeing him angrily,'this is not a
place to sleep in. I wish to see my bed-room.'
"'Bed-rume /'he repeated, in a tone of mockery. * Yah's
see all t'bed-rumes thear is — ^yon's mine.'
" He pointed into the second garret, only differing from the
first in being more naked about the walls, and having a large,
low, curtainless bed, vrith an indigo-colored quilt, at one end.
" * What do I want with yours V 1 retorted. * I suppose Mr.
Heathcliff does not lodge at the top of the house, does he V
" * Oh ! i^'s Maister Heathclifs yah're wenting 1 " cried he,
as if making a new discovery. * Couldn't ye uh said soa, at
ODst 1 un then, aw mud uh telled ye, baht all this wark, ut that's
just one yah cannut sea — ^he alias keeps it locked, un'nob'dy
iver mells on't but hisseln.'
" * You've a nice house, Joseph,'I could not refrain from
observing, * and pleasant inmates ; and I think the concentrated
essence of all the madness in the world took upits abode in my
brain the day I linked my fate vrith theire ! However, that is
not to the present purpose — ^there are other rooms. For heav-
en's sake, be quick, and let me settle somewhere !'
" He made no reply to this adjuration ; only plodding dog'
godly down the wooden steps, and halting before an apartment
126 WUTBEltINO HBIGHTa.
which, from that halt, and the superior quaKty of its furniture, I
conjectured to be the best one.
** There was a carpet, a good (me; but the pattern was ob-
literated by dust; a fireplace hung with cut paper, dropping
to pieces ; a handsome oak bedstead with ample crimson cur-
tains of rather expensive material, and modem make. But
they had evidently experienced rough usage, the valances hung
in festoons, wrenched from their rings; and the ircHi rod sup-
porting them was bent in an arc, on one side, causing the drapeiy
to trail upon die floor. The chaira were also damaged, many
of them severely ; and deep indentations deformed the panels
of the walls.
" I was endeavoring to gather resolution for entering, and
takiuff possession, when my fool of a guide announced —
" * This hei-e is t* maister's.'
** My supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and
mv patience exhausted. I insisted on being provided instantly
ivith a place of refuge, and means of repose.
« * Whear the divil,'began the religious elder.'The Lord
bless us! The Lord forgie us! Whear the keU, wold ye
gang] ye marred, wearisome nowt! Yah seen all bud Hare-
ton's bit uf a cham'er. They's nut aniother hoile tub lig dahn
in i'th'hahse 1'
''I was so vexed, I flung my tray, and its contents on the
^ound; and then seated myself at the stair's head, hid my fiice
m my hands, and cried.
** * Ech ! ech !'exclaimed Joseph.'Weel done, Miss Cathy !
Hahsiver, t'maister sail just tum'le o'er them brocken pots ;
un'then we's heai* summut ; we's hear hah it's tuh be, Gooid-
fiir-nowt madling 1 yah desarve pining froo this tuh Churstmas,
flinging t* precious gifts uh God under fooit i'yer fiaysome
rages! Bud, aw'm mista'en if yah shew yw sperrit lang.
will Heathcliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye ? Aw nobbut
wish he muh cotch ye i'that plisky. Aw nobbut wish he may.*
< *And so he went scolding to his den beneath, taking tbe
candle with him, and I remained in the dark.
'* The period of reflection succeeding this silly action, com-*
pelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my pride, and
choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its effects.
" An unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
Throttler, whom I now recognized as a son of our old Skulker ;
it had spent its whelphood at the Grange, and was given by my
WUTHBRIN6 HEIGHTS. 127
father to Mr. Hindley. I fancy it knew me— it pushed its nose
against mine by way of salute, and then hastened to devour the
porri(^^, while I groped from step to step, collecting the shat-
tered earthenware, and drying this spatters of milk from the
bannister with my pocket-handkerchid^
" Our lahorB were scarcely over when I heard Eamshaw*s
tread in the passage ; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed
to the wall ; I stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's en-
deavor to avoid him was unsuccessful, as I guessed by a scutter
down stairs, and a prolonged, piteous yelping. I had better
luck. He passed on, entered his chamber, and shut the door.
" Directly after, Joseph came up with Hareton, to put him
to bed. I had found shelter in Hareton's room, and the old
man on seeing me, said —
*''They's rahm fur boath yah, un yer pride, nab, aw sud
think i'th'hahse. It's emptv; yah muh hev it all tuh yerseln,
un Him as alias maks a third, i'sich ill company I "
" Gladly did I take advantage of dns mtimation; and the
minute I flung myself into a chair, by the ftre, I nodded, and
slept.
''My slumber was deep and sweet; though over far too
soon. Mr. Heathcliff awoke me ; be had Just come in, and
demanded, in his loving manner, what I was doing there t
" I told him the cause of my staying up so late---that he had
the key of our room in his podtet.
" The adjective our gave mortal offence. He swore it was
not, nor never should be mine ; and he'd— -but I'll not repeat
his language, nor describe his haHtual conduct ; he is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence ! I sometimes
wonder at him, with an intensity that deadens my ftar : yet,
I assure you, a tiger, or a venomous serpent could not rouse
terror in me equal to that which he wakens. He told me of
Catherine's illness, and accused my brother of causing it;
promising that I should be Edgar's proxy in suflfering, till he
could get a hold of him.
" I do hate him--*I am wretched — I have been a fool! Be-
ware of uttering one breath of this to any one at the (Grange.
I shall expect you every day— don't disappomt me !
M ISABXLLA.**
CHAPTER XIV.
As Boon as I had perused this epistle, I went to the master^
and informed him that his sister had arrived at the Heights, and
sent me a letter expressing her sorrow for Mrs. Linton's situa-
tion, and her ardent desire to see him ; with a wish that he
would transmit to her, as early as possible, some token of for-
giveness by me.
« Forgiveness V* said Linton. " I have nothing to forgive-
her, Ellen — you may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon^
if you like, and say that I am not angry, but I'm sorry to have
lost her : especially as I can never tfink she'll be happy. It is
out of the question ray going to see her, however; we are eter*
nally divided ; and should she really wish to oblige me, let her
j^)ersuade the villain she has married ta leave the eountxy. "
" And you won't write her a little note, sir] " I asked, implor-
ingly-
''Noy " he answered; ^it is needless. My communication
with HeathelifF^s family shall be as sparing as his- with mine. It I
shall not exist! " |
Mr. Edgar's coldness depressed me exceedingly; and all the
way from the Grange, I puzzled my brains how to put more |
heart into what he said, when I repeated it ; and how to soften
his refusal of even a few lines to console Isabella.'
I dare say she had been on the watch & t me since morning r ,
I saw her looking through the lattice, as I came up the garden
causeway, and I nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid
of being observed.
I entered without knocking. There never was such a dreary, i
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented ! I must ■]
confess that, if I had been in the young lady'^s place, I would at
least have swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster.
But she already partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which
encompassed her. Her pretty face was wan and listless; her
hair uncurled ;. some locks hanging lankly down, and some care-
lessly twisted round her head. Probably she had not touched
her dress since yester-evening.
Hindley was not there. Mr. Heathcliff sat at a table, turning
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 129
over some papers in his pocket-book ; but he rose when I ap-
peared, asked me how I did, quite fHendly, and offered me a
chair.
He was the only thing there that seemed decent, and I thought
he never looked better. So much had circumstances altered
their positions, that he would certainly have struck a stranger
as a bom and bred gentleman, and his wife as a thorough little
slattern !
She came forward eagerly to greet me; and held out one
hand to take the expected letter.
I shook my head. She wouldn't understand the hint, but fol-
lowed me to a sideboard, where I went to lay my bonnet, and
importuned me, in a whisper, to give her directly what I had
brought.
Heathcliff guessed the meaning of her manoeuvres, and said,
" If you have got any thing for Isabella, as no doubt you
have, Nelly, give it to her. You needn't make a secret or it ;
we have no secrets between us. "
''Oh, I have nothing, " I replied, thinking it best to speak the
truth at once. " My master bid me tell his sister that she must
not expect either a letter or a visit from him at present. He
sends his love, ma'am, and his wishes for your happiness, and his
pardon for the grief you have occasioned ; but he thinks that
afler this time his household and the household here should
drop intercommunication ; as nothing good could come of keep-
ing it up.
Mrs. Heathcliff's lip quivered slightly, and she returned to
her seat in the window. Her husband took his stand on the
hearthstone, near me, and began to put questions concerning
Catherine.
I told him as much as I thought proper of her illness, and he
extorted from me, by cross-examination, most of the & cts con-
nected with its origin.
I blamed her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself;
and ended by hoping that he would follow Mr. Linton's exam-
ple, and avoid future interference with his family, for good or
evil.
" Mrs. Linton is now just recovering, " I said ; " she'll never
be like she was, but her life is spared, and if you really have a
regard for her, you'll shun crossing her way again. Nay, you'll
move out of this country entirely; and that you may not regret
it, I'll inform you Catherine Linton is as different now from
180 WVTHEEING HEI6HT8.
your old friend Catherine Eariishaw as that young lady is dif-
ferent from me ! Her appearance is changed greatly, her char-
acter much more so ; and the person who is compelled of neces-*
•ity to be her companion, wiU only sustain his a & ction hereafter
by the remembrance of what she once was, by common human-
ity, and a sense of duty !''
" That is quite possible,'* remarked Heathcli£^ forcing himself
to seem calm, " quite possible that your master should have
nothing but common humanity, and a sense of duty to fall back
upon. But do you imagine that I shall leave Catherine to his
(my and kwnanity ? and can you compare my feelings respect-
ing Catherine to his 1 Before you leave this house, I must exact
a promise from you, that you'll get me an interview with her^-
c < Risent of refuse, I ivill see her ! What do you say? "
** I say Mr. Heathcliff, " I replied, " you must not— you never
shall through my means. Another encounter between you and
the master would kill her altogether ! "
" With your aid that may be avoided,'* he continued ;'* and
should there be danger of such an event— should he be the cause
of adding a single trouble more to her existence — why, I think
I shall be justified in going to extremes 1 I wish you had sin-
cerity enough to tell me whether Catherine would suffer greatly
from his loss. The fear that she would restrains me, and there
you see the distinction between our feelings. Had he been in
my place, and I in his, though I hated him with a hatred that
turned my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against
him. You may look incredulous if you please ! I never would
have banished him from her society as long as she desired his.
The moment her regard ceased, I would have torn his heart out
and drank his blood! But till then, if you don't believe me,
you don't know me— till then, I would have died by inches
before I touched a single hair of his head ! "
" And yet, " I interrupted, " you have no scruples in com-
pletely ruining all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting
yourself into her remembrance, now when she has nearly for-
gotten you, and involving her in a new tumult of discord and
distress. "
" You suppose B^e has neariy forgotten me 1 " he said. ** Oh,
Nelly ! you know she has not ! You know as well as I do,
that for every thought she spends on Linton, she spends a thou-
sand on me ! At a most miserable period of my life, I had a
notion of the kind ; it haunted me on my retuni to the neigh-
WUTSSftlNCKBIOHTS. 181
^. I.I.I
borfaood, last sttminer, bnl only her own agrarance could make
me admit the horrible idea again. And then, Linton would be
nothing, nor Hindlej, nor all the dreajm that ever I dreamed.
Two words would comprehend my fhtmr o d e t Uk and J & d2— ex-
istence, after losing her, would be helL
'* Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment tliat she valued Ed-
gar Linton's attachment more than mine ; if he loved with all
the powers of his puny beii^, he couldn't love as much in eighty
years as I could in a day. And Catherine has a heart as deep
as I have ; the sea could be as readily contained in that horse-
trough as her whole affection be monopolised by him. Tush !
He is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her horse.
It is not in him to be loved like me ;, how can she love in him
what he has not V*
" Catherine and Edgar are as fond of each other at any two
people can be ! " cried Isabella, with sudden vivacity. ** No one
has a ri^t to talk in that manner, and I won't hear my brother
depreciated in silence ! "
" Your brother is wondrous fond of you, too, isn't he 1 " ob-
served Heathcliff, scornfully.''He turns you adrift on the
world with surprising alacrity. "
" He is not awai-e of what I suffer, " she replied. " I didn't
tell him that. "
" You have been telling him something, then— you have writ-
ten, have youl "
*'To say that I was married, I did write-— you saw the note.*'
* " And notlung since f
" No. "
" My young lady is looking sadly the worse £ > r her change
of condition, " I remarked. *'Somebody's love comes short in
her case, obviously— *whose, I may guess $ but perhaps I
shouldn't say. "
" I shouki guess it was her own, " said Heathcliff. " She de-
generates into a mere slut ! She is tired of trying to please me,
uncommonly eai-ly. You'd haitlly credit it, but the very mor-
row of our wedding, she was weeping to go home. However,
she'll suit thi^ house so much the better for not being over nice,
and I'll take care ^e does not disgrace me by ramUing abroad. "
" Well, sir, returned I, " I hope you'll consider that Mra
Heathcliff is accustomed to be looked after, and waited on ; and
that she has been bix > ught up like an only daughter whom every
one was re^dy to serve. You must let her have a maid to keep
183 WVTBSEIN6 HI & IGBT9b
things tidy about her, and you most treat her kiadly. Whatever
be your notion of Mr. Edgar, you can not doubt that she has a
capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn't hare abandon-
ed ihe elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former home,
to fix contentedly in such a wilderness as this, with you. "
** She abandoned them under a delusion, " he answered, " pic-
turing in me a hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indul-
gences from my chivalrous devotion. 1 can hardly regard her
in the light of a rational creature, so obstinately has she permit
ed in forming a fabulous notion of my character, and acting on
the false impressions she cherished. But at last, I think she be-
gins to know me — I don't perceive the silly smiles and grimaces
that provoked me at first ; and the senseless incapability of dis-
cerning that I was in earnest when I gave her my opinion of
her infatuation, and herself* It was a remarkable effort of per-
spicacity to discover that I did not love her. I believed, at one
time, no lessons could teach her thatl and yet it is poorly
learned ; for this morning she announced, as a piece of appalling
intelligence, that I had actually succeeded in making her hate
me ! A positive labor of Hercules, I assure you ! If it be
achieved, 1 have cause to return thanks ; can I trust your asser-
tion, Isabella — are you sure you hate me 1 If I let you alone
for half a day, won't you come sighing and wheedling to me
again 1 I dare say she would rather I had seemed all tender-
ness before you ; it wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed.
But I don't care who knows that the passion was wholly on one
side, and I never told her a lie about it. She can not accuse
me of showing a bit of deceitful softness. The first thing she
saw m^ do, on coming out of the Grange, was to hang up her
little dog ; and when she pleaded for it, the first words I uttered
were a wish that I had the hanging of every being belonging to
her, except one : possibly, she took that exception for herself.
But no brutality disgusted her — ^I suppose she has an innate ad-
miration of it, if only her precious person were secure from in-
jury! Now, was it not the depth of absurdity — of genuine
idiocy — for that pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream
that I could love her ] Tell your master, Nelly, that I never,
in all my life, met with such an abject thing as she is ; she even
disgraces the name of Linton; and I've sometimes relented,
from pure lack of invention^ in my experiments on what she
could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back ! But
teU him also to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at (
WUTHBRIN6 HBI6HT8. 139
that I keep Btrictlj within the limits of the law — ^I have ayoided,
ujp to this period, giving her the slightest right to claim a sepa-
ration ; and what's more, she'd tha^ nohody for dividing us —
if she desired to go she might — the nuisance of her presence
outweighs the gratification to he deriyed from tormenting
her! "
«'Mr. Healhcliff, " said I, " this is the talk of a madman, and
your wife, most Hkely, is convinced you are mad ; and, for that
reason, she has home with you hitherto : hut now that you say
she may go, she'll douhtless avail herself of the permission.
You are not so hewitched ma'am, are you, as to remain with
him of your own accord 1 "
" Take care, EUen 1 " answered Isabella, her eyes sparkliog
irefully; there was no misdoubting^ by their expression, the
full success of her partner's endeavors to make himself de-
tested. " Don't put faith in a single word he speaks. He's a
lying fiend, a monster, and not a human being ! I've been told
I might leave him before ; and I've made Uie attempt, bnt I
dare not repeat it ! Only £llen, promise you'll not mention a
syllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or Catherine.
Whatever he may pretend, he wishes to provoke Edgar to des-
peration. He says he has married me on purpose to obtain
power over him ; and he shan't obtain it — I'll die first ! I just
hope, I pray, that he may forget his diaboUcal prudence, and
kill me ! The single pleasure I can imagine, is to die, or to see
him dead ! "
" There— that vnll do for the present 1 " said Heathclifil
" If you are called upon in a court of law, you'll remember
her language, Nelly 1 And take a good look at that counte-
nance—she's near Uie point which would suit me. No, you're
not fit to be your own guardian, Isabella now; and I, being
your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
distasteful the obligation may be. Go up-stairs ; I have some-
thing to say to Ellen Dean, in private. That's not the way —
up-stairs, I tell you ! Why this is the road up-stairs, child 1 "
He seized, and thrust her from the itx)m; and returned
muttering,
" I have no pity ! I have no pity I The worms writhe, the
more I yearn to crush out their entrails ! It is a moral teeth-
ing« and I grind with greater energy, in proportion to the in-
crease of pain. "
" Do you understand what the word pity means 1 " I said,
134 WUTHEftINO HBiaHTt*
hastening to resume my bonnet. " Did you eyer feel a touch
of it in your lite V*
" Put that down !''he interrupted, perceiving my intention
to depart.'* You are not going yet Come here now, Nelly ;
I must either persuade or compel you to aid me in fulfilling
my determination to see Catherine, and that without delay.
I swear that I meditate no harm ; I dotk*t desire to cause any
diBturbance, or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton ; I only wish
to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill ; and
to ask if any thing that I could do would be of use to her.
Last night I was in the Grange garden six hours, and I'll
return there to-night ; and every night I'll haunt the place, and
every day, till I find an opportunity of entering. If Edgar
Linton meets me, I shall not hesitate to knock him down, and
give him enough to ensure his quiescence while I stay. If his
servants oppose me, I shall threaten them off with these pistols.
But wouldn't it be better to prevent my coming in contact with
them, or their master ] And you could do it so easily I I'd
warn yoa when I came, and then you might let me in unob-
served, as soon as she was alone, and watch till I departed^-
your conscience quite calm, you would be hindering mischief. "
I protested against playing that treacherous part in my em*
ployei*'s house ; and besiJes, I urged the cruelty and selfii & ness
of his destroying Mrs. Linton's tranquillity, far his satisfaction.
" The commonest occurrence startles her painfiilly, " I said*
** She's all nerves, and she couldn't beai* the surprise, I'm
positive. Don't persist, sirl or else, I shall be obhged to in-
form my master of your designs, and he'l} take measures to
secure his house and its inmates firom any such unwarrantable
intrusions ! "
" In that case, I'll take measures to secure you, woman! "
exclaimed Heathcliff;''you shall not leave Wuthering Heights
till to-morrow morning. It is a foolish story to assert that
Catherine could not bear to see me ; and as to surprising her,
I don't desire it, you must prepare her-*-ask her if I may come.
You say she never mentions my name, and that I am never
mentioned to her. To whom should she mention me, if I am a
forbidden topic in the house ] She thinks you are all spies for
her husband. Oh, I've no doubt she's in hell among you ! I
guess, by her silence, as much as any thing, what she feels.
You say she is often restless, and anxious-looking — is that a
proof of tranquillity ? You talk of her mind being unsettled
WUTHEEINO HEIGHT B. 185
— how the devi] could it be otherwise, in her frightful isolation 1
And that insipid, paltry creature attending her from duty and
humamty / From ^ty and charity. He might as well plant
an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he
can restore her to vigor in the soil of his shallow caras ! Let
us settle it at once ; will you stay here, and am I to fight my
way to Catherine over Linton and his footmen ? Or will you
be my friend, as you have been hitherto, and do what I re-
quest ? Decide ! because there is no reason for my lingering
another minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature/'
Well, Mr. Lockwood, I argued, and complained, and flatly
reflised him fifl;y times ; but, in the long run, he forced me to
an agreement. I engaged to carry a letter from him to my
mistress ; and should she consent, I promised to let him have
intelligence of Linton's next absence from home, when he
miffht eome, and get in as he was able — I wouldn't be there,
and my fellow servants should be equally out of the way.
Was it right or wrong 1 I fear it was wrong, though ex-
pedient. I thought I prevented another explosion by my com-
pliance ; and I thought too, it might create a favorable crisis in
Catherine's mental illness : and then I remembered Mr. Edgar's
stem rebuke of my carrying tales ; and I tried to smooth away
all disquietude on the subject, by aflirmine with frequent itera-
tion, that this betrayal of trust, if it merited so harsh an appella-
tion, should be the last.
Notwithstanding, my journey homeward was sadder than mv
journey thither ; and many misgivings I had ere I could pravail
on myself to put the missive into Mrs. Linton's hand.
But here is Kenneth — 111 go down and tell him how much
better you are. My history is dree^ as we say, and will serve to
while away another morning. —
Dree, and dreary ! I reflected as the good woman descended
to receive the doctor; and not exactly of the kind which I
should have chosen to amuse me ; but never mind 1 I'll extract
wholesome medicines from Mrs. Dean's bitter herbs ; and first-
ly, let me beware of the fascination that lurks in Catherine
Heathclifl*'s brilliant eyes. I should be in a curious taking, if I
surrendered my heart to that young person, and the daughter
turned out a second edition of the mother f

CHAPTER XV.
Another week over — and I am so many days nearer health
and spring ! I have now heard all my neighbor's history at dif-
ferent sittings, as the housekeeper could spare time from more
important occupations. I'll continue it in her own words, only
a little condensed. She is, on the whole, a very fair narrator,
and I don't think I could improve h^r style. —
In the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the Heights,
I knew as well as if I saw him, that Mr. Heathcliff was about
the place ; and I shunned going out, because I still carried his
letter in my pocket, and didn't want to be threatened, or teased
any more.
I had made up my mind not to give it till my master went
somewhere ; as I could not guess how its receipt would affect
Catherine. The consequence was, that it did not reach her
before the lapse of three days. The fourth was Sunday, and I
brought it into her room,, after the family were gone to church.
There was a man servant left to keep the house with me, and
we generally made a practice of locking the doors during the
hours of service ; but on that occasion the weather was so warm
and pleasant that I set them wide open ; and to fulfill my en-
gagement, as I knew who would be coming, I told my com-
panion that the mistress wished very much for some oranges,
and he must run over to the village and get a few, to be paid
for on the morrow. He departed, and I went up-stairs.
Mrs. Linton sat in a loose, white dress, with a light shawl
over her shoulders, in the recess of the open vnndow, as usual.
Her thick, long hair had been partly removed at the beginning
of her illness ; and now she wore it simply combed over her
temples and neck. Her appearance was altered, as I had told
Heathcliff, but when she was calm, there seemed unearthly
beauty in the change.
The flash of her eyes had been succeeded by a dreamy and
melancholy softness : they no longer gave the impression of
looking at the objects around her; they appeared always to
gaze beyond, and far beyond — ^you would have said out of this
world — then the paleness of her face, its haggard aspect having
WUTHEftINO HEIGHT B. 197
-vanished as she recovered flesh, and the peculiar expression
arising from her mental state, though painfully suggestive c^
their causes, added to the touching interest, which she wakened,
and invariably to me, I know, and to any person who saw her,
I should think, refiited more tangible prooft of convalescence,
and stamped her as one doomed to decay.
A book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely
perceptible wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. I believe
Linton had laid it there, for she never endeavored to divert her*
self with reading, or occupation of any kind ; and be would
spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to some
subject which had formerly been her amusement.
She was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods en-
dured his efforts placidly; only showing their uselessness by
now and then suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking him at
last with the saddest of smiles and kisses. At other times she
would turn petulantly away, and hide her face in her hands, or
even push him off angrily; and then he took care to let her
alone, for he was certain o^ doing no good.
Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing ; and the full, mel-
low flow of the beck in the valley, came soothingly on the ear.
It was a sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the
summer foliage, which drowned that music about the Grange
when the trees were in leaf. At Wuthering Heights it always
sounded on quiet days, following a ^at thaw, or a season of
steady rain — and of Wuthering Heights Catherine was think-
ing, as she listened ; that is, if she thought or listened at all ;
but she had the vs^e, distant look I mentioned before, which
expressed no recognition of material things either by ear or eye.
" There's a letter for you, Mrs. Linton, " I said, gently insert-
ins it in one hand that rested on her knee. " You must read
it mimediately, because it wants an answer. Shall I break the
seal] "
" Yes, " she answered, without altering the durection of her
eyes.
I opened it-^it was very short.
" Now, " I continued, " read it. "
She drew away her hand, and let it fall. I replaced it in
her lap, and stood waiting till it should please her to glance
down ; but that movement was so long delayed that at last I
resumed —
" Must I read it, ma'am 1 It is from Mr. Heathcliff. "
140 WUTHEftlNG HBIOHTfi.
" I'm Bdt wishing you greater torment tban I have, Heatb-
cliflf ! I only wish us never to be parted-^and should a word of
ipine distress you hereafter, think I feel the same distress un-
derground, and for my own sake, fbrgive me! Come here
and kneel down again ! You never harmed me in your life.
Nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember than
my harsh words I Won't you come here again ? Do ! "
Heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leaned over,
but not so far as to let her see his face, which was livid with
emotion. She bent round to look at him ; he would not per-
mit it ; tumine abruptly, he walked to the fireplace, whei'e he
stood silent, with his back toward us.
Mi«. Linton's glance followed him suspiciously ; every move-
ment woke a new sentiment in her. After a pause, and a pro-
longed gaze, she resumed, addressing me in accents of indig-
nant disappointment.
" Oh, you see, Nelly ! he would not relent a moment, to keep
me out of the grave 1 That is how I'm loved ! Well, never
mind ! That is not my Heathcliff. I shall love mine yet ; and
take him with me — ^he's in my soul. And, " added she, musing-
ly, " the thing that irks me most is this shattered prison, after
all. I'm tired, tired of being inclosed here. I'm wearying to
escape into that glorious world, and to be always there ; not
seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the
walls of an aching heart j but really with it, and in it. Nelly,
you think you are better and more fortunate than I ; in full
health and strength — ^you are sorry for me — ^very soon that
will be altered. I shall be sorry for you. 1 shaU be incom-
parably beyond and above you all. I wonder he won't be near
me! " She went on to herself " I thought he wished it.
Heathclift*, dear ! you should not be sullen now. Do come to
me, HeathclifF. "
In her eagerness, she rose and supported herself on the arm
of the chair. At that earnest appeal, he turned to her, looking
absolutely desperate. His eyes wide, and wet at last, flashed
fiercely on her; his breath heaved convulsively. An instant
they held asunder; and then how they met I hardly saw, but
Catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they were
locked in an embrace from which I thought my mistress would
never be released alive. In fact, to my eyes, she seemed di-
rectly insensible. He flung himself into the nearest seat, and
on my approaching hurriedly to asceitain if she had fainted, he
WUTHERING HBIOHT8. 141
goashed at me, and foBuned like a mad dog, and gathered her
to him with greedy jealousy. I did not feel as if 1 were in the
company of a creature of my own species ; it appeared that he
would not understand, though I spoke to him ; so I stood off
and hekl my tongue, in great perplexity.
. A movement of Oatheiine's relieved me a little presently:
she put up her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to
his, as he held her ; while he, in return, covering her with fran-
tic caresses, said, wildly —
" You teach me now how. cruel you've been— cruel and
false. Why did you despise me 1 Why did you betray your
own heart, Cathy 1 I have not one word of comfort — you de-
serve this. You have killed yourself. Yes, you may kiss me,
and cry ; and wring out my kisses and tears. They'll blight
you — diey'U damn you. You loved me — then what right had
you to leave me 1 What right — answer me — for the poor fan-
cy you felt for Linton 1 Because misery, and degradation, and
cleath, and nothing that God or Satan could inflict would have
parted us, you, of your own will, did it. I have not broken
your heait — you have broken it — ^and in breaking it, you have
broken mine. So much the worse for me, that I am strong.
Do I want to live 1 What kind of living will it be when you
— Oh, God ! would you live with your soul in the grave V*
" Let me alone. Let me alone, " sobbed Catherine. " If I've
done wi'ong, I'm dying for it. It is enough ! You left me too ;
but I won't upbraid you ! I forgive you. Forgive me ! "
*'It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel
those wasted hands, " he answered. " Kiss me again; and
don't let me see your eyes I I forgive what you have done to
me. I love my murderer — ^but yours I How can 1 1 "
They were silent — their faces hid against each other, and
washed by each other's tears. At least, I suppose the weeping
was on both sides; as it seemed Heathcliff cvidd weep on a
great occasion like this.
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon
wore fast away, the man whom I had sent off returned from his
errand ; and I could distinguish, by the shine of the westering
sun up the valley, a concourse thickening outside Gimmerton
diapel porch.
" Service is over. My master will be here in half an hour.'*
Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Catherine closer-^
she never moved.
143 WUTHERXNG HEIGHT K
Ere long I perceived a group of & e servanU pasong up tho
road toward the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton was not far behind;
he opened the gate himself^ and sauntered slowly up, probably
enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.
" Now he is here/'I exclaimed.'VFor Heaven's sake,,
hurry down 1 You'll not meet any one on the front stairs.
Do be quick; and stay among the trees till he is fairly in. "
'* I must go, Cathy/'said Heathcliff, seeking to extricate
himself from his companion's arms. ** But, if I live, I'll see
you again before you are adeep. I won't stray five yards firom
your window. "
'* You must not go P'she answered, holding htm as* fbrmly aa
her strength allowed. " You shall noC, I teU yow. "
'* For one hour, " he pleaded, earnestly.
** Not for one minute, " she replied.
>''I m««^^Linton will be up immediately, " persisted the
alarmed intruder.
He would have risen, and unfixed her fingers, by the act —
she clung fast, gasping ; there was mad resolution in her face.
" No! " she shrieked. <'Oh, don't, don't go. It is the last
time 1 Edgar will not hurt us. Heathclif^ I shall die ! I shall
die I "
'* Damn the fooL There he is, " cried Heathdiff sinking
back into his seat.''Hush, my darling ! Hush, hush, Cathe-
rine ! I'll stay. If he shot me so^ I'd expire with a blessing
on my lips. "
And there they vrere fast again. I heard my master mount-
ing the stairfr— the cold sweat ran fix > m my forehead ,- I waa
horrified.
'* Are you going to listen to her ravings f I said passionately^
" She does not know what she says. Will you ruin her, be-
cause she has not wit to help herself 1 Get up ! you could-
be free instantly. That is the most diabolical deed that ever
you did. We are all done for — ^master, mistress, and servant "
I wrung my hands, and cried out ; and Mr. Linton hastened
bis atop at the noise. In the midst of my agitation, I was ain^-
cerely glad to observe that Catherine's arms had & ltoa relaxed,
and her head hung down.
" She's fainted or dead, " I thought, " so much the better*.
Far better that she should be dead, than lingering a buirden
and a misery-maker to all around her. "
Edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched witii astonidiK
WVTH & RINO. HEIOHT0. 14S
ment an4 rage. What lie meant to do, I can not teU; howerer^
the oliher stopped all demooBtrationfl at once^ by placing Ihm
IffeleeA looking form in his arms.
** Look tliere» " he bkA^ ** nnleea yon be a fiend, help her fixst»
then you shall speak to me i "
He walked into the parlor, and sat down. Mn Linton sum
moned me, and with great difficulty, and after resorting to many
means, we managed to restore her to sensation ; but she was aU
bewildered ; Ae sighed and moaned and knew nobody. Edgar,
in his anxiety lor nor fergot her hated friend* I clid not. I
went, at the earliest opporttmity, and besought him to depart^
affirming thatCatherine was better, aiid he should hear from me
in the morning, how Ae passed the night.
^'I shall not refiise to g^ out of doors, " he answered, " but
I shall stay in the garden ; and, Nelly, mind you keep your
word to-morrow. I shall be under those larch trees, mmd 1 or
I pay another visit, whether Linton be iu or not "
He sent a rapid glance througb the half-open door of the
chancer, and aacertaining that what I stated was apparently
true, defivered the houee of hia luckless prosence.
CHAPTER XVI.
Asotrr twelre o'clock that night, was bom the Catheiine you
saw at Wuthermg Heights, a puny, seven months'child ; and
two hours afteri die mother died, having never recovered suffi*
cient consciousness to miss HeatfacM^ or know Edgar.
The latter's distraction at his bereavement is a subject too
painfrd to be dwelt on ; its afber effects showed how deep the
sorrow sunk.
A great addition, in my eyes, was his being left without an
heir. I bemoaned that, as I gazed on the feeble orphan ; and
I mentally abused old Linton fon^wbat was only natural par-
tiafity-tte BecoriDg hk estate to Ub owu daogfatmr, u»te»] of
Ins son's.
An nnwelcomed infaut it was, poor thing 1 It mi|ht hsTitf
wailed out of hfb, and nobody oarm a^noiMl during uN»e:fiisl
144 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
houre of existence. We redeemed the neglect afterward;
but it's beginning was as friendless as its end is likely to be.
Next morning — bright and cheerful out of doors — stole
softened in through the blinds of the silent room, and suffused
the couch and its occupant with a mellow, tender glow.
Edgar Linton had fais head laid on the pillow, and his eyes
shut. His young and fair features were alnoost as deathlike as
those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed ; but his was
the hush of exhausted angubh, and hers of perfect peace. Her
brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of
a smile. No aneel in heaven could be more beautiful than she
appeared; and I paitook'of the infinite calm in which she lay.
My mind was never in a holier frame than while I gazed on
that untroubled image of divine rest. I instinctively echoed
the words she had uttered a few hours before. " Incomparably
beyond and above us all ! Whether still on earth or now in
Heaven, her spirit is at home with God! "
'I don't know if it bo n peculiarity in me, but I am seldom
otherwise than happy while watching in the chamber of death,
should no frensiea or llespainng mourner share the duty with
me. I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break ; and
I f^el an assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter —
the eternity they have entered — where life is boundless in its
duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in its fullness. I
noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is even in a
love Tike Mr. Linton's, when he so regretted Catherine's blessed
release.
To be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward and
impatient existence she had led, whether she merited a haven
of peace at last. One might doubt, in seasons of cold reflecti < m,
but not then, in the presence of her corpse. It asserted its own
tranquillity, which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former
inhabitant.
Do you believe such people are happy in the other world,
sir ? I'd give a great deal to know.
I declined answering Mrs. Dean's question, which struck me
as something heterodox. She proceeded : —
Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have no
right to think she is ; but we'll leave her with her MiJcer.
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sunrise
to quit the room, and steal out to the pure, refreshing air. The
•enrants tlK > ttght me gone to shake off the drowsiness of my
WUTHBHIN6 HEIGHTS. 145
protracted watch ; in reality my chief motive waJs seeing Mr.
Heathcliff. If he had remained amo^g the larches all night he
would hare heard nothing of the stir at the Grange, unless,
lerhaps, he might catch the gallop of the messenger going to
jrimmerton. If he had come nearer he would probahly be
iware, from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and
shutting of the outer doors, that all was not right within.
I wished, yet feared, to find him. I felt the terrible news
must be told, and I longed to get it over ; but how to do it I did
not know.
• He was there^at least a iew yards further in the park, lean-
ing against an old ash-tree, his hat off, and his hair soaked with
the dew that had gathered on the budded branches, and fell
pattering round him. He had been standing a long time in
that position, for I saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing,
scarcely three feet from him, busy in building their nest, and
regarding his proximity no more than that of a piece of tim-
ber. They flew off at my approach, and he raised his eyes and
spoke :
" She's dead ! " he said ; " Tve not Waited for you to learn
that. Put your handkerchief away— don't snivel before me.
Damn you all ! She wants none ot your tears ! "
I was weeping as mUch for him as her : we do sometimes
pity creatures that have none of the feeling either for them-
selves or others ; and when I first looked into his & ce I per-
ceived that he had got intelligence of the catastrophe ; and a
foolish notion struck me that his heart was quelled, and he
prayed, because his lips moved, and his gaze was bent on the
ground.
" Yes, she's dead ! " I answered, checking my sobs, and dry-
ing my cheeks. " Gone to heaven, 1 hope, where we may every
one join her if we take due warning, and leave our evil ways to
follow good. "
" Did she take due warning, then ?*'asked HeathclifF, attempt-
ing a sneer.'* Did she die like a saint ? Come, give me a true
history of the event. How did "
He endeavored to pronounce the name, but could not manage
it ; and, compressing his mouth, he held a silent combat with his
inward agony, defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an un-
flinching, ferocious stare.
" How did slie die 1 " he resumed, at last, fain, notwith-
standing his hardihood, to have a support behind him, for afler
G
146 WUTUEUINU HEIGHTS.
tlie Struggle, he trembled, in spite of himself, to his very iinger*
ends.
" Poor wretch ! " I thought, " you have a heart and nei^ves, the
same as your brother men ! Why should you be so anxious to
conceal them 1 Your pride can not blind God 1 You tempt
Him to wring them, till He forces a cry of humiliation V*
" Quietly as a lamb ! " I answered, aloud. " She drew a sigh,
and stretched herself, like a child reviving, and sinking again to
rsleep ; and five minutes after I felt one little pulse at her heart,
and nothing more. "
" And — and did she ever mention me V* he asked, hesitating,
as if he dreaded the answer to his question would introduce
details that he could not bear to hear.
" Her senses never returned — she recognized nobody from
the time you left her, " I said. " She lies with a sweet smile on
her face, and her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early
days. Her life closed in a gentle dreani — may she wake as
kindly in the other world ! "
" May she wake in torment ! " he cried, with frightful vehe-
mence, stamping his foot, and groaning, in a sudden paroxysm
of ungovernable passion. " Why, she's a liar to the endl
Where is she 1 Not there — ^not iu heaven — ^not perished—
where 1 Oh, you said you cared nothing for my sufferings!
And I pray one prayer — I repeat it tiU my tongue stiffens —
Catherine Earnshaw, may you not rest as long as I am living !
You said I killed you — ^haunt me then! The murdered do
haunt their murderers, I believe ; I know that ghosts have
wandered on earth. Be with me always — take any form — drive
me mad ! only do not leave me in this abyss .where I can not
find you ! Oh, God ! it is unutterable I I can not live without
my life ! I can not live without my soul 1 "
He dashed his head against the knotted trunk ; and, lifting up
his eyes, howled, not like a man, but like a savage beast getting
goaded to death with knives and spears.
^ I observed several splashes of blood about the bark of the
tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained ; probably
the scene I witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the
night. It hardly moved my compassion — ^it appalled me ; still I
felt reluctant to quit him so. But the moment he recollected
himself enough to notice me watching, he thundered a command
for me to go, and I obeyed. He was beyond my skill to quiet
or console !
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS. 147
Mfb. Linton's fiuieral was appointed to take place on the
Friday following her decease ; and till then her coffin remained
uncovered, and strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the
great drawing-room. Linton spent his days and nights theroi a
sleepless guardian ; and-^a circumstance concealed fix > m all
hut me — Heathcliff spent his nights, at least, outside, equally a
stranger to repose.
I held no communication with him ; still I was conscious of
his design to enter, if he could ; and on the Tuesday, a little
after dark, when my master, from sheer fatieue, had been com-
pelled to retire a couple of hours, I went and opened one of the
windows, moved by his perseverance to give him a chance of
bestowing on the fading image of his idol one final adieu.
He did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously
and briefly ; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slight-
est noise ; indeed, I shouldn't have discovered that he had been
there, except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the
corpse's face, and for observing on the floor a curl of light hair,
fastened with a silver thread, which, on examination, 1 ascer-
tained to have been taken from a locket hung round Catherine's
neck. Heathclifl* had opened the trinket, and cast out its con-
tents, replacing them by a black lock of his own. I twisted the
two, and enclosed them together.
Mr. Eamshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains
of his sister to the grave, and he sent no excuse, but he never
came ; so that besides her husband, the mourners were wholly
composed of tenants and servants. Isabella was not asked.
The place of Catherine's interment, to the surprise of the
villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carved monument
of the Lintons, nor yet by the tombs of her own relations, out-
side. It was dug on a green slope, in a comer of the kirkyard,
where the wall is so low that heath and bilberry plants have
climbed over it from the moor ; and peat mold almost buries it.
Her husband lies in the same spot, now ; and they have each a
simple headstone above, and a plain gray block at their feet, to
mark the graves.
CHAPTER XVU.
That Friday made the last of our fine days, for a month.
In the eTening the weather hroke ; the wind slufted from south
to northeast, and hrought rain first, and then sleet and snow.
On the morrow one could hardly imagine that there had been
three weeks of summer: the primroses and crocuses were hid-
den under wintry drifU : the larks were silent, the young leaves
of the early trees smitten and blaekened^'-^And dreary, and
diill, and dismal that morrow did creep over! My master kept
his room — I took possession of the lonely parior, converting it
into a nursery ; and there I was sitting, with the moaning doll
of a child laid on my knee, rocking it to and fro ; and watching,
meanwhile, the still driving flakes build up the uncurtained
window, when the door opened, and some person entered, out
id breath and laughing \
My anger was greater than my astonishment for a minute; I
supposed it one of the maids, and I cried,
" Have done ! How dare you show your giddiness here %
What would Mr. Lintoii say if he heard you 1 "
*'Excuse me ! " answered a familiar voice,'* but I know Ed-
gar is in bed, and I can not stop myself/*
With that, the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and
holding her hand to her side.
" I have run the whole way from Wutherrag Heights ! " she
continued, after a pause.''Except where I've flown. I
couldn't count the number of falls I've had. Oh, I'm aching
all over 1 Don't be alarmed — there shall be an explanation as
soon as I can give it— ^nly just have the goodness to step out,
and order the carriage to take me on to Gimmerton, and tell a
servant to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe. "
The intruder was Mrs. Heathcliff — she certainly seettied in
no laughing predicament : her hair streamed on her shoulders,
dripping with snow and water ; she was dressed in the girlish
dress she commonly wore, befitting her age more than her po-
sition ; a low frock, with short sleeves, and nothing on either
head or neck. The frock was of light silk, and clung to her with
wet; and her feet were protected merely by thin sHppers ; add
WUTHBSIira HBIOHT8. 140
to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the cold preTented
from bleeding profusely, a white face scratdied and bruised, and
a frame hardly able to support itself, through fatigue, and you
may & ncy my first fdght was not much allayed when I had
leisure to examine her.
''My dear young lady, " I exclaimed ; ** I'll stir nowhere, and
hear nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes,
and put on dry thuigs ; and certainly you shall not go to Gim-
merton to-night; so it is needless to oi^r the carriage. "
" Certainly I shall, " she said ; " walking or riding — yet I've
no objection to dress myself decently ; and — ah, see how it flows
down my neck now ! the fire does make it smaft. "
She insisted on my fiilfitiing her directions, before she would
let me touch her ; and not till after the coachman had been in-
structed to get ready, and a maid sent to pack up some neces-
sary attire, did I obtain her consent for binding the wound, and
helping to change her garments.
" Now Ellen, " she said wl^en my task was finished, and she
was seated in an easy chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea be-
fore her, " You sit down opposite me, and put poor Catherine's
baby away — ^I don't like to see it ! You mustn't think I care
little for Catheriner because I behaved so foolishly on entering
— ^I've cried, too, bitterly — ^yes, more than any one else has
reason to cry — we parted unreconciled, you remember, and I
shan't forgive myself. But for all that I was not going to sym-
pathize with him — ^tfae brute beast! O give me the poker ! this
is the last thing of his I have about me, " she slipped the gold
ring fi'om her third fineer, and threw it on the floor. " I'll
smash it ! " she continued, striking with childish spite. *'And
then I'll burn it I " and she took and dropped the misused arti-
cle among the coals.''There ! he shall buy another if he gets
me back again. He'd be capable of coming to seek me, to
tease Edgar. I dare not stay, lest that notion should possess
his wicked head ! And besides, Edgrar has not been kind, has
he ] And I won't come suing for his assistance ; nor will I
bring him into more trouble. Necessity compelled me to seek
shelter here ; though if I had not learned he was out of the way,
I'd have halted at the kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself,
got you to bring what I wanted, and departed again to any
where out of the reach of my accursed— of that incarnate gob-
lin I Ah, he was in such a fury — if he had caught me ! It's a
pity Eamshaw is not his match in sti^ngth — f wouldn't have
150 WUTHERINO HEIGHT fi.
run till I'd seen him all but demolished, had Hindley been able
to do it! "
** Well, don't talk so fast, Miss, " I interrupted, " you'll disor-
der the handkerchief I have tied round your fiice, and ipake the
cut bleed again. Drink your tea, and take breath, and give
over laughing. Laughter is sadly out of place under, this roof,
and in your condition ! "
*'An undeniable truth, " she replied,''Listen to that cuiic ! it
maintains a constant wail — send it out of my hearing, for an
hour ; I shan't stay any longer. "
I rang the bell, and committed it to a servant's care ; and
then I inquii*ed what had urged her to escape from Wuthering
Heights in such an unlikely plight — and where she meant to go,
as she refused remaining with us.
" I ought, and I wish to remain, " answered she ; " to che^:
Kdgar, and take care of the baby, for two things, and because
the Grange is my right home— -but I tell you, he wouldn't let
me I Do you think he could bear to see me grow fat, and
merry ; and could bear to think that we were tranquil, and not
resolve on poisoning our comfort ? Now I have the satis & ction
of beine sure that he detests me to to the point of its annoying
him seriously to have me within ear-shot or eye-sight. I notice
when I enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are
involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred ; partly aris-
ing from his knowledge of the good causes I have to feel that
sentiment for him, and partly from original aversion. It is strong
enough to make me feel pretty certain that he would not chase
me over England, supposing I contrived a clear escape; and
therefore I must get quite away. I've recovered from my first
desire to be killed by him : I'd rather he'd kill himself! He
has extinguished my love efiectually, and so I'm at my ease. I
can recollect yet how I loved him ; and can dimly imagine that
I could stiU be loving him, if — no, no ! Even, if he had doted
on me, the devilish nature would have revealed its existence
somehow. Catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem
him so dearly, knowing him so well. Monster ! would that he
could be blotted out of creation, and out of my memory ! "
** Hush, hush ! he's a human being, " I said. " Be more
charitable; there are worse men than he is, yet! "
" He's not a human being, " she retorted ; ^ and he has no
claim on my charity. I gave him my heart, and he took and
pinched it to death ; and flung it back to me — ^people feel with
WUTHEEING HEIGHTS. 1^1
tbeir hearts, Ellen — and since be bas destroyed mine, I bare
not power to feel for him ; and I would not, though be groaned
from this to bis < 3ying day ; and wept tears of blood for Cathe-
rine ! No, indeed, indeed, I wouldn't! " And here Isabella be-
gan to ci*y ; but, immediately dashing the water from ber lashes,
she recommenced.
" You asked what has driven me to flight at lastl I was
compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded in rousing his
rage a pitch above his malignity. Pulling out the nerves with
red hot pincers requires more coolness than knocking on the
bead. He was worked up to forget the fiendish prudence he
boasted of^ and proceeded to murderous violence. I experi-
enced pleasure in being able to exasperate him : the sense of
pleasui'e woke my instinct of self-preservation ; so I fairly broke
fi'ee, and if ever I come into his hands again he is welcome to
a signal revenge.
'•Yesterday, you know, Mr. Earnshaw should have been at
the funeral. He kept himself sober for the purpose — tolerably
sober; not going to bed mad at six o'clock, and getting up
drunk at twelve. Consequently he rose, in suicidal low spirits ;
as fit for the church as for a dance ; and instead, he sat down
by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls.
" Heatbcliff — I shudder to name him ! has been a stranger in
the house from last Sunday till to-day. Whether the angels
have fed him, or his kin beneath, I can not tell ; but he has not
eaten a meal with us for nearly a week. He had just come
home at dawn, and gone up-stairs to his chamber ; locking him-
self in — as if any body dreamed of coveting his company ! There
he continued, praying like a Methodist ; only the deity he im-
plored is senseless dust and ashes; and God, when addressed,
was curiously confounded with bis own black father ! After
concluding these precious orisons — and they lasted generally till
he grew hoarse, and his voice wm strangled in his throat — ^he
would be off again; always straight down to the Grange] I
wonder Edgar did not send for a constable, and give him into
custody ! For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it was im-
possible to avjoid regarding this season of deliverance from de-
grading oppression as a holiday.
" I recovered spirits sufficient to hear Joseph's eternal lectures
without weeping; and to move up and down the house less
with the foot of a fiightened thief than formerly. You wouldn't
think that I should cry at any thing Joseph could say, but ho
152 WUTHEEINO HEIGHTS.
and Hareton are detestable compaDions. I'd rather Bit Tvith
Hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with't'little mai^ter,'
and his staunch supporter, that odious old man !
* < When Heathclin is in, Tm often obliged to seek the kitchen
and their society, or starve among the damp, uninhabited charzi*
bers; when he is not, as was the case this week, I establish a
table and chair, at one comer of the house-fire, and never mind
how Mr. Eamshaw may occupy himself; and he does not inter-
fere with my arrangements : he is quieter now than he used to
be, if no one provokes him ; more sullen and depressed, and less
furious. Joseph affirms he's sure he's an altered man ; that the
Lord has touched his heart, and he is saved'so as by fire.'I'm
puzzled to detect signs of the favorable change, but it is not my
Dusiness.
" Yester-evening, I sat in my nook, reading some old books,
till late on toward twelve. It seemed so dismal to go up-stairs,
with the wild snow blowing outside, and my thoughts contin-
ually reverting to the kirkyard, and the new made grave ! I
dared hardly mb my eyes from the page before me, that melan-
choly scene so instantly usurped its place.
" Hindley sat opposite, his head leaned on his hand, perhaps
meditating on the same subject. He had ceased drinking at a
point below in*ationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken
during two or three hours. There was no sound through the
house, but the moaning wind which shook the windows every
now and then ; the faint crackling of the coals ; and the click
of my snuffers as I removed at intervals the long wick of the
candle. Hareton and Joseph were probably fast asleep in bed.
It was very, very sad, and while I read I sighed, for it seemed
as if all joy had vanished from the world, never to be restored.
The doleful silence was broken, at length, by the sound of
the kitchen latch. Heathcliff had returned from his watch
earlier than usual, owing, I suppose, to the sudden storm.
" That entrance was fastened ; and we heard him coming
round to get in by the other. I rose with an irrepressible ex-
pression of what I felt on my lips, which induced my companion,
who had been staring toward the door, to turn and look at me.
" I'll keep him out five minutes, " he exclaimed ; " you won't
object V*
** No, you may keep him out the whole night, for me, " I an-
swered. " Do ! put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts. "
Eamshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front ;
WUTHEKING HBIOHTfl. 153
t J then came and bronght his chair to the other side of my table ;
leaning over it, and searching in my eyes a sympathy with the
burning bate that gleamed from his : as he both looked and felt
like an assassin, be couldn't exactly find that ; but he discovered
enough to encourage him to speak.
'''You, and 1/ he said,'have each a great debt to settle with
the man out yonder ! If we were neither of us cowards we
might combine to discharge it. Are you as soft as your brother ?
Are you williBg to endure to the last, and not once attempt a
repayment ]*
** * I'm weary of enduring now ;'I replied,'and I'd be glad
of a retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself; but treachery
and violence are speurs pointed at both eods — they wound those
who resort to them worse than their enemies.'
'*'Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and
violence !'cri^ Hindley.'Mrs. Heathcliff, I'll ask you to do
nothing but sit still and he dumb. Tell roe now, can you t I'm
sure you would have as much pleasure as I in witnessing the
conclusion of the fiend's existence. He'll be your death unless
you overreach him — and he'll be my ruin. Damn the hellish
villain ! He knocks at the door as if he were master here al-
ready ! Promise to hold your tongue, and before that dock
strikes — ^it wants three minutes of one — ^you're a free woman !'
** He took the implements which I described to you in my
letter jBrom his breast, and would have turned down the candle
I snatched it away, however, and seized his arm.
** * I'U not hold my tongue !'I said. * You mustn't touch him.
Let the door remain shut, and be quiet !'
"'No ! I've formed my resolution, and by God I'll execute
it!'cried the desperate being;'I'll do you a kindness, in spite
of yourself, and Hareton jusUce ! And you needn't trouble your
head to screen me. Catherine is gone — ^nobody alive would re-
gret me, or be ashamed though I cut my throat this minute^
apd it's time to make an end !'
" I might as vroll have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with
a lunatic. The only resource left me was to run to a lattice,
and warn his intended victim of the fkte which awaited him.
"'You'd better seek shdter somewhere else to-night !'I ex»
claimed in a rather trramphant tone.'Mr. Earnshaw ^has a
mind to shoot you, if you persist in endeavoring to enter.
" * You'd better open the door, you -v'^^ answered, ad-
dressing me by some elegant term that I don't care to repeat.
J54 WUTHBRINO HEiaHTS.
** < I shall not meddle in the matter,'I retorted again.'Come
in and get shot, if you please. V\e done my duty.'
'* With that I shut the window, and returned to my place l^
the fire, having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my conmiand
to pretend any anxiety for the danger that menaced him.
''Eamshaw swore passionately at me, affirming that I loved
the villain yet, and calling me all sorts of names for the base
spirit I evinced. And I, in my secret heart (and conscience never
reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be for him
should Heathcliff put him out of misery, and what a blessing for
me should he send Heathcliff to his right abode ! As I sat
nursing these reflections, the casement behind me was banged
upon the floor by a blow from the latter individual, and his
black countenance looked blightingly through. The stanchions
stood too close to sufler his shoulders to follow, and I smiled,
■exulting in my fancied security. His hair and clothes were
whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed by
cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.
" * Isabella, let me in, or Vlt make you repent !* he * gimed,'
as Joseph calls it.
" * I can not commit murder V I replied, * Mr. Hindley stands
sentinel, ynth a knife and loaded pistol.'
" * Let me in by the kitchen door,'he said.
" * Hindley will be there before me,'I answered. * And that's
a poor love of yours, that can not bear a shower of snow ! We
were left at peace in our beds as long as the summer moon
shone, but the moment a blast of winter returns you must run
for shelter ! Heathcliff, if I were you I'd go stretch myself over
her grave, and die like a faithful dog. The wodd is surely not
woith living in now, is it ? You had distinctly impressed on me
the idea that Catherine was the whole joy of your life. I can't
imagine how ycfti think of surviving her loss.'
" * He's there, is he ]'exclaimed my companion, rushing to the
gap. * If I can get my arm out I can hit him.'
** I'm afi*aid, £ < Uen, you'll set me down as really vfdcked ; but
you don't .know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't have aided or
abetted an attempt on even his life, ibr any thing. Wish that
he were dead I must ; and therefore I was fearfully disappointed,
and unnei*ved by terror for the consequences of my taunting
speech, when he flung himself on Eamshaw's weapon and
wrenched it from his grasp. The charge exploded, and the
knife, in springing back, closed into its owner's wiist. Heath-
WUTHEHING HEIGHTS. 155
cliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the flesh as it pass-
ed on, and thrust it dripping into'his pocket. He then took a
stone, struck down the division between two windows, and
sprung in. His adversary had fallen senseless with excessive
pain, and the flow of blood that gushed from an artery or a laige
vein.
" The iniifian kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his
head repeatedly against the flags, holding me with one hand,
meantime, to prevent me summoning Joseph. He exerted pre-
terhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him completely;
but, getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged the
apparently inanimate body to the settle. There he tore off the
sleeve of Eamshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal
roughness, spitting and cursing during the operation as energeti-
cally as he had kicked before. Being at liberty, I lost no time
in seeking the old servant, who, having gathered by degrees the
purport of my hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as he descended
the steps, two at once.
" • Whet is thur tub do, nab ? whet is thur tub do, nab V
" * There's this to do,'thundered Heathcliff, * that your mas-
ter's mad, and, should he last another month, I'll have him to an
asylum. And how the devil did you come to fasten me out, you
toothless hound ? Don't stand muttering and mumbling there.
Come, I'm not going to nurse him. Wash that stuff away-— and
mind the sparks of your candle— it is mora than half brandy !'
" Und soa, yah been murthering on him V exclaimed Joseph,
lifting his hands and eyes in horror. * If iver aw seed a seeght
loike this ! May the Lord —'
" Heathcliff gave him a push upon his knees, in the middle
of the blood ; and flung a towel to him ; but instead of proceed-
ing to dry it up, he joined his hands, and began a prayer which
excited my laughter from its odd phraseology. 1 was in the
condition of mind to be shocked at nothing ; in fact, I was as
reckless as some malefactors show themselves at the foot of the
gallows.
"'Oh, I forgot you,'said the tyrant,'you sh^^do that
Down with you. And you conspire with him agcfflst me, do
you, viper 1 There, that is work fit for you!'
" He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside
Joseph, who steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose,
vowing he would set off for the Grrange directly. Mr. Linton
was a magistrate, and though he had fifty wives dead, he should

156 WUTHERlVtt HSIOHT0.
inquire into this. He was so obstinate in bis resolution that
Heatbclifi* deemed it expedient to compel from my lips a re-
capitulation of what bad taken place ; standing over me, heav-
ing with malevolence, as I rductantly delivered the account in
answer to bis questions. It required a great deal of labor to
satisfy the old man that be was not the aggressor ; especially
with my hardly-wrung replies. However, Mr. Earnshaw socxi ,
convinced him that he was alive still ; he hastened to administer
a dose of spirits, and by their succor his master presently regain-
ed motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aware that be was
ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called him
deliriously intoxicated ; and said he should not notice his atro-
cious conduct further ; but advised him to get to bed. To my
joy, be left us after giving this judicious counsel, and Hindley
stretched himself on the hearth- stone. I departed to my own
room, marveling that I had escaped so easily.
''This morning, when I came aown, about half an hour before
noon, Mr. Earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; bin
evil genius, almost as gaunt and ghastly, leaned against the chim-
ney. Neither appeared inclined to dine; and having waited
till all was cold on the table, I commenced alone. Nothing
hindered me from eating heartily ; and I experienced a certain
sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, I cast »
look toward my silent companions, and felt the comfbrt of a
quiet conscience within me.
" After I had done, I ventured on the unusual liberty of
drawing near the fire; going round Earnshaw's seat, ain}
kneeling in the corner beside him. Hoathcliff did not glance
my way, and I gazed up, and contemplated his features, almost
as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. His fore-
bead, that I once thought so manly, and that I now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud ; his basilisk eyes
were nearly quenched by sleeplessness — and weeping, perhaps^
for the lashes were wet then ; his lips devoid of their fei^ocious
sneer, and sealed in an expression of unspeakable sadness. Had
it been another, I would have covered my face, in the presence
of such ^Hbf In ^?^ case, I was gratified : and ignoble as U
seems to insult a fallen enemy, I couldn't miss this chance of
sticking in a dart ; his weakness was the only time when I could
taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.
" Fie, fie, Miss ! " I inten'upted. " One might suppose you
had never opened a Bible in your life. If God afflict your
WUTBSRIN« HBIQHT0. 157
enemies, surely that ought to suffice you. It is both mean and
presumptuous to add your torture to his !''
" In general, I'll allow that it would be, Ellen, " she ccmtinoed.
" But what misery laid on Heathcliff could content me, unless
I have a hand in it 1 I'd rather he suffered Uss, if I mighl
cause his sufiferings, and he might know that I was the cause.
Oh, I owe him so much. On only one condition can I hope to
forgive him. It is, if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, for every wrench of agony, return a wrench, redaca
him to my level. As he was the first to injure, make him tlie
first to implore pardon; and then — why then, Ellen, I might
show you some generosity. But it is utterly impossible I
can ever be revenged, and therefore I can not forgive him.
Hindley wanted some water, and I handed him a glass, and
asked him how he was. "
**'Not as ill as- 1 wish,'he replied.'But leaving out my
arm, every inch of me is as sore as if I had been fighting with a
legion of imps!'
**'Yes, no wonder,'was my next remark.'Catherine used to
boast that she stood between you and bodily harm — she meant
that ceitain persons would not hurt you, for fear of ofiending
her. It's well people don't really rise from the grave, or, last
night, she might have witnessed a repulsive scene 1 Are not
you bruised and cut over your chest and shoulders V
" * I can't say,'he answered ;'but what do you mean ?
Did he dare to strike me when I was down ]'
"'He trampled on, and kicked you, and dashed you on the
ground,'I whispered.'And his mouth watered to teat yoa
with his teeth; because, he's only half a man — ^not so much.'
** Mr. Earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of
our mutual foe; who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed in-
sensible to any thing around him; the longer he stood, the
plainer his reflections revealed their blackness through hia
features.
" * Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle him in
my last agony, I'd go to heU with joy,'groaned the impatient
man, writhing to rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of
his inadequacy for the struggle.
" * Nay, it's enough that he has murdered one of you,'I ob-
served aloud. * At the Grange, every one knows your sister
would have been living now had it not been for Mr. HeathcliC
After all, it is preferable to be hated than loved by hiip. Wheoi

158 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
I recollect how happy we were — ^how happy Catherine was be-
fore he came — I'm fit to curse the day.'
''Most likely, Heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was
said, than the spirit of the person who said it. His attention
was roused, I saw, for his eyes rained down tears among the
ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sighs. I stared full
at him, and laughed scornfully. The clouded windows of hell
flashed a moment toward me ; the fiend which usually looked
out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that I did not fear
to hazard another sound of derision.
'''Get up, and begone out of my sight,'said the mourner.
'* I guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his voice
was hardly intelligible.
"'1 beg your pai-don,'I replied. *But I loved Catherine
too ; and her brother requires attendance which, for her sake, I
shall supply. Now that she's dead, I see her in Hindley. Hind-
ley has exactly her eyes, if you had not tried to gouge them out,
and made them black and red; and her —'
"'Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death !'he
cried, making a movement that caused me to make one also.
"'But then,'I continued, holding myself ready to flee ;'if
poor Catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous,
contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff*, she would -soon
have presented a similar picture! S/^ wouldn't have borne
your abominable behavior quietly ; her detestation and disgust
must have found voice.
" The back of the settle, and Eamshaw's person interposed
between me and him; so, instead* of endeavoring to reach me,
he snatched a dinner knife fl*om the table, and flung it at my
head. It struck beneath my ear, and stopped the sentence 1
-WHS uttering; but pulling it out, I sprang to the door, and
delivered another which I hope went a little deeper than his
missile.
" The last glimpse I caught of him was a furious rush, on his
part, checked by the embrace of his host ; and both fell locked
together on the hearth. In my flight through the kitchen I bid
Joseph speed to his master; I knocked over Hareton, who was
hanging a litter of puppies fi-om a chair-back in the doorway;
and, blest as a soul escaped fi:oin purgatory, I bounded, leaped,
and flew down the steep road : then, quitting its windings, shot
direct across the moor, rolling over banks, and wading through
marshes; precipitating myself, in fact, toward the beacon light
.WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 150
of the Grange. Aod f^ rather would I be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions, than even for one
niffht abide beneath the roof of Wnthering Heights again. "
Isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea ; then she
rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl I
had brought, and turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to
remain another hour, she stepped upon a chair, kissed Edgar's
and Catherine's portraits, bestowed a similar salute on me, and
descended to the carriage, accompanied by Fanny, who yelped
Tvild with joy at recovering her mistress. She was driven away,
never to revisit this neighborhood; but a regular correspondence
vras established between her and my master, when things were
more settled.
I believe her new abode was in the south, near London; there
she had a son bom, a few months subsequent to her escape. He
was christened Linton, and, from the first, she reported him to
be an ailing, peevish creature. Mr. Heathcliff, meeting me one
day in the village, inquired where she lived. I refused to tell.
He remarked that it was not of any moment, only she must be-
ware of coming to her brother ; she should not be with him, if
he bad to keep her himself.
Though I would give no information, he discovered, through
some of the other servants, both her place of residence, and the
existence of the child. Still he didn't molest her; for which
forbearance she might thank his aversion, I suppose. He often
asked about the infant when he saw me; and on hearing its
name, smiled grimly, and observed :
" They wish me to hate it too, do they V*
" I don't think they wish you to know any thing about it, " I
answered.
" But I'll have it, " he said, " when I want it. They may
reckon on that ! "
Fortunately, its mother died before the time arrived, some
thirteen years after the decease of Catherine, when Linton was
twelve, or a little more.
On the day succeeding Isabella's unexpected visit, I had no
opportunity of speaking to my master : he shunned conversation,
and was fit for discussing nothing. When I could get him to
listen, I saw it pleased him that hie sister had left her husband^
whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildness of his
nature would scarcely seem to allow. So deep and sensitive
was his aversion, that he refrained fi-om going any where wliere
](M) WUTHBKIN# HSIGHTt.
he was likely to see or hear of Heathcliff. Grief and that tc^
gether traxiflfonned him into a complete hermit : he threw up
his office < ^ magistra & ej ceased even to attend church, avoided
the village on all occa^ons, and spent a life of entire seclusion
-within the limits of his park and grounds : only varied by soli-
tary rambles oa the moors, and visits to the gprave of his Mrife,
mostly at evening, or early morning, before other vranderers
Mrere abroad.
But he was too good to be thoroughly unhappy long. JE &
didn't piay for Catherine's soul to haunt him. Time brought
resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than common joy. He
recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and hopeful
aspiring to the hotter world, where, he doubted not she was gone*
And he had earthly consolation and affections also. For a
few days, I said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to
the departed : that coldness melted as fast as snow in April,
and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step, it
wielded a despot's scepter in his heart. It was named Cath*
erine, but he never called it the name in full, as he had never
called the first Catherine short, probably because Heathcliff
had a habit of doing so. The little one was always Cathy, it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet, a con-
nection with her j and his attachment sprang from its relation to
her, far more than from its being his own.
I used to draw a comparison between him and Hindley
Earnshaw, and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why
their conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances. They
had both been fond husbands, and were both attached to their
children ; and I could not see how they shouldn't both have
taken the same road, for good or evil. But, I thought in my
mind, Hindley with apparently the stronger head, has shown
himself sadly the woree and the weaker man. When his ship
struck, the captain abandoned his post ; and the crew, instead
of trying to save her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving no
hope for their luckless vessel. Lintou, on the contrary, dis*
played the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul : he trusted
God— and God comforted him. One hoped, and thp other
despaired : they chose their own lots, and were righteously
Roomed to endure them. —
But you'll not want to hear my moralizing, Mr. Lockwood :
you'll judge as well as I can, all these things j at least, you'll
think you will, and that's the same. —
WUTHSRIN9 HBlGHTff. 161
Tl)je end of Eamshaw was what might have been expected :
It followed fast on his sister's; there was scarcely six months
between them. We, at the Ghrange, never got a very succinct
account of his state preceding it ; all that I did leani, was on
occasion of going to aid in the preparations for the fnneraL Mr.
Kenneth came to announce the event to my master.
" Well, Nelly, " said he, riding into the yazd one morning, too
early not to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news.
** It's your and my turn to go into mourning at pi^seot. Who's
given us the slip now, do you think ] "
" Who 1 " I asked in a flurry.
" Why, guess! " be returned, dismounting, and slinging his
bridle on a hook by the door. ** And nip up the corner of your
apron ; I'm certain you'll need it. "
" Not Mr. HeathclifT, surely ] I exclaimed. "
" What ! would you have tears for him ? " said the doctor.
No, HeathdifT's a tough young fellow ; he looks blooming to-
day — I've just seen him. He's rapidly regaining flesh since he
lost his better half.
" Who is it then, Mr. Kenneth 1 " I repeated impatiently.
'* Hindley Eamshaw ! Your old friend Hindley, " he replied.
" And my wicked gossip ; though he's been too wild for me this
long while. There 1 I said we should draw virater. But cheer
up! He died true to his character, drunk as a lord. Poor
laid. I'm sorry too. One can't help missing an old companion ;
though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man imagined;
and has done me many a rascally turn. He's barely twenty-
seven, it seems ; that's your own age ; who would have thought
you were born in one year ! "
I confess this blow was greater to me than die shock of Mrs.
Linton's death : ancient associations lingered round my heart ;
I sat down in the porch, and wept as for a blood relation,
desiring Kenneth to get another servant to introduce him to the
master. I could not hinder myself from pondering on the
question — " Had he had fair play] " Whatever I did, that
idea would bother me : it was so tiresomely pertinacious that I
resolved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights, and
assist in the last duties to the dead. Mr. Linton was extremely
reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless ^
condition in which he lay ; and I said my old master and foster
brother had a claim on my services as strong as his own. Be-
sides, I reminded him that the child, Hareton, was his wife's
It2 WUTHSRllfO HEIGHTS.
nephew ; and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to act as
its gaardian ; and he ought to and must inquire how the prop-
erty was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.
He was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid
me speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.
His lawyer had been Eamshaw's also : I called at the village,
and asked him to accompany me. He shook his head, and
advised that Heathcliff should be let alone ; affirming, if the
truth were known, Hareton would be found little else than a
lis father died in debt ; " he said, " the whole property is
mortgaged, and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow
him an opportunity of creating some interest in the creditor's
heart, that he may be inclined to deal leniently towai^d him. "
When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had come to
see every thing carried on decently, and Joseph, who appeared
in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence.
Mr. Heathcliff said he did not perceive that I was wanted, but
I might stay and order the an*angements for the funeral, if I
chose.
** •* Correctly, " he remarked, " that fool's body should be buried
at the cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I happened
to leave him ten minutes, yesterday afternoon, and, in that in-
terval, he fastened the two doors of the house against me, and
he has spent the night in drinking himself to death deliberately !
We broKe in this morning, for we heard him snorting like a
horse; and there he was, laid over the settle — ^flaying and
scalping would not have wakened him. I sent for Kenneth,
and he came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion —
he was both dead, and cold, and stark ; and so you'll allow, it
was useless making more stir about him ! "
The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered,
" Awd rather he'd goan hisseln fiir t'doctor ! Aw sud uh
taen tent uh t'maister better nur him — ^un he wam't deead when
aw left, nowt uh t'soart ! "
I insisted on the funeral being respectable. Mr. HeathcW
said I might have my own way there, too ; only, he desired me
to remember, that the money for the whole affair came out of
his pocket.
He maintained a hard, careless deportment, indicative of
neither joy nor sorrow ; if any thing, it expressed a flinty grat-
ification at a piece of difficult work, succ^sfuUy executed. I
WUTUfiRING HEIGHTS. 163
observed once, indeed, something like exultation in his aspect.
It was just when the people were bearing the coffin from the
liouse ; he had the hypocnsy to represent a mourner ; and pre-
Tious to following with Hareton he lifted the unfortunate cnild
upon the table, and muttered with peculiar gusto,
'* Now my bonny lad you are mine ! And we'll see if one
tree won't grow as crooked as another, with the same wind to
twist it! "
The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this speech ; he played
with Heathcliff's whiskers, and stroked his cheek, but I divined
its meaning, and observed tartly,
'* That boy must go back with me to Thrushcross Grange, sir.
There is nothing in the world less yours than he is ! "
" Does Linton say so i " he demanded.
" Of course — ^he has ordered me to take him, " I replied.
" Well, " said the fcoundrel, " we'll not argue the subject now ;
but I have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one ; so
intimate to your master, that I must supply the place of this
with my own, if Ha attempt to remove it; I don't engage to let
Hareton go, undisputed ; but I'll be pretty sure to make the
other come ! remember to tell him. "
This hint was enough to bind our hands. I repeated its sub-
stance, on my return, and Edgar Linton, little interested at the
commencement, spoke no more of interfering. I'm not aware
that he could have done it to any purpose had he been ever so
willing.
The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights: he
held firm possession, and proved to the attorney, who, in his
turn, proved it to Mr. Linton, that Earnshaw had mortgaged
every yard of land he owned for cash to supply his mania for
gaming : and he, Heathcliff, was the mortgagee.
In that manner, Hareton, who should now be the first gentle-
man in the neighborhood, was reduced to a state of complete
dependence on his father's inveterate enemy ; and lives in his
own house as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages, and
quite unable to right himself, because of his friendlessness, and
his ignorance that he has been wronged.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The twelve years, — continued Mre. Dean,-^following that
dismal period, were the happiest of my IJfe : my greatest
troubles, in their passage, rose from our little lady's trifling ill-
nesses, which she had to experience in common with all chil-
di*en, rich and poor.
For the rest, after the first six months, she grew like a larch.;
and could walk and talk too, in her own way, before the heath
blossomed a second time over Mrs. Linton's dust. She was
the most winning thing that ever brought sunsliine mto a deso-
late house— a real beauty in face — with the Eamshaws'hand-
some dark eyes, but the Lint^ns'fair skin, and small features,
and yellow curling hair. Her spirit was high, though not rough,
and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its af-
fections. That capacity for intense attachments reminded me
of her mother ; still she did not resemble her ; for she could be
soft and mild as a dove, and she had a gentle voice, and pensive
expression : her anger was never furious ; her love never fierce ;
it was deep and tender.
However, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil li^r
gifts. A propensity to be saucy was one ; and a perverse w^l
that indulged children invariably acquire, whether they be good
tempered or cross. If a servant chanced to vex her, it was al-
ways, ** I shall tell papa I " And if he reproved her, even by a
look, you would have thought it a heart-breaking business ; I
don't believe he ever did speak a hai-sh word to her.
He took her education entirely on himself, and made it an
amusement; fortunately, curiosity and a quick intellect urged
her into an apt scholar ; she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did
honor to his teaching. Till she reached the age of thirteen, she
had not once been beyond the range of the park by herselC
Mr. Linton would take her with him, a mile or so outside, on
rare occasions ; but he trusted her to no one else. Gimmerton
was an unsubstantial name in her ears ; the chapel the only
building she had approached or entered, except her own home;
Wuthering Heights and Mr. Heathcliff did not exist for her j
she was a perfect recluse, and, apparently, perfectly contented.
WU'PBBElNd HBIOBT0. 163
-• - - ■ — -^- .. - - -^ — . -- ■ ■■ - - ■
Sometimes, indeed, while surveying the country from her nun-
eiy window, she would observe —
** !Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to the top of
those hiUs 1 I wonder what lies on the other 8ide-*iB it the
sea V
" No, Miss Cathy, " I would answer,'* it is hills ^sin, just
like these, "
" And what are those golden rocks like, when you stand
mider them ]''i^e once asked.
The abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly attracted
her notice, especially when the setting sun shone on it, and the
tc^most heights \ and the whole extent of landscape besides
lay in sbadow. I explained that they were bare masses of
stone, with hai^y enough earth in their clefts to noimsh a stunt-
ed tree. •
< * And why are they bright so long after it is evening here t "
she pursued.
" Because they atie a great deal higher up than vre are,''re-
plied I ; " you could not cliitilr tfa fem t hey are too high and
steep. In winter the frost is always there before it comes to us ;
and, deep into summer, 1 have found snow under that black hol-
low on the northeast side. "
*'Oh, you have been on them ! " fdie cried, gleefully. ** Then
I can go, too, when I am a woman. Has papa been, Ellen ? "
" Papa would tell you, miss, " I answered, hastily, " that they
are not worth the trouble of visiting. The moors, where you
ramble with him, are much nicer ; and Thi^^icross park is the
finest place in the world. "
" But I know the park, and I don't know those, " she mur-
mured to herselC " And I should delight to look round me,
from the brow of that tallest point. My little pony, Minny, shall
take me some time. "
One of the maids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned
her bead with a desire to fulfill this project ; she teased Mr.
Linton about it, and he promised she should have the journey
when she got older ; but Miss Catherine measured her age by
months, and —
" Now, am I old enough to go to Penistone Crags 1 " was the
constant question in her mouth.
The road thither wound close by Wuthering Heights. Ed-
gar had not the heart to pass it ; so she received as constantly
the anawer—
J
166 WUTBERINO HEIGHTS.
" Not yet, love, not yet "
I said Mrs. Heathcliff lived about a dozen yean after quitting
her husband. Her family were of a delicate constitution ; she
and Edgar both lacked the ruddy health that you will generally
meet in these paits. What her last illness was, I am not cer-
tain ; I conjecture they died of the same thing, a kind of fever,
slow at its commencement, but incurable, and rapidly consuming
life toward the close.
She wrote to inform her brother of the probable conclusion
of a four months'indisposition under which she had suffered ;
and entreated him to come to her, if possible, for she had much
to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, and deliver Linton
safely into her hands. Her hope was, that Linton might be left
with him, as he had been with her ; his father, she would fain
convince herself, had no desife to assume the burden of his
maintenance or education.
My master hesitated not a moment in complying with her re-
quest ; reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls, he
flew to answer this ; commending Catherine to my peculiar vigr
ilance in his absence, with reiterated orders that sfie must not
wander out of the park, even under my escort ; he did not cal-
culate on her going unaccompanied.
He was away three weeks. The first day or two My charge
sat in a comer of the library, too sad for either reading or play-
ing ; in that quiet state she caused me little trouble ; but it was
succeeded by an interval of impatient, fretful weariness : and,
being too busy and too old then to run up and down amusing
her, I hit on a method by which she might entertain herself.
I used to send her on her travels round the grounds — now on
foot, and now on a pony ; indulging her with a patient audience
of all her real and imaginary adventures, when she re-
turned.
The sumn^er shone in full prime ; and she took si^k a taste
for this solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out
from breakfast till tea ; and then the evenings were spent in
recounting her fanciful tales. I did not fear her breaking
bounds, because the gates were generally locked, and I thought
she would scarcely venture foith alone, if they bad stood wide
open. Unluckily, my confidence proved mbplaced. Catherine
came to me, one morning at eight o'clock, and said she was
that day an Arabian merchant, going to cross the desert with
his caravan ; and I must give her plenty of provisions for her-
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS* 167
lelf and beasts, a horse, and three camels, personated by a
large bound and a couple of pointers.
I got together good store (^dainties, and slung them in a
basket on one side of the saddle ; and she sprang up as gay as
a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from
the July sun, and trotted off with a merry laugh, mocking my
cautious counsel to avoid galloping, and come back early.
The naughty thing never made ner appearance at tea. One
traveler, the hound, being an old dog, and fond of its ease,
returned ; but neither Cadiy, nor the pony, nor the two pointers
were visible in any direction ; and I dispatched emissaries
down this path, and that path, and, at last, went wandering in
search of her myself.
There was a laborer working at a fence round a plantation,
on the borders of the grounds. I inquired of him if he had
seen our young lady ]
''I saw her at morn, " be replied,''she would have me to cut
her a fiazel switch ; and then she leaped her galloway over
the hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and galloped out ot
sight. "
You may guess how I felt at hearing this news. It struck
me directly she must have started for Penistone Crags.
" What will become of her 1 " I ejaculated, pushing through
a gap which the man was repairing, and making straight to the
high road. I walked as if for a wager, mile after mile, till a
turn brought me in view of the Heights, but no Catherine could
I detect, far or near.
The Crags lie about a mile and a half beyond Mr. Heath-
cliff's place, and that is four from the Grange, so I began to
fear night would fall ere I could reach them.
" And what if she should have slipped in clambering among
them, " I rejected, " and been killed, or broken some of her
bones 1 "
My suspense was truly painful ; and, at first, it gave me
delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the farm-house,
Charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window,
with swelled head and bleeding ear. I opened the wicket,
and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. A
woman whom I kne^^, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton,
answered — she had been servant there since the death of Mr.
Eamshaw. •
" Ah, " said she, " you are come a seeking your little mis-
168 WOTHBEINO BEI«HT».
trefl6 ! don't be frigbtdned. She's here aaf^— but I'm gl^d it
isn't the master. "
" He is not at home then, is he 1 " I panted, quite breathless
with quick walking and alarm.
** No, no, " she replied, ** both he and Joseph are off, and
I think they won't return this hour or more. Step in and rest
you a bit. "
I entered, and beheld my stray kmb, seated on the hearth,
rocking herself in a little chair that had been her mothei^'s,
when a child. Her hat was hung agauist the wall, and she
seemed perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the best
spirits imaginable, to Hareton, now a great, strong lad of
eighteen, who stared at her with considerable curiosity and
astonishment ; comprehending precious little of the fluent suc-
cession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased
pouring forth.
•* Very well. Miss, " I exclaimed, concealing my joy under an
angry countenance.''This is your last ride till papa comes
back. ** I'll not trust you 0¥er the threshold again, you naughty,
naughty girl. "
•* Aha, Ellen ! " she cried, gayly, jumping up and running to
my side. " I shall hare a pretty story to tell to-night — and so-
you've found me out. Have you ever been here in your life
before 1 "
" Put that hat on, and home at once, " said I. " I'm dread-
ftilly grieved at you, Miss Cathy — you've done extremely wrong !
It's no use pouting and crying; that won't repay the trouble
Fve had, scouring the country after you. To think how Mr.
Linton charged me to keep you in, and you stealing off so ; it
shows you are a cunning little fox, and nobody will put faith in
you any more. "
** What have I done 1 " sobbed she, instantly checked. " Papa
charged me nothing — She'll not scold me, Ellen — ^he's never cross,
like you ! "
" Come, come ! " I repeated. " I'll tie the ribbon. Now let
us have no petulance. Oh, for shame. You thirteen years
old, and such a baby ! "
This exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from
her head, and retreating to the chimney, out of my reach.
" Nay, " said the servant, ** don't be bard on the bonny lass,
Mrs. Dean. We made her stop ; she'd fain have ridden for-
ward, afeard you should be uneasy. But Hareton c^ered to
wtJTii a 4*1 i»o B^tmuTL 109
i|fo'with her, and I thought he should. It's a wild road over the
hills. "
Haretoti, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his
pockets, too awkward to speak, though he looked as if he did
not relish my intrusion.
" How long am I to waiti " I continued, disregarding the
woman's interference. ** It will be dark in ten minutes. Where
is the pony, Miss Cathy 1 And where is Phoenix 1 1 shall
leave you, unless you be quick— so please yourself "
••* The pony is in the yard, " she replied, " and Phoenix is shut
in there. He's bitten, and so is Charlie. I was going to tell
you all about it, but you are in a bad temper, and don't deserve
to hear. "
I picked up her hat, and approa < ihed to reinstate it ; bat per-
eeiviDg that the people of the house took her part, she com-
menced capering round the room ; and, on my giving chase, ran
Hke k mouse, over and under and behind the furniture, render-
ing it ridiculous for me to pursue. Hareton and the woman
laughed, and she joined them, and waxed more impertinent still,
till I cried, in great irritation.
" Well, Miss Cathy, if you were aware whose house this is,
you'd be glad enough to get out. "
" It's yimr father's isn't it ? " said she, turning to Hareton.
" Nay, " he replied, looking down, aod blushing bashfully.
He could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes, though they
were just his own.
" Whose then — ^your master^s ? " she asked.
He colored deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an oath,
and turned away.
" Who is his master 1 " continued the tiresome girl, appealing
to me. " He talked about * our house,'and * our folk'— I thought
he had been the owner's son. And he never said Miss; he
should have done, shouldn't he, if he's a servant 1 "
Hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud, at this childish speech.
I silently shook ray questioner, and at last succeeded in equip-
ping her for departure.
" Now get my horae, " Ae said, addressing her unknown kins-'
man as she would one of the stable-boys at the Grange. *'And
you may come with me. I want to see where the goblin hun-
ter rises in the marsh, and to hear about the JairisheSy as you^
cjull them— but make baste J What'e the matter? Qet.my;
h9i«e, I say. "
H
170 WUTHSEING HBIOHT0.
" Ill see thee damned, before I be < ^ aervant !''growled die
lad.
" Youll Bee me tokat P* aaked Catberine in sarpriae.
''Damned, thou Baucy witch ! " he replied.
" There, Miss Cathy ! you see you have got into pretty com-
pany, " I interposed. " Nice words to be used to a young lady !
Fray don't begin to dispute with him. Come, let us seek £ar
Minoy ourselves, and be gone. "
" But, Ellen, " cried she, staring, fixed in astonishment. <'How
dare he speak so to me 1 Mustn't he be made to do as I ask
him 1 You wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you said.
Now then ! "
Hareton did not appear to feel this threat ; so the teaiB sprung
into her eyes with indignation. " You bring the pony, " she ex-
claimed, turning to the woman, " and let my dog firee this mo-
ment ! "
" Softly, Miss, " answered the addressed. ^ You'll lose noth-
ing by being civil. Though Mr. Hareton, there, be not the mas-
ter's son, he's your cousin ; and I was never hired to serve you. "
** He my cousin ! " cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh.
" Yes, indeed, " i*esponded her reprover.
''Oh, Ellen ! don't let them say such things, " she puiBued in
great trouble. Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from London —
my cousin b a gentleman's son. That my — " she stopped and
wept outright, upset at the bare notion of relationship with such
a clown.
" Hush, hush ! " I whispered, " people can have many cousins,
and of all sorts. Miss Cathy, without being any the worse for it ;
only they needn't keep their company, if they be disagreeable
and bad. "
''He's not, he's not my cousin, Ellen ! " she went on, gather-
ing fresh grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms
for refuge fi'om the idea. I was much vexed at her and the
servant for their mutual revelations ; having no doubt of Lin-
ton's approaching arrival, communicated by the former, being
reported to Mr. Heathcliff; and feeling as confident that Cath-
erine's first thought, on her Other's return, would be to seek
an explanation of the latter's assertion concerning her rude-
bred kindred.
Hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for a
servant, seemed moved by her distress ; and, having fetched the
pcRly round to the door, be took, to propitiate her. & to»
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS* 171
erooked-legged terrier wbelp from the kennel ; and, patting it
into her hand, bid her wisht, for he meant naught. PauBing in
ker lamentations, she surveyed him with a glance of awe and
borror, then burst forth anew.
I Gould scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the
poor fellow, who was a well made, athletic youth, good-looking
in features, and stout and healthy, but attired in garments be-
fitting his daily occupations gf working on a £irm, and loungine
among the moors aner rabbits and game. Still, I thought I
could detect in his physiognomy a mind owning better qualities
than his father ever possessed. Good things lost amid a wilder-
-ness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far overtopped their
neglected growth ; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy
soil that might yield luxuriant crops, under other and favorable
circumstances. Mr. Heathcliff, I believe, had not treated him
physically ill, thanks to his fearless nature which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression; it had none of the
timid susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment
in Heathcliff's judgment. He appeared to have bent his male*
volence on making him a brute ; he was never taught to read or
write ; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
keeper ; never led a single step toward virtue, or guarded by a
single piecept against vice. And from what I heard, Joseph
contributed much to his deterioration by a narrow-minded par-
tiality, which prompted him to flatter and pet him as a boy,
because he was the head of the old family. And as he had
been in the habit of accusing Catherine Eamshaw and Heath-
cli£^ when children, of putting the master past his patience,
and compelling him to seek solace in drink, by what he termed,
their *'offalld ways, " so at piesent, he laid the whole burden
of Hareton's faults on the shoulders of the usurper of his prop-
erty.
If the lad swore, he would'nt correct him, nor however cul-
pably he behaved. It gave Joseph satisfaction, apparently, to
watch him go the worst lengths. He allowed that he was
ruined, that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then he
reflected that Heathcliff must answer for it. Hareton's blood
would be required at his hands ; and there lay immense con-
solation in that thought, Joseph had instilled into him a pride
of name, and of his lineage ; he would, had he dared, have
fostered hate between him and the present owner of the
'Hdghts, but his dread of that owner amounted to supers^oa;
173 WUTHEItING HeiGHTS.
and he confined his feelings, regardmg bim to muttered inuen-
does and private comminations.
I don't pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode of
living customary in those days at Wuthering Heights. I only
speak from hearsay ; for I saw little. The villagers affirmed
Mr. Heathcliff was near, and a cruel, hard landlord to his
tenants; but the house inside had regained its ancient aspect
of comfort under female management ; and the scenes of riot
common in Hindley's time, were not now enacted within its
walls. The master was too gloomy to seek companionship with
any people, good or bad; and be is yet.
This, nowever, is not making progress with my story. — ^Misa
Cathy rejected the peace-ofiering of the terrier, and demanded
her own doj|;s, Charlie and Phoenix. They came, limping and
hanging their heads ; and we set out out for home* sadly out of
sorts, every one of us.
I could not wring from my little lady how she had spent the
day ; except that, as I supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage
was Penistone Crags ; and she arrived without adventure to
the gate of the farmhouse, when Hareton happened to issue
forth, attended by some canine followers who attacked her
train. They had a smart battle before their owners could
separate them; that formed an introduction.'Catherine told
Hareton who she was, and where she was going; and asked
him to show her the way ; finally beguiling lum to accompany
her.
He opened the mysteries of the fairy cave, and twenty other
queer places; but being in disgrace, I was not favored with a
description o£ the interesting objects she saw. I could gather,
however, that her guide had been a favorite, till she hmt his
feelings by addressing him as a servant, and Heathcl^'s houses
keeper hurt hers, by calling hira her cousin. Then the lan-
guage he had held to her rankled in her heart ; she who was
always " love, " and " darling, " and " queen, " and " angel, "
with every body at the Grrange, to be insulted so shockingly by
a stranger ! She did not comprehend it, and hard work I had
to obtain a promise that she would not lay the grievance before
her father,
I explained how he objected to the whole household at the
Heights, and how sorry be would be to find she had been
there ; but I insisted most on the fact, that if she revealed my
nwlVI^Qfitt of bifl .OKden^ hci would, perhaps, be so angiy that.I
WUTHBRING H£I«UTS. 178
Bbould have to leave ; and Cathy couldn't bear that proBpect ;
slie pledged her word, and kept it, for my take. After alJ, she
was a sweet little girl
CHAPTER XIX.
A LETTER edged with black announced the day of my mas*
ter's return. Isabella was dead ; and he wrote to bid me get
mourning for his daughter, and arrange a room, and other ac-
commodations, for his youthful nephew. Catherine ran wild
with joy at the idea of welcoming her father back ; and indulged
most sanguine anticipations of the innumerable excellencies of
her " real " cousin.
The evening of their expected arrival came. Since early
morning she had been busy, ordeiing her own small affairs ; and
now, attired in her new black frock—'poor thing ! her aunt's
death impressed her with no definite sorrow — she obliged me,
by constant worrying, to walk with her down through the
grounds to meet them.
" Linton is just six months younger than I am, " she chattered,
as we strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy
turf, under shadow of the trees. " How delightful it will be to
have him for a playfellow I Aunt Isabella sent papa a beautiful
lock of his hair; it was lighter than mine— more flaxen, and
^uite as fine. I have it carefully preserved in a little glass box ;
and I've oflen thought what pleasure it would be to see its
owner. Oh ! I am happy — and papa, dear, dear papa 1 come
Ellen, let us run ! come run ! "
She ran, and returned and ran again many times, before my
sober footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on
the grassy bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently ;
but that was impossible ; she couldn't be still a minute.
" How long they are ! " she exclaimed. " Ah, I see some
dust on the road— they are coming ! No ! When will they be
here ? May we not go a little way — ^half a mile, Ellen, only
just half a mile ? Do say yes — to that clump of birches at the
turn! "
'I refused stanchly : and, at length, her suspense was ended :
174 WUTH£RINO HEIGHTS.
the traveling carriage rolled in sight. Miss Cathy shriekeci,
and stretched out her arms, as soon as she caught her Other's
face looking from the window. He descended, nearly as eager
as herself; and a considerable interval elapsed, ere they had a
thought to spare for any but themselves.
While they exchanged caresses, I took a peep in to see after
Linton. He was asleep in a comer, wrapped in a warm, fur-
lined cloak, as if it had been winter. A pale, delicate, effemi-
nate boy, who might have been taken for my master's younger
brother, so strong was the resemblance ; but there was a sickly
peevishness in his aspect, that Edg^r Linton never had.
The latter saw me looking ; and having shaken hands, ad-
vised me to close the door and leave him undisturbed ; for the
journey had fatigued him. Cathy would fain have taken one
glance ; but her father told her to come on, and they walked
together up the park, while I hastened before to prepare the
servants.
" Now, darling, " said Mr. Linton, addressing his daughter, as
they halted at the bottom of the front steps. ** Your cousin is
not so strong, or so meiTy as you arc, and he has lost his
mother, remember, a very short time since ; therefore, don't ex-
pect him to play, and run about with you directly. And don't
harass him much by talking — ^let him be quiet this evening, at
least, will you 1 "
" Yes, yes, papa, " answered Catherine ; " but I do want to
B^e him ; and he hasn't once looked out. "
The carriage stopped; and the sleeper, being roused, was
lifted to the ground by his uncle.
" This is your cousin Cathy, Linton, " he said, putting their
little hands together. " She's fond of you already ; and mind
you don't grieve her by ciying to-night. Tiy to be cheerful
now ; the traveling is at an end, and you have nothing to do
but rest and amuse yourself as you please. "
" Let me go to bed then, " answered the boy, shrinking from
Catherine's salute ; and he put his fingers to his eyes to remove
incipient tears.
" Come, come, there's a good child, " I whispered, leading
him in. You'll make her weep too— see how sorry she is for
you ! "
I do not know whether it were sorrow for him, but his cousin
put on as sad a countenance as himself, and returned to her
& ther. All three entered, and mounted to the library, whera
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS. 175
10a was laid ready. I pix > ceeded to remove Linton's cap and
mantle, and placed him on a chair by the table; bat he was no
sooner seated than he began to cry afresh. My master inquired
what was the matter.
*'I can't sit on a chair/'sobbed the boy.
" Go to the sofa then ; and Ellen shall bring you some tea, "
answered his uncle, patiently.
He had been greatly tried during the journey, I felt convinced,
by his fretful, ailing charge.
Linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down. Cathy car-
ried a footstool and her cup to his side. At first he sat silent ;
but that could not last ; she had resolved to make a pet of her
little cousin, as she would have him to be ; and she commenced
stroking his curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in
her saucer, like a baby. This pleased him, for he was not
much better ; he dried his eyes, and lightened into a faint smile.
" Oh, he'll do very well, " said the master to me, after watch-
ing them a minute. ** Very well, if we can keep him, Ellen.
The company of a child of his own age will instill new spirit
into him soon ; and by wishing for strength hell gain it. "
Aye, if we can keep him! I mused to myself; and sore mis-
givings came over me that there was slight hope of that. And
3ien, I thought, how will that weakling ever live at Wuthering
Heights, between his father and Hareton 1 what playmates and
instructors they'll be.
Our doubts were presently decided ; even earlier than I ex-
pected. I had just taken the children up-stairs, after tea was
finished ; and spen Linton asleep— he would not suffer me to
leave him, till that was the case. I had come down, and was
standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for
Mr. Edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen, and in-
formed me that Mr. Heathcliff's servant, Joseph was at the
door, and wished to speak with the master.
" I shall ask him what he wants first, " I said, in considerable
trepidation. " A very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and
the instant they have returned from a long journey. I don't
think the master can see him. "
Joseph had advanced through the kitchen, as I uttered these
words, and now presented himself in the hall. He was donned
in his Sunday garments, with his most sanctimonious and sour-
est face ; and holding his hat in one hand, and his stick in the
other, he proceeded to clean his shoes on the mat.
170 VyUTUEtlNG HEIGHTS.
<'Good evening, Joseph/'I said, coldly. *^ What busineM
brings you here ta-night V
" It*s Maister Linton aw man spake tuU, " he answered wa¥«
ing me disdainfully aside.
*'Mr. Linton is going to bed ; unless you have something par-
ticular to say, I'm sure be wont hear it now, " I continued*
*'You had better sit down there and intrust your message to me.''
" Which is his rahml " pursued the fellow, surveying the
range of closed doors.
I perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation ; so, very
reluctantly, I went up to the library, and announced the unsea*
sonable visitor ; advising that he should be dismissed till next
day. Mr. Linton had no time to empower me to do so, for he
mounted close at my heels, and pushing into the apartment,
planted himself at the far side of the table, with his two iists
clapped on the head of his stick, and began, in an elevated tone,
as i£ he anticipated opposition,
" Heathclin has sent me for his lad, un aw mun'nH goa back
'baht him. "
Edgar Linton was silent a minute ; an expression of exeeedr
ing sorrow overcast his features ; he would have pitied the child
OD his own account ; but, recalling Isabella's hopes and fea.r8,
and anxious wishes for her son, and her commendations of him
to his care, he grieved bitterly at the prospect of yielding him
up, and searched in his heart how it might be avoided. No
plan offered itself; the veiy exhibition of any desire to keep
aim would have rendered the claimant more peremptory ; there
was nothing left but to resign him. However, he was not
going to rouse him from his sleep.
" Tell Mr. Heathcliff, " he answered, calmly, " that his son
shall come to Wutliering Heights to-morrow. He is in bed,
and too tired to go the distance now. You may also tell him
that the mother of Linton desired him to remain under my
guardianship j and, at present, his health is very precarious. "
" Noa ! " said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the
floor, and assuming an authoritative aii\ " Noa ! that manes
nowt — Heathcliff maks noa'cahnt uh t'mother, nur yah norther
— ^bud he'll hev his lad ; und aw mun tak him— soa nah yah
knaw ! "
" You shall not to-night ! " answered Li»ton, decisively.
" Walk down stairs at once, and repeat to your master what I
have said. Ellen, show him down. Go*- "
WaTHBftINO HliaHTS^ 177
* And, aiding the indignant elder with a lifl hy the arm, he rid
the room of him and closed the door.
< «Tarrah weel! " shouted Joseph, as he slowly drew off
** Tuh morn, he's come hisseln, im'thrust him sht, if yah darrT*
CHAPTER XX.
To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, Mr
Lfinton commissioned me to take the boy home early, on
Catherine's pony, and, said he—
" As we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good
or bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my
daughter ; she can not associate with him hereafter ; and it is
better for her to remain iu ignorance of his proximity, lest she
should be restless, and anxious to visit the Height^-— merely tell
her, his father sent for him suddenly, and he 1ms been obliged
to leave us. "
Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five
o'clock, and astonished to be informed that he must prepare for
^rtber traveling : but I softened off the matter by stating that
be was going to spend some time with his father, Mr. Heath-
cliff, who wished to see him so much, he did not like to defer
the pleasure till he should recover from his late journey.
" My father! " he cried, in strange perplexity. " Mamma
never told me I had a father. Where does he live I I'd
rather stay with uncle. "
" He lives a little distance from the Grange, " I replied, " just
beyond those hills — ^not so far but you may walk over here,
when you get hearty. And you should be glad to go home,
and to see him. You must try to love him, as you did your
mother, and then he will love you. "
" But why have I not heard of him before 1 " asked Linton ;
" why didn't mamma and he live together as other people do 1 "
" He had business to keep him iu the north, " I answered ;
" and your mother's health required her to roside in the
south. "
" And why didn't mamma speak to me about him ? " perse-
vered the child. " She often talked of uncle, and I learned to
178 WUTBEEING HEIGHTS.
love bim loDg ago. How am I to love papa ) I don't know
him. "
" Oh, all children love their parents, " I said. " Your mother,
perhaps, thought you would want to be with him, if she men'
tioned him often to you. Let us make haste. An early ride
on such a beautiful morning is much preferable to an hour's
more sleep. "
" Is slit to go with us 1 " he demanded. " The little girl I
saw yesterday ] "
" Not now, " replied I.
" Is uncle ] " he continued.
•* No, I shall be your companion there, " I said.
Linton sank back on his pillow, and fell into a brown study.*
'" I won't go without uncle ; " he cried at length : " I can't
tell where you mean to take me. "
I attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing
reluctance to meet his father : still he obstinately resisted any
progress toward dressing ; and I had to call for my master's
assistance in coaxing him out of bed. The poor thing was
finally got off with several delusive assurances that his absence
should be short ; that Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit him ;
and other promises, equally ill-founded, which I invented and
reiterated, at intervals, throughout the way.
The pure heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the
fentle canter of Minny, relieved his despondency after a while.
Ee began to put questions concerning his new home, and its in-
habitants, with greater interest and liveliness.
" Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross
Grange ? " he inquired, turning to take a last glance into the
valley, whence a light mist mounted, and formed fleecy clouds,
on the skirts of the blue.
*'It is not so buried in trees, " I replied,''and it is not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully, all round ; and the
air is healthier for you — ^fresher and dryer. You will, perhaps,
think the building old and dark, at first — though it is a respect-
able house, the next best in the neighborhood. And you will
have such nice rambles on the moors ! Hareton Earnshaw —
that is Miss Cathy's other cousin, and so yours in a manner —
will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can bring a book
in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk; he does
frequently v^ralk out on the hills. "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 179
" And what is my father like 1 " be asked. " Is he as yoanir
and handsome as uncle 1 " Jo
« He's as young, " said I, " but he has black hair and eyes,
and looks sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.
He'll not seem to you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps,
because it is not his way; still, mind you be frank and cordial
with him, and, naturally, he'll be fonder of you than any uncle,
for you are his own. "
" Black hair and eyes ! " mused Linton. " I can't fancy him.
Then I am not like him, am I ] "
" Not much, " I answered. " Not a morael, " I thought;
surveying with regret the white complexion and slim frame
of my companion, and his large languid eyes — his mother's
eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a
moment, they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.
" How strange that he should never come to see mamma
and me, " he murmured. " Has he ever seen me ? If he have,
I must have been a baby — I remember not a single thing about
him ! "
" Why, Master Linton, " said I, " three hundred miles is a
great distance ; and ten years seem very different in length to
a grown up person, compared with what they do to you. It
is probable Mr. Heathcliff proposed going, from summer to
summer, but never found a convenient opportunity ; and now
it is too late. Don't trouble him with questions on the subject ;
it will disturb him for no good. "
The boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the
remainder of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse gar-
den gate. I watched to catch his impressions in his counte-
nance. He surveyed the carved front, and low-browed lattices,
the straggling gooseberry bushes, and crooked firs, with solemn
intentness, and then shook his head ; his private feelings entire-
ly disapproved of the exterior of his new abode ; but he had
sense to postpone complaining — ^there might be compensation
within.
Before he disinounted, I went and opened the door. It was
half-past six ; the family had just finished breakfast ; the servant
was clearing and wiping down the table ; Joseph stood by his
master's chair telling some tale concerning a lame horae; and
Hareton was preparing for the hay-field.
" Hallo, Nelly! " cried Mr. Heathcliff, when he saw me.
''I feared I should have to come down and fetch my property
180 lVUTBERiN« MMl^nrBi
myselC You've brought it, have you % Let uis see what we
can make of it. " •
He got up and strode to the door : Hareton and Joseph fol-
lowed in gaping curiosity. Poor Linton ran a fi-ightened eye
over the faces of the three.
" Sure-ly, " said Joseph, after a grave inspection, " he's
swopped wi'ye, maister, an'yen's his lass ! "
Heathcliff having stared his son into an ague of confusion, ut-
terred a scornful laugh.
" God I what a beauty! what a lovely, charming thing! " ho
exclaimed. *^ Haven't they reared it on snails and sour milk,
Nelly ? Oh, damn my soul ! but that's worse than I expected
— and the devil knows I was not sanguine ! "
I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down and en-,
ter. He did not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his fa-
ther's speech, or whether it were intended for him : indeed, he
was not yet certain that the grim, sneeiing stranger was his
father ; but he clung to me with growing trepidation ; and on
Mr. Heathclififs taking a seat, and bidding him " come hither, "
he hid his face on my shoulder, and wept.
" Tut, tut! " said Heathcliff, stretching out a hand and drag-
ging him roughly between his knees, and then holding up his
head by the chin. " None of that nonsense I we're not going
to hurt thee, Linton — ^isn't that thy name] Thou art thy
mother's child, entirely ! Whem is my share in thee, puling
chicken V*
He took off the boy's cap and brushed back his thick flaxen
curls, felt his slender arms, and his small fingers ; during which,
examination, Linton ceased crying, and lifted his great blue
eyes to inspect the inspector.
" Do you know me i " asked Heathclifif^ having satisfied him*
self that the limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
" No! " said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.
" You've heard of me, I dare say 1 "
" No, " he replied again.
" No ? What a shame of your mother, never to waken your
filial regard for me ! You are my son, then, I'll tell you ; and
your mother was a wicked slut to leave you in ignorance of the
sort of father you possessed. Now, don't wince and color up !
though it is something to see. you have not white blood. Be a
good lad ; and I'll do for you. Nelly, if you be tired you may
sit down, if not, get home again. I guess you'll report what
WUTHERING HEI0BTS. 181
yoji hear ^nd see, to the cipher at the Grange ; and this thing
won't be settled while you linger about it. "
" Well, " replied I, " I hope you'll be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliff, or you'll not keep him long, and he's all you haTe
akin in the ivide world that you will ever know — ^remember. "
''I'U be very kind to him ; you needn't fear I " he said, laugh-
ing. " Only nobody else must be kind to him^ I'm jealous of
monopolizing his affection. And, to begin my kindness, Joseph,
bring the lad some breakfast. Hareton, you infernal calf, be-
gone to your work. Yes, Nell, " he added when they were de-
parted,'* my son is prospective owner of your place, and I should
not wish him to die till I was certain of being his successor.
Besides, he's miney and I want the triumph of seeing my de-
scendant fairly lord of their estates — ^my child hiring their chil-
dren to till their fathers'lands for wages. That is the sole con-
sideration which can make me endure the whelp-r-I despise him
for himself, and hate him for the memories he revives I but that
consideration is sufficient; he's as safe with me, and shall be
tended as carefully as your master tends his own. I have a
room up-stairs, furnished for him in handsome style ; I've en-
gaged a tutor, also, to come three times a week from twenty
miles distance, to teach him what he pleases to leaiii. I've or-
dered Hareton to obey him ; and, in fact, I've an*anged every
thing with a view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in
him above his associates. I do regret, however, that he so little
deserves the trouble. If I wished any blessing in the world, it
was to find him a worthy obiect of pride, and I'm bitterly disap-
pointed with the whey-faced, whining wretch ! "
While he was speakine, Joseph returned, bearing a basin of
milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton. He stirred round
the homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed he could
not eat it. I saw the old man-servant shared largely in his mas-
ter's scorn of the childy though be was compelled to retain the
sentiment in his heart, because Heath cliff plainly meant his un-
derlings to hold him in honor.
** Cannut ate it? " repeated he, peering in Linton's face, and
subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard.
" But Maister Hareton nivir ate nowt else when he wer a little
un ; und what wer gooid enough fur him's gooid eueugh fur yah,
aw's rayther think ! "
" I shan't eat it I " answered Linton, snappishly. " Take it
•way. "
I8S WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS.
Joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it
to us.
" Is there owt ails th'yictuak 1 " he asked, thrusting the tray
under Heathcli£f's nose.
''What should ail them 1 " he said.
" Wah !*'answered Joseph, *'yon dainty chap says he cannut
ate'em. Bud aw guess it's raight His mother wer just soa —
we wer a'most too mucky tuh sow th'com fur makking her
breead.'*
''Don't mention his mother to me, " said the master, angrily.
*'Get him something that he can eat, that's alL What is his
usual food, Nelly 1 "
I suggested boiled milk or tea, and the hous^eeper received
instructions to prepare some.
" Come, " I reflected, " his father's selfishness may contribute
to his comfort. He perceives his delicate constitution, and the
necessity of treating him tolerably. I'll console Mr. Edgar by
acquainting him with the turn HeathcliflTs humor has taken. " ^
Having no excuse for lingering longer, I slipped out, while
Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a fiiend-
ly sheep-dog. * But he was too much on the aleit to be cheated :
as I closed the door I heard a cry, and a frantic repetition of the
words —
" Don't leave me ! I'll not stay here ! I'll not stay here ! "
Then the latch was raised and fell — they did not suffer him
to come forth. I mounted Minny, and urged her to a trot, and
so my brief guardianship ended.
CHAPTER XXI.
We had sad work with little Cathy that day : she rose in
high glee, eager to join her cousin ; and such passionate tears
and lamentations followed the news of his departure, thatEdgar
himself was obliged to soothe her by aflirmmg he should come
back soon ; he added, however, ** if I can get him, " and diere
wei-e no hopes of that. This promise poorly pacified her ; but
time was more potent ; and though still at intervals she inquired
of her father when Linton would return, before she did see him
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 1S8
again his features bad waxed so dim in her memory that she did
not recognize him.
When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering
Heights, in paying business visits to Gimmerton, I used to ask
how the young master got on ; for he lived almost as secluded
as Catherine herself, and was never to be seen. I could gather
from her that he continued in weak health, and was a tiresome
inmate. She said Mr. Heathcliff seemed to dislike him ever
longer and worse, though he took some trouble to conceal it.
He had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do
at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes
together. There seldom passed much talk between them ; Lin-
ton learned his lessons, and spent his evenings in a small apart-
ment they called the parlor ; or else lay in bed all day ; for he
was constantly getting coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains
of some sort.
" And I never knew such a faint-hearted creature, " added the
woman ; " nor one so careful of hisseln. He will go on, if I
leave the window open a bit late in the evening. Oh ! it's killing,
a breath of night air ! And he must have a fire in the middle
of summer; and Joseph's'bacca pipe is poison; and he must
always have sweets and dainties, and always milk, milk for ever -
— ^heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter — and
there he'll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak, in his chair by the
fire, and some toast and water, or other slop, on the hob to sip.
at ; and if Hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him — Hareton is
not bad-natured, though he's rough — ^they're sure to part, one
swearing, and the other crying. I believe the master would
relish Eamshaw's thrashing him to a mummy, if he were not
his son : and, I'm certain, he would be fit to turn him out of
dooro, if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln. But then,
he won't go into danger of temptation; he never enters the
parlor, and should Linton show those ways in the house where
he is, he sends him up stairs directly. "
I divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had
rendered young Heathcliff selfish and disagi'eeable, if he were
not so originally ; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed ;
though still I was moved with a sense of grief at his lot, and a
wish that he had been left with us.
Mr. Edgar encouraged me to gain information ; he thought a
great deal about him, I fancy, and would have run some risk to
see him ; and he told me once to ask the housekeeper whether
184 WUTBER1N6 HEIGH Ta.
he ever came into the village 1 She said he had only beecK
twice, on horseback, accompanying his father : and both times
he pretended to be quite knocked up for three or four days
afterward. The housekeeper left, if I recollect rightly, two
years after he came ; and another, whom I did not know, was
her successor : she lives there still.
Time wore on at the Grange in its former pleasant way,, till
Miss Cathy reached sixteen. On the anniversary of her birth
we never manifested any signs of rejoicing, because it was also
the anniversary of my late mistress's death. Her father iuvari-
ably spent that day alone in the library ; and walked, at dusk,
as far as Gimmerton kirkyard, where he would frequently
prolong his stay beyond midnight. Therefore Catherine was
thrown ,on her own resources for amusement.
This twentieth of March was a beautiful spring day, and when
her father had retired, my young lady came down,, dressed for
going out, and said she had asked to have a ramble on the edge
of the moors with me ; and Mr. Linton had given her leave, if •
we went only a short distance, and were back within the hour.
" So make haste, EHen ! " she cried. ^* I know where I wish
to go ; where a colony of moor game are settled ; I want to see
whether they have made their nests yet. "
" That must be a good distance up, " I answered ; " they
don't breed on the edge of the moor. "
" No, it's not, " she said. " I've gone very near with papa. "
I put on my bonnet, and sallied put ; thinking nothing more
of the matter. She bounded before me, and returned to my
side, and was off again like a young grayhound ; and, at first, I
found plenty of entertainment in listening to the larks singing
far and near ; and enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine ; and
watching her, my pet and my delight, with her golden ringlets
flying loose behind^ and her bright cheek, as soft and pure in its
bloom as a wild rose, and her eyes radiant with cloudlesss pleas*
ure. She was a happy creature, and an angel, in those days.
It's a pity she could not be content.
" Well, " said I, " where are your paoor game. Miss Cathy]
We should be at them — the Grange park-fence is a great way
off now. "
" Oh, a little further — only a little further, Ellen, " was ber
answer, continually. " Climb to that hillock, pass that bank,
and by the time you reach the other side, I shall have raised the
Wrds. "
^UTHERIN« BBi«HT0w IS9
fittt there were so many hillocks aod hanks to climh and pass,
that, at length, I hegan to be wearj, aod told her we must halt,
and retrace our steps. I shouted to her, as she had outstripped
me a long way ; she either did not hear, or did not reganl, for
she still sprang on, and I was compelled to follow. Finally, she
dived into a hollow ; and before I came in sight of her again,
she was two miles nearer Wuthering Heights than her own
home ; and I beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of whom
I felt convinced was Mr. lieathcliff himself.
Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least,
hunting out the nests of the grouse. The Heights were Heath-
diflfs land, and he was reproving the poacher.
" I've neither taken any nor found any, " she said, as I toiled
to them, expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement.
'^I didn't mean to take them; but papa told me there were
quantities up here, and I wished to see Uie eggs. "
Heathclin glanced at me vrith an ill-meaning smile, expi^ess-
isg his acquaintance with the party, and, consequently; his ma-
levolence toward it, and demanded who *^ papa " was t
" Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Gi-ange, " she replied. " I thought
you did not know me, or you wouldn't have spoken in that
way. "
" You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected then V*
he said, sarcastically.
" And what are you 1 " inquired Catherine, gazing curiously
onthe speaker. " That man I've seen before. Is he your son 1 "
She pointed to Hareton, the other individual ; who had gained
nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two
years to his age : he seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
" Miss Cathy, " I interrupted, ** it will be three hours instead
of one, that we are out, presently. We really must go back. "
" No, that man is not my son, " answered Heathclifi^ pushing
me aside. ^* But I have one, and you have seen him befoi^e
too ; and, though your nurse is in a hurry, I think both you and
she would be the better fer a little rest. Will you just turn this
nab of heath, and walk into my house ) You'll get home earlier
for the ease ; and you shall receive a kind welcome, "
I whispered Catherine that she mustn't, on any account, ao*
cede to the proposal ; it was entirely out of the question.
" Why 1 " she asked aloud. " I'm tired of running, end the
ground is dewy — ^I can't sit here. Let us go, Ellen | BeA im ^
ha says I have seen his son. He's mistaken, I think ; Wit I

k.
186 WUTHBRING HBIOHT8.
guess wbere he lives— -at the farmhoase I visited in coming from
^enistone Crags. Don't you 1 "
" I do. Come, Nelly, hold your tongue— it will be a treat
for her to look in on us. Hareton, get forward with the lass.
You shall walk with me, Nelly. "
''No, she's not going to any such place, " I cried, struggling
to release my arm which he had seized ; bat she was almost at
the door-stones already, scampering round the brow at full speed.
Her appointed companion did not pretend to'escort her; he
ahyed off by the roadside, and vanished.
** Mr. Heatbcliff, it's very wrong, " I continued, " you know
you mean no good ; and there she'll see Linton, and all will be
told as soon as ever we return, and I shall have the blame. "
" I want her to see Linton, " he answered :''he's looking bet-
ter these few days ; it's not ofien he's fit to be seen. And we'll
soon persuade her to keep the visit secret—'where is the harm
ofitr
''.The harm of it is, that her father would hate me, if he found
I suffered her to enter your house ; and 1 am convinced you
have a bad design in encouraging her to do so, " I replied.
" My design is as honest as possible. I'll inform you of its
whole scope, " he said. " That the two cousins may & 11 in love
and get married. I'm acting generously to your master ; his
young chit has no expectations; and should she second my
wishes, she'll be provided for at once as joint successor with
Linton. "
" If Linton died, " I answered, " and his life is quite uncer-
tain, Catherine would be the heir. "
" No she would not, " he said ; " there is no clause in the will
to secure it so ; his property would go to me ; but, to prevent
disputes, I desire their union, and am resolved to bring it about. "
" And I'm resolved she shall never approach your house with
me again, " I returned, as we reached the gate, where Miss
Cathy waited our coming,
Heathcliff bid me be quiet ; and, preceding us up the path,
hastened to open the door. My young lady gave him several
looks, as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to
think of him ; but now he smiled when he met her eye, and
soflened his voice in addressing her, and I was foolish enough
to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him fix)m
desiring her injury.
Linton stood on the hearth. He had been out walking in the
WUTHBEINO H BIGHTS. 187'
fields, for bis cap was on, and he was calling to Joseph to bring
bim dry shoes. He had grown tall of his age, still wanting
some months of sixteen. His features were pretty yet, and his
eje and complexion brighter than I remembered them, though
with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air
and genial sun.
''Now, who is that V asked Mr. Heathcliff, turning to Cathy.
" Can you tell r
" Your son V she said, having doubtfully surveyed first one
and then the other.
" Yes, yes, " answei-ed he;''but is this the only time you
bave beheld him? Think! Ah! you have a short memory.
Linton, don't you recall your cousin, that you used to tease us
so with wishing to see ] "
''What, Linton! " cried Cathy, kindling into joyfiil surprise
at the name. " Is that little Linton ] He's taller than I am !
Are you Linton V*
The youth stepped forward and acknowledged himself: she
kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change
time had wrought in the appearance of each.
Catherine had reached her fiill height ; her figure was both
plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole aspect spark-
ling with health and spirits. Linton's looks and movements
were very languid, and his foim extremely slight; but there
was a gi'ace in his manner that mitigated these defects, and
rendered him not unpleasing.
After exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
cousin went to Mr. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door, divid-
ing his attention between the objects inside, and those that lay
without, pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really
noting the foimer alone.
" And you are my uncle, then ! " she cried,^ reaching up to
salute him. " I thought I liked you, though you were cross at
first. Why don't you visit at the Grange with Linton 1 To
live all these years such close neighbors, and never see us, is
odd ; what have you done so for 1 "
" I visited it once or twice too often before you were bom, "
he answered. " There-^amn it ! If you have any kisses to
spare, give them to Linton — ^they are thrown away on me. "
** Naughty EUen ! " exclaimed Catherine, flying to attack me
next with her lavish caresses. " Wicked Ellen ! to try to hinder
me from entering. But I'll take this walk every morning in

188 WUTHERING HSIOHTS.
futures-may I, uncle — and sometimes bring papa 1 Won't you
be glad to see us 1 "
''Of course! " replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed
grimace, resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed
visitors. " But stay, " he continued, turning tovrard the young
lady. " Now I think of it, I'd better tell you. Mr. Linton has
a prejudice against me ; we quarreled at one time of our lives
vnth unchristian ferocity ; and, if you mention coming here to
him, he'll put a veto on your visits altogether. Therefore, you
must not mention it, unless you be careless of seeing your
cousin hereafieiw-yott may come, if you vrill, but you must not
mention it "
" Why did you quarrel ]'asked Catherine, considerably crest-
fallen.
•* He thought me too poor to wed his sister, " answered Heath-
clifT, " and was grieved that I got hier — ^his pride was hurt, and
he'll never forgive it. "
" That's wrong I " said the young lady : ** sometime I'll tell
him so; but Linton and I have no share in your quarrel. Pll
not come here, then, he shall come to the Grange. "
" It will be too far for me, " murmured her cousin, " to walk
four miles would kill me. No, conie here, Miss Catherine, now
and then, not every morning, but once or twice a week. "
The father launched toward his son a glance of bitter con^
tempt.
" I am afraid, Nelly, 1 shall lose my labor, " he muttered to
me. " Miss Catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his
value, and send him to the devil. Now, if it had been Hareton
—do you know that, twenty times a day, I covet Hareton, vrith
all his degi'adation ] I'd have loved the lad had he been some
one else. But I think he's safe from her love. I'll pit him
against that paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly. We
calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen. Oh, confound
the vapid thing. He's absorbed in drying his feet, and never
looks at her — Linton 1 "
" Yes, father, " answered the boy.
" Have you nothing to show your cousin, any where about ;
not even a rabbit, or a weasel's nest I Take her into the gar-
den, before you change your shoes ; and into the stable to see
your horse. "
" Wouldn't you rather sit here 1 " asked Linton, addressing
.Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctance to move again.
WUTHEIINO HEIGHT 9.
*'I don't know, " she replied, casting a longing look to the
door, and evidently eager to be active.
He kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. Heathcliff
rose, and weot into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard,
calling out iox Hareton. Hareton responded, and presently the
two re-entered. The young man had been washing himself, as
was visible by the glow on his cheeks, and his wetted hair:
" Oh, I'll ask you, uncle ; " cried Miss Cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion. " That's not my cousin, is he 1 "
*^ Yes, " he- replied, " your mother's nephew. Don't you like
bimi "
Catherine looked queer.
" Is he not a handsome lad 1 " he continued.
The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a
sentence in HeathcHfT's ear.
He laughed ; Hareton darkened ; I perceived he was very
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of
his inferiority. But his master or guardian chased the frown
by exclaiming —
'* You'll be the favorite among us, Hareton 1 She says you
are a — ^what was it T Well, something very flattering. Here 1
you go with her round the farm. And behave like a gentle-
man, mind ! Don't use any bad words ; and don't stare when
the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to hide your
£ice when she is ; and, when yon speak, say your words sbwly,
and keep your hands out of your pockets. Be off, and enteitain
her as nicely as you can. "
He watched the couple walking past the window. Eamshaw
had his countenance completely averted from his companion.
He seemed studying the familiar landscape with a stranger's,
and an artist's interest. Catherine took a sly look at him, ex-
pressing small admiration. She then turned her attention to
seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and tripped mer-
rily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.
" I've tied his tongue, " observed Heathcliff. " He'll not
Venture a single syllable all the time ! Nelly, you recollect
me at his age— nay, some years younger. Did I ever look so
stupid, so'gaumless,'as Joseph calls it ? "
*• Worse,''1 replied, " because more sullen with it. "
" Fve a pleasure in him ! " he continued, reflecting aloud.:
** He has satisfied my expectations. If he were a bora fool I
should not enjoy it half so much.. But he's iia£iol;.aiid I oaii
100 WUTHBEIN6 HEIGBTS.
sympathize with all his leeliugs, having felt th^n myself I
know what he sufiers now, for instance, exactly — ^it is merely a
beginning of what he shall suffer, though. And he'll never be
able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness and ignorance.
I've got him faster than his scoundrel of a father secured me,
and lower ; for he takes a pride in his brutishness. I've taught
him to scorn every thing extra-animal, as silly and weak.
Don*t you think Hindley would be proud of his son, if he
could see him ] almost as proud as I am of mine. But there's
this difference, one is gold put to the use of paving stones ;
and the other is tin polished to ape a service of silver. Mine
has nothing valuable about it ; yet I shall have the merit of
making it go as fiir as such poor ittuff can go. His had first-
rate qualities, and they are lost — ^rendered worse than unavail-
ing. I have nothing to regret ; he would have more than any
but I are aware of And die best of it is, Hareton is damnably
fond of me ! You'll own that I've out-matched Hindley there.
If the dead villain could rise from his grave to abuse me for
his offspring's wrongs, I should have the fun of seeing the said
offspring fight him back again, indignant that he should dare to
rail at the one friend he has in the world ! "
Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea ; I made no
reply, because I saw that he expected none.
Meantime, our young companion, who sat too removed from
us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms of uneasi-
ness : probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat
of Catherine's society, for fear of a little fatigue. His father
remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and
the hand irresolutely extended toward his cap.
** Get up, you idle boy ! " he exclaimed with assumed hearti-
ness. ** Away after them — ^they are just at the corner, by the
stand of hives. "
Linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. The
lattice was open, and, as he stepped out, I heard Cathy in-
quiring of her unsociable attendant, what was that inscription
over the door 1
Hareton stared up, and scratched his head like a true
clown.
" It's some damnable writing ; " he answered. " I can not
read it. "
" Can't read it 1 " cried Catherine, " I can read it— it's En-
glisb^-bttt I want to know why it is theifiu "
WUTHEBING BEIOHT8. 101
Linton giggled — the. first appearance of mirth he had ex-
hibited.
" He does not know his letters/'he said to his cousin. " Could
you helieve in the existence of such a colossal dunce V*
** Is he all as he should be V* asked Miss Cathy seriously,
** or is he simple — ^not right V* I've questioned him twice now,
and each time he looked so stupid, I think he does not under-
stand me ; I can hardly understand him I'm sure.
Linton repeated his laugh , and glanced at Hareton taunt*
ingly, who certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension
at that moment.
" There's nothing the matter but laziness, is there, Earn*
shaw ? " he said. " My cousin fancies you are an idiot. There
you experience the consequence of scorning'book laming,'as
you would say. Have/ you noticed, Catherine, his frightful
Yorkshire pronunciation ] "
" Why, where the devil is the use on't V* growled Hareton,
more ready in answering his daily companion. He was about
to enlarge further, but the two youngsters broke into a noisy fit
of merriment ; ray giddy Miss being delighted to discover that
she might turn his strange talk to matter of amusement.
" Where is the use oF'the devil'in that sentence 1 " tittered
Linton. ** Papa told you not to say any bad words, and you
can't open your mouth vrithout one. Do try to behave like a
gentleman, now do ! "
, " If thou wem't more a lass than a lad, I'd fell thee this
minute, I would ; pitiful lath of a crater ! " retorted the angry
boor retreating, while his face burned with mingled I'age and
mortification ; for he was conscious of being insulted, and em-
barrassed how to resent it.
Mr. Heathcliff, having overheard the conversation, as well as
I, smiled when he saw him go, but immediately afterward cast
a look of singular aversion on the flippant pair, who remained
chattering in the door-way. The boy finding animation enough
while discussing Hareton's faults and deficiencies, and relating
anecdotes of his goings on ; and the girl relishing his pert and
spiteful sayings, without considering the ill-nature they evinced :
but I began to dislike, more than to compassionate, Linton,
and to excuse his father, in some measure, for holding him cheap.
We stayed till afternoon ; I could not tear Miss Cathy away
before ; but, happily, my master had not quitted his apartment,
and remained ignorant of our prolcHiged absence.
IM WUVHEEIN6 HVIGBTS:
As we walked home» I would fain have enlightened my
charge on the characters of the people we had quitted ; but
she got it into her head that I was prejudiced against them.
** Aha r'she cried, " you take papa's side, Ellen — you are
partial, I know, or else you wouldn't have cheated me so many
years, into the notion that Linton lived a long way from here,
I'm really extremely angry, only, I'm so pleased, I can't show
it ! But you must hold your tongue about my uncle — ^he's my
uncle, remember, and I'll scold papa for quarreling with him. "
And so she ran on, till I dropped endeavoring to oonvince her
of her mistake. She did not mention the visit that night, be-
cause she did not see Mr. Linton. Next day it all came out,
sadly to my chamn ; and still, I was not altogether sorry : I
thought the burden of directing and warning would be more
efficiently borne by him than me, but he was too tiibid in giving
satisfactory reasons for his wish that she would shun connection
with the household of the Heights, and Catherine liked good
reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.
" Papa 1 " she exclaimed after the morning's salutations,
** guess whom I saw yesterday, in ray walk On the mooiis.
Ah, papa, you started ! you've not done right, have you, now T
I saw. But listen, and you shall hear how I found you out,
and Ellen, who is in league with you^ and yet pretended to pity
me so, when I kept hoping, and was always disappointed about
Linton's coming back f "
She gave a raithful account of hdr excursion and its conse-
quences; and my master, though he cast more than one re-
proachful look at me, said nothing, till she had concluded.
Then he drew her to him, and asked if she knew why he had
concealed Linton's near neighborhood from herl Could she
think it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly
enjoy]
" It was because you disliked Mr. Heathcliff, " she answered.
" Then you believe I care more for my own feelings than
yours, Cathy V he said. " No, it was not because I disliked Mr.
Heathcliff; but because Mr. Heathcliff dblik^s me; an4 is a
most diabolical man, delighting to Wrong and ruin those he
hates, if they give him the slightest 6pportunity. I knew that
you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin, with-
out being brought into contact with him ; and I knew he would
detest you, on ray account ; iSo, for your own good, and nothing
else, I took precautions that you should not see Linton again.-
WUTHCRING HEIGHTS. 1G3
I meant to explain this, some time, as you grew older, and I'm
Bony I delayed it ! "
** But HealbclifF was quite cordial, papa, " observed Catherine,
not at all convinced ;'* and ht didn't object to our seeing each
other : he said I might come to his house when I pleased, only
I must not tell you, because you had quarreled with him, and
would not forgive him for marrying aunt Isabella. And you
won't — you are the one to be blamed— he is willing to let U9 be
friends, at least ; Linton and I — and you are not. "
My master, perceiving that she would not take his word for
her uncle-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of his
conduct to Isabella, and the manner in which Wuthering
Heights became his property. He could not bear to discourse
long upon the topic, for though he spoke little of it, he still felt
the same hori'or, and detestation of his ancient enemy that had
occupied his heart ever since Mrs. Linton's death. " She might
have been living yet, if it had not been for him !** was his con-
stant, bitter reflection; and, in his eyes, Heathcliff seemed a
iliurderer.
Miss Cathy, conversant with no bad deeds except her own
slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion, lising from hot
temper, and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day they
\^ere committed, was amazed at the blackness oif spirit that
could brood on, and cover revenge for years ; and deliberately
prosecute its plans, without a visitation of remoree. She ap-
peared so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view of
human nature— excluded from all her studies and all her ideas
till now — that Mr. Edgar deemed it unnecessaiy to puraue the
subject. He merely added,
" You will know hereafter, darling, why I wish you to avoid
his house and family — ^now, return to your old employments and
amusements, and think no more about them ! "
Catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her
lessons for a couple of hours, according to custom : then she
accompanied him into the grounds, and the whole day passed
as usual: but in the evening, when she had retired to her room,
and I went to help her to undress, I found her crying, on her
knees by the bedside.
" Oh, fie, silly child ! " I exclaimed. " If you had any real
griefs, you'd be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contra-
riety. You never had one shadow of substantial sorrow, Miss
Catherine. Suppose, for a minute, that master and I were dead,

)94 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS.
and you were by yourself in the world — ^how wouici yovt feel
then ? Compare the present occasion with such an afiSlictioii as
that, and be thankful for the friends you have, instead of covet-
ing more. "
" I'm not crying for myself, Ellen, " she answered, ** it's for
him. He expected to see me again to-morrow, and tben fae'il
be so disappointed — and he'll wait for me, and I shan't come T'
" Nonsense ! " said I, " do you imagine he has thoug^ht as
much of you as you have of him ] Hasn't he Hareton for a.
companion 1 Not one in a hundred would weep at losing'a
relation they had just seen twice, for two afternoons. Liixtcm
will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself no fiirther about
you. "
*'But may I not write a note to tell him why I can not
come 1 she asked rising to her feet. " And just send tliose
books I promised to lend him. His books are not as nice as
mine, and he wanted to have them extremely, when I told faim
how interestinff they were. May I not, Ellen 1 "
" No, indeed, no indeed ! " replied I with decision. " Then
he would write to you, and there'd never be an end of it. l^a.
Miss Catherine, the acquaintance must be dropped entirely —
80 your papa expects, and I shall see that it is done ! "
" But how can one little note — " she recommenced, putting'
on an imploring countenance.
" Silence ! " I interrupted. " We'll npt begin with your little
notes. Get into bed ! "
She threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that I
would not Idss her good-night at first : I covered her up, and
shut her door, in gi-eat displeasure — but, repenting half-way, I
returned softly, and lo ! there was Miss, standing at the table
with a bit of blank paper before her, and a pencil in her hand,
which she guiltily slipped out of sight, on my re-entrance.
" You'll get nobody to take that, Catherine, " I said, " if you
write it ; and at present I shall put out your candle. "
I set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as I did so, a
slap on the hand, and a petulant ** cross thing ! " I then quitted
her again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst, most
peevish humora.
The letter was finished, and forwarded to its destination by a
milk-fetcher who came from the village, but that I didn't learn
till some time afterwards. Weeks passed on, and Cathy recov-
ered her temper, though she grew wondrous fond of stealing off
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHT 8« 195
to corners by herself, and often, if I came near her suddenly
-while reading, she would start, and bend over the book, evidently
clesirous to hide it ; and I detected edges of loose paper stick-
ing out beyond the leaves.
She also got a trick of coming down early in the morning,
and lingering about the kitchen, as if she were expecting the
arrival of something ; and she had a small drawer m a cabinet
in the library which she would trifle over for hours, and whose
key she took special care to remove when she left it.
One day, as she inspected this drawer, I observed that the
playthings and trinkets which recently formed its contents,
vrere transmuted into bits of folded paper.
My curiosity and suspicions were roused; I determined to
take a peep at her mysterious treasures ; so, at night, as soon
as she and my master were safe up-stairs, I seardied and
readily found among my house keys, one that would fit the
lock. Having opened, I emptied the whole contents into my
apron, and took them with me to examine at leisure in my own
chamber.
. Though I could not but suspect, I was still surprised to dis-
cover that they were a mass of correspondence, daily almost, it
must have been, fi-om Linton Heathchft*, answers to documents
forwarded by her. The earlier dated were embarrassed and
short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious love
letters, foolish as the age of the vmter rendered natural, yet
with touches, here and there, which I thought wore borrowed
from a more experienced source.
Some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds of
ardor and flatness ; commencing in strong feeling, and conclud-
ing in the affected, wordy way that a school-boy might use to a
fancied, incorporeal sweetheait. Whether they satisfied Cathy,
I don't know, but they appeared very worthless trash to me.
After turninff over as many as I thought proper, I tied them in
a handkerchief, and set them aside, re-locking the vacant drawer.
Following her habit, my young lady descended early, and
visited the kitchen : I watched her go to the door, on the arrival
of a certain little boy ; and, while the dairy maid filled his can,
she tucked something into his jacket pocket, and plucked some-
thing out. I went round by the garden, and laid wait for the
messenger ; who fought valorously to defend his trust, and we
spilled the milk between us; but I succeeded in abstracting the-
epistle ; and threatening serious consequences if he did not look
196 WUTHEEINa HEiaHTfl.
ehai'p borne, I remained under the wall, and perused Miss^
Cathy's affectionate composition. It was more simple and
more eloquent than her cousin's, very pretty and very silly. 1
shook my head, and went meditating into the house.
The day being wet, she could not divert herself with ram
bling about the pai'k ; so, at the conclusion of her morning
studies, she resoited to the solace of the drawer. Her father
sat reading at the table ; and I, on pui'pose, had sought a bit of
work in some unripped fringes of the vnndow curtain, keeping-
my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings.
Never did any bird flying back to a plundered nest which it
had lefl brimful of chirping young ones, express more com-
plete despair in its aneuished cries and fiutterings, than she by
ner single ** Oh ! " ana the change that transfigured her late
happy countenance. Mr. Linton looked up.
" What is the matter, love 1 Have yoa hurt yourself? " he
said.
His tone and look assured her he had not been the discoverer
of the hoard.
" No papa — " she gasped. ** Ellen ! Ellen ! come up-stairs
—I'm sick!''
I obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.
" Oh, Ellen! you have- got them/'she commenced imme-
diately, dropping on her knees, when we were inclosed alone.
" Oh, give them to me, and I'll never never do so again ! Don't
tell papa. You have not told papa, Ellen, say you have not !
I've been exceedingly naughty, but I won't do it any moi-e ! "
With a grave severity in my manner, I bid her stand up.
" So, " I exclaimed, " Miss Catherine, you are tolerably far
on, it seems— you may well be ashamed of them ! A fine bun-
dle of trash you study in your leisure hours, to be sure. Why
it's good enough to be printed ! And what do you suppose th»
master will think, when I display it before him 1 I haven't
shown it yet, but you needn't imagine I shall keep your ridicu-
lous secrets. For shame ! And you must have led the way in
writing such absurdities ; he would not have thought of^ begin-
ning, I'm certain. "
" I didn't! t didn't ! " sobbed Cathy > fit to break her heart.
**I didn't once think of loving him till — "
*'Loving/'* cried I, as scomfiiUy as I could utter the word»
** Lovmg! Did any body ever hear the like ! I might just as
well talk of Icmng the mtllM'who oomes^onee^ year to loiy our
W0TH« < INO nCIOHTfl. 107
com. Pi*etty loving, indeed, and both times together you havB
Been Linton hardly £}ur hours, in your life! Nowhere is the
babyish trash. I'm going with it to the library ; and we'll see
what your father says to such loving^
She sprang at her precious epistles, but I held them above my
head ; and then she poured out further frantic entreaties that I
" would bum them — do any thing rather than show them. And
being really fully as inclined to laugh as scold, for I esteemed
it all girlish vanity, I at length, relented in a measure, and
asked,
" If I consent to bum them,'will you promise faithfully,
neither to send, nor receive a letter again, nor a book — for I
perceive you have sent him books-^nor locks of hair, nor rings,
nor playthings ! "
" We don't send playthings ! " cried Catherine, her pride over
coming her ^ame.
" Nor any thing at all, then, my lady 1 " I said. " Unless you
will, here I go. "
" I promise, Ellen !''she cried, catching my dress. " Oh, put
them in the fire, do, do I "
But when I proceeded to open the place with the poker, the
sacrifiee was too painful to be borne. She earnestly supplicated
that I would spare her one or two.
" One or two, Ellen, to keep for Linton's sake ! "
I unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them
in fi'om an angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
" I will have one, you cruel wretch ! " she screamed, darting
her hand into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed
fragments, at the expense of her fingers.
" Very well — and I will have some to exhibit to papa ! " I
answered, shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning
anew to the door.
She emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and mo-
tioned me to finish the immolation. It was done ; I stirred up
the ashes, and interred them under a shovelfiil of coals ; and
she mutely, and with a sense of intense injuiy, retired to her
private apaitment. I descended to tell my master that the
young lady's qualm of sickness was almost gone, but I judged
it best for her to lie down a while.
She wouldn't dine ; but she re-appeared at tea, pale and red
about the eyes, and marvelously subdued in outward aspect.
Next moling I answered the letter by a slip of paper in-

198 WUTBERINO HEIGHTS.
scribed, " Master Heathcliffis roquestecl to send no more notes
to Miss Linton, as she will not i-eceive tbem. " And, thence-
forth the little boy came with vacant pockets.
CHAPTER XXII.
Summer drew to an end, and early autumn ; it was past
Michaelmas, but the harvest was late that year, and a few of
our fields were still uncleared. Mr. Linton and his daughter
would frequently walk out among the reapers ; at the carrying
of the last sheaves, they stayed till dusk, and the evening hap-
pening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad cold, that,
settling obstinately on his lungs, confined him indoors through-
out the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.
Poor Cathy, fnghtened from her little romance, had been
considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and her
father insisted on her reading less, and taking more exercise.
She had his companionship no longer ; I esteemed it a duty to
supply its lack, as much as possible, with mine — an inefficient
substitute, for I could only spare two or three hours, from my
numerous diumai occupations, to follow her footsteps, and then
my society was obviously less desirable than his.
On an afternoon in October, or the beginning of November,
a fresh wateiy afremoon, when the turf and paths were rustling
with moist, withered leaves, and the cold, blue sky was half
hidden by clouds, dark gray streamers, rapidly mounting from
the west, and boding abundant rain, I requested my young lady
to forego her ramble, because I was certain of showers. She
refused, and I unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my um-
brella to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park—
a foi-raal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited ; and
that she invariably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse than
ordinary — a thing never known from his confession, but guessed
both by her and me from his increased silence, and the melan-
choly of his countenance.
She went sadly on ; there was no running or bounding now,
though the chill wind might well have tempted her to a race.
And ofl:en» from the side of my eye, I could detect her raising a
WUTRERING HEIGHTS. 199
Land, and brushing something off her cheek. I gazed round
for a means of diveiting her thoughts. On one side of the road
rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks, with
their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure ; the soil was
too loose for the latter, and sti'ong winds had blown some nearly
horizontal. In summer. Miss Catherine delighted to climb along
these trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above
the ground ; and I, pleased with her agility, and her Hght,
childish heart, still considered it proper to scold every time I
caught her at such an elevation, but so that she'knew there
was no necessity for descending. From dinner to tea she would
lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing except singing
old songs — my nursery lore — to herself, or watching the birds,
joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to fly, or nestling
with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming, happier than
words can express.
" Look, miss ! " I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the
roots of one twisted tree ; " winter is not here yet. There's a
little flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of blue-
bells that clouded those turf steps in July with a lilac mist.
Will you clamber up, and pluck it to show to papa 1 "
Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trembling in
its earthy shelter, and replied at length —
" No, I'll not touch it ; but it looks melancholy, does it not,
Ellen V
" Yes, " I observed, " about as starved and Backless as you —
your cheeks are bloodless ; let us take hold of hands and run.
You're so slow, I dare say I shall keep up with you. "
" No, " she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at
intervals to muse over a bit of moss, or a tufl; of blanched grass,
or a fungus spreading its bright orange among the heaps of
brown foliage ; and, ever and anon, her hand was lifted to her
averted face.
" Catherine, why are you crying, love 1 " I asked, approach-
ing and putting my arm over her shoulder. " You must'nt
cry because papa has a cold ; be thankful that it is nothing
worse. "
She now put no further restraint on her tears ; her breath
was stifled by sobs.
" Oh, it will be something worse, " she said. " And what shall
I do when papa and you leave me, and I am by myself? I
can't forget your words, Ellen, they are always in my ear.

200 W U T H E & I N G HEIGHTS.
How life will be changed, how dreary the world will be, when
papa and you are dead ! "
" None can tell whether you won't die before us, " I replied.
" It's wrong to anticipate evil — we'll hope there are years and
years to come before any of us go ; master is young, and I am
strong, and hardly forty-five. My mother lived till eiglity, a
canty dame to the last. And suppose Mr. Linlon were spared
till he saw sixty, that would be more years than you have
counted, miss. And would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity
above twenty years beforehand 1 "
" But aunt Isabella was younger than papa, " she remarked,
gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation.
" Aunt Isabella had not you and me to nurse her, " I replied.
" She wasn't as happy as master; she hadn't as much to live
for. All you need do is to wait well on your father, and cheer
him by letting him see you cheerful ; and avoid giving him anx-
iety on any subject — mind that, Cathy ! I'll not disguise but
you might kill him, if you were wild and reckless, and cheiisb-
ed a foolish, fanciful affection for the son of a person who would
be glad to have him in his grave, and allowed him to discover
that you fretted over the sepai'ation he has judged it expedient
to make. "
" I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness, " answer-
ed my companion. " I care for nothing in coniparison with
papa. And I'll never — never— Oh, never, while I have my
senses, do an act, or say a word to vex him. I love him better
than myself, Ellen; and I know it by this — I pi*ay every night
that I may live after him ; because I would rather be miserable
than that he should be — that proves I love him better than my-
self. " .
" Good words, " I replied. " But deeds must prove it also ;
and after he fa well, remember you don't forget resolutions
formed in the hour of fear. "
As we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road ; and
my young lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up, and
seated herself on the top of the wall, reaqhing over to gather
some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the
wild rose trees, shadowing the highway side; the lower fruit
had disappeared, but only birds could touch the upper, except
from Cathy's present station.
In stretching to pull them, her hat fell off; and as the door
was locked, she proposed scrambling down to recover it. I bid
h
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS. 201
her be cautious lest sbe got a fall, and she nimbly disap
peared.
But the retuni was no such easy matter; the stones were
61X1 ooth and neatly cemented, and the rosebushes and blackberry
stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending. I, like a
fool, didn't recollect that till I heard her laughing, and exclaim-
ing—
*'Ellen ! you'll have to fetch the key» or else I must run round
to the porter's lodge. I can't scale the ramparts on this side ! "
" Stay where you are, " I answered ; *'I have my bundle of
keys in my pocket ; perhaps I may manage to open it ; if not,
I'll go. "
Catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the
door, while I tiied all the large keys in succession. I had ap-
plied the last, and found that none would do ; so, repeating my
desire that she would remain there, I was about to nnrry home
as fast as I could, when an approaching sound arrested me. It
was the trot of a horse ; Cathy's dance stopped, and in a minute
the horse stopped also.
" Who is that 1 " I whispered.
" Ellen, I wish you could open the door, " whispei-ed back my
companion, anxiously.
" Ho, Miss Linton V* cried a deep voice (the rider's). " I'm
glad to meet you. Don't be in haste to enter, for I have an ex-
planation to ask and obtain. "
" I shan't speak to you, Mr. Heathcliff ! " answered Catherine.
" Papa says you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and
me ; and Ellen says the same. "
" That is nothing to the purpose, " said Heathcliff. (He it
was.) " I don't hate my son, I suppose, and it is concerning
him that I demand your attention. Yes! you have cause to
blush. Two or three months since, were you not in the habit
of wiiting to Linton 1 — making love in play, eh ] You desei'ved,
both of you, flogging for that I You especially, the elder,, and
less sensitive, as it turns out. I've got your lettere, and if you
give me any pertness, I'll send them to your father. I presume
you grew weary of the amusement, and dropped it, didn't you]
Well, you dropped Linton with it, into a Slough of Despond.
He was in earnest — in love — really.. As true as I live, he's
dying for you — ^breaking his heart at your fickleness, not figura
tively, but actually. Though Hareton has made him a standing
jest for six weeks, and I have used more serious measures, and
802 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
attempted to frighten him out of his idiocy, he gets worse dailj,
and he*ll h^ under the sod before summer, unless you restore
him ! "
" How can you lie so glaringly to the poor child ! " I called
from the inside. " Pray ride on ! How can you deliberately
get up such paltry falsehoods 1 Miss Cathy, I'll knock the lock
off with a stone. You won't believe that vile nonsense. You
can feel in yourself, it is impossible that a person should die for
love of a stranger. "
" I was not aware there were eaves-droppers, " muttered the
detected villain. " Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you, but I don't
like your double dealing, " he added, aloud. " How could you
lie so glaringly as to affirm I hated the * poor child V And in-
vent bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-stones ? Cath-
erine Linton (the very name warms me), my bonny lass, I shall
be from home all this week — go and see if I have not spoken
truth ; do— there's a darling ! Just imagine your father in my
place, and Linton in yours ; then think how you would value
your careless lover, if he refused to stir a step to comfort you,
when your father himself entreated him ; and don't, from pure
stupidity, fall into the same error. I swear, on my salvation,
he's going to his grave, and none but you can save him ! "
The lock gave way, and I issued out.
" I swear Linton is dying, " repeated Heathcliff, looking hard
at me. " And grief and disappointment are hastening his death.
Nelly, if you won't let her go, you can walk over yourself. But
I shall not return till this time next week; and I think your
master himself would scarcely object to her visiting her cousin ! "
" Come in, " said I taking Cathy by the ai-m, and half forcing
her to re-enter, for she lingered, viewing, with troubled eyes,
the features of the speaker, too stem to expi'ess his inward
deceit.
He pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed —
" Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have little patience
with Linton, and Hareton and Joseph have less. I'll own that
he's with a harsh set. He pines for kindness as well as love,
and a kind word from you would be his best medicine. Don't
mind Mrs. Dean's cruel cautions, but be generous, and contrive
to see him. He dreams of you day and night, and can not be
persuaded that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor
call. "
I closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS. 203
in holding it ; and spreading my ninbrella, I drew my charge
undei*neath, for the rain began to drive through the moaning
branches of the trees, and warned us to avoid delay.
Our hurry prevented any comment on the encounter with
Heathcliff, as we stretched toward home ; but I divined instinct-
ively that Catherine's heart was clouded now in double dark-
ness. Her features were so sad, they did not seem hers : she
evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.
The master had retired to rest before we came in. Cathy
Btole to his room to inquire how he was ; he had fallen asleep.
She returned, and asked me to sit with her in the library. We
took our tea together ; and afterward she lay down on the rug,
and told me not to talk, for she vras weary.
I got a book, and pretended to read. As soon as she sup-
posed me absorbed m my occupation, she recommenced her
silent weeping : it appeared, at present, her favorite diversion.
I suffered her to enjoy it a while ; then I expostulated, deriding
and ridiculing all Mr. Heathcliff's assertions about his son, as
if I were certain she would coincide. Alas ! I hadn't skill to
counteract the effect his account had produced — ^it was just what
he intended.
" You may be right, Ellen, " she answered ; ** but I shall never
feel at ease till I know — and I must tell Linton it is not my fault
that I don't write, and convince him that I shall not change. "
What use wei^ anger and protestations against her silly cre-
dulity 1 We parted that night hostile ; but next day beheld me
on the road to Wuthering Heights, by the side of my i/rillful
young mistress's pony, I couldn't bear to witness her sorrow
— ^to see her pale, dejected countenance and heavy eyes — and I
yielded in the faint hope that Linton himself might prove, by
his reception of us, how little of the tale was founded on fact.
CHAPTER XXIIL
The rainy night had ushered in a misty morning — ^half frost,
half drizzle — and temporary brooks crossed our path, gurgling
from the uplands. My feet were thoroughly wetted; I was
cross and low, exactly the humor suited for making the most of
these disagreeable things. We entered the farmhouse by the
204 W < 7TH fiRII«{ a KSIOBT0.
kitchen way, to Ascertain whether Mr. Heathcliff were realljr
absent, because I put slight & ith in his own affirmation.
Joseph seemed sitting alone, in a sort of elysium, beside a
roaring fire, a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with
large pieces of toasted oat cake, and his black, short pipe in his
mouth. Catherine i*an to the hearth to warm herself. I askecl
if the master were in 1 My question remained so long unan-
swered, that I thought the old man had grown deaf, and I re-
peated it louder.
« Na— ay ! " he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose.
« Na — ay 1 yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough.*'
** Joseph, " cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from
the inner room, " how often am 1 to call you 1 There are only
a few red ashes nowi Joseph ! come this moment. "
Vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate declared
he had no ear for this appeal. The housekeeper and Hareton
were invisibles-one gone on an errand, and the other at his
work, probably. We knew Linton's tones, and entered.
" Oh, I hope you'll die in a gawet, staiTed to death ! " said
the boy, mistaking our approach for that of his negligent at,-
tendant.
He stopped on observing his en'or ; his cousin flew to him.
" Is that you, Miss Linton ] " he said, raising his head from
the arm of the great chair in which he reclined. ** No — don't
kiss me. It takes my breath— dear me ! Papa said you would
call, " continued he, after recovering a little from Catherine's
embrace, while she stood by, looking very contrite. " Will
you shut the door, if you please ] — you left it open, and those —
those detestable creatures won't bring coals to the fire. It's so
cold! "
I stiiTed up the cinders, and fetched a scuttlefiil myself. The
invalid complained of being covered .with ashes ; but he had a
tiresome cough, and looked feverish and ill, so I did not rebuke
his temper.
" Well, Linton, " murmured Catherine, when his corrugated
brow relaxed. " Are you glad to see me 1 Can I do you anv
goodl " ^ ^
" Why didn't you come before 1 " he said. " You should have
come, instead of writing. It tired me dreadfully writing those
long letters. I'd far rather have talked to you. Now, I can
neither bear to talk, nor any thing else. I wonder where Zillah
is ! Will you (looking at me) stef
step into the kitchen and see 1 "
WUTHBHINO HEIGHT 9. 205
I had received no thanks for my other service ; and being un-
willing to run to and fro at his behest, I replied —
" Nobody is out there but Joseph. "
" I want to drink, " he exclaimed, fretfully turning away.
^'Zillah is constantly gadding off to Gimmeiton since papa went.
It's miserable ! And I'm obliged to conoe down here — they
resolved never to hear me up stairs. "
** Is your father attentive to you, Master Heathclifif? " I asked,
perceiving Catheiine to be checked in her ftiendly advances.
*'Attentive ? He makes them a little more attentive, at least, "
he cried. " The wretches ! Do you know, Miss Linton, that
brute Hareton laughs at me 1 I hate him — indeed^ I hate them
sUl — ^tbey are odious beings. "
Cathy began searching for some water; she lij^ted on a
l^itcher in the dresser^ filed a tumbler, and brought it. He bid
her add a spoonful of wkie from a bottle on the table ; and, hav-
ing swallowed a small poition, appeared more tranquil, and said
^he was very kind,
" And are you glad to see me V* asked she, reiterating her
^ormer question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a smile.
" Yes, I aja. It's something new to hear a voice like youral "
he rej^lied, " but I have been vexed, because you wouldn't come.
And papa swore it was owing to me ; he called me a pitiful,
shuffling, worthless tiling, and said you despised me ; and if he
had been in my place he ;vfould be more the master of the
Grange than your father by this time. But you don't despise
me, do you Miss — "
" I wish you would say Catherine, or Cathy! " interrupted my
voung lady. " Despise you 1 No ! Next to papa, and Ellen,
I love you better than any body living. I don't love Mr. Heath-
cliff, though ; and I dare not come when he returns ; will he stay
^way many days 1 "
•• Not many : " answered Linton, but he goes to the moors
frequently, since the shooting season commenced, and you might
spend an hour or two with me in his absence. Do say you will !
I think I should not be peevish with you ; you'd not provoke
me, and you'd always be ready to help me, wouldn't you 1 "
'* Yes, " said Catherine, strolang his long, soft hair ; " if I could
only get papa's consent, I'd spend half my time with you. Pretty
Linton ! I wish you were my brother 1 "
" And then you would like me as well as your father 1 " ob-
served he more cheerfully. " But papa says you would love me
WUTHERIIVG HBIOHTS.
better than him and all the world, if you were my wife — so I'd
rather you were that I "
*'No ! I should never love any body better than papa, " she
returned gravely. " And people hate their wives, sometimes ;
but not their sisters and brothers, and if you were the latter, you
would live vnth. us, and papa would be as fond of you, as he is
of me. "
Linton denied that people ever hated their vnves ; but Cathy
affirmed they did, and in her wisdom, instanced his own father's
aversion to her aunt. I endeavored to stop her thoughtless
tongue. I couldn't succeed, till every thing she knew was out.
Master Heathcliff, much irritated, asserted her relation was false.
" Papa told me ; and papa does not tell falsehoods ! " she an-
swei'ed, pertly.
** My papa scorns yours ! " cried Linton. " He calls him a
sneaking fool ! "
" Yours is a wicked man, " retorted Catherine, " and you are
very naughty to dare to repeat what he says. He must be
wicked, to have made aunt Isabella leave him as she did ! "
•*She didn't leave him, " said the boy. " You shan't contra-
dict me ! "
" She did ! " cried my young lady.
" Well I'll tell you something ! " said Linton. " Your mother
hated your father; now then. "
** Oh ! " exclaimed Catherine, too enraged to continue.
** And she loved mine ! " added he.
" You little liar ! I hate you now, " she panted, and her face
grew red with passion.
" She did ! she did ! " sang Linton, sinking into the recess of
his chair, and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the
other disputant, who stood behind.
" Hush, Master Heathcliff! " I said, " that's your fathei's tale
too, I suppose. "
" It isn't— you hold your tongue ! " he answered, " she did,
she did, Catherine, she did, she did ! "
Cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and
caused him to fall against one arm. He was immediately seized
by a suffocating cough, that soon ended his triumph. It lasted
so long that it frightened even me. As to his cousin, she wept
with all her might, aghast at the mischief she had done, though
she said nothing. I held him, till the fit exhausted itself. Then
he thrust me away, and leaned his head down, silently. Cathe-
WUTHEEINO HEIGHTS. 207
line quelled her lamentationB also, took a seat opposite, and
looked solemnly into die fire.
" How do you feel now, Master Heathcli£^ " I inquired, after
waiting ten minutes.
** I wish she felt as I do, " he replied, " spiteful, cruel thing !
Hareton never touches me, he never struck me in his life. And
I was better to-day — and there " — his voice died in a whimper.
" I didn't strike you ! " muttered Cathy, chewing her lip to
prevent another burst of emotion.
He sighed and moaned like one under great suffering ; and
kept it up for a quarter of an hour, on purpose to distress his
cousin, apparently, for whenever he caught a stifled sob from
her, he put renewed pain and pathos into the inflections of his
voice.
" I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton ! " she said at length, racked
beyond endurance. *'But I couldn't have been hurt by that
little push; and I had no idea that you could, either — you're
not much, are you, Linton 1 Don't let me go home, thinking
I've done you harm ! answer, speak to me.'^
" I can't speak to you, " he murmured, " you've hurt me so
that I shall lie awake all night, choking with this cough. If you
had it you'd know what it was — but you'U be comfortably
asleep, while I'm in agony — and nobody near me ! I wonder
how you would like to pass those fearful nights ! " And he be-
gan to wail aloud for very pity of himself.
" Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights, " I
said, " it won't be Miss who spoils your ease ; you'd be the
same, had she never come. However, she shall not disturb you
again — and perhaps you'll get quieter when we leave you. "
" Must I go 1 " asked Catherine dolefully, bending over him.
" Do you want me to go, Linton 1 "
" You can't alter what you've done 1 " he replied pettishly,
shrinking from her, " unless you alter it for the worse, by teas-
. ing me into a fever I "
" Well, then I musrgo 1 " she repeated.
" Let me alone, at least, " said he ; " I can't bear your talk
She lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure, a
tiresome while, but as he neither looked up nor spoke, she
finally made a movement to the door, and I followed. We
were recalled by a scream. Linton had slid from his seat upon
the hearthstone, and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an
J
J208 WUTEBRINO HEIGHTg.
indulged plague of a child, determined to be as grievous anci
harassing as it can. I thoroughly gauged his disposition from
his behavior, and saw at once it would be folly to attempt hu-
moring him. Not so my companion, she ran back in terror,
knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till he grew
quiet from lack of breath, by no means from compunction a«
distressing her.
** 1 shall lift him upon the settle,''I said, *'and he may loll
about as he pleases ; we can't stop to watch him. I hope you
are satisfied. Miss Cathy, that you are not the person to benefit
him, and that his condition of health is not occasioned by at-
tachment to you. Now then, there he is ! Come away ; as
soon as he knows there is nobody by to care for his nonsense,
he'll be glad to lie still ! "
She placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some
water, he rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former,
as if it were a stone, or a block of wood. She tried to put it *
more comfortably.
" I can't do with that, " he said,''it's not high enough ! "
Catherine, brought another to lay above it.
" That's too high ! " murmured the provoking thing.
" How must I arrange it, then 1 " she asked, despairingly.
He twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle,
and converted her shoulder into a support.
" No, that won't do ! " I said. " You'll be content with the
cushion, Master Heathclifi*! Miss has wasted too much time
on you already ; we can not remain five minutes longer. "
" Yes, yes, we can ! " replied Cathy. " He's good and pa-
tient, now. He's beginning to think I shall have far greater
misery than he will, to-night, if I believe he is the worse for my
visit ; and then I dare not come again. Tell the truth about it,
Linton— *for I mustn't come if I have hurt you. "
" You must come to cure me, " he answered. " You ought
to come because you have hurt me. You know you have, ex-
tremely ! I was not as ill when you entered as I am at present
— wasir
" But you've made yourself ill by crying, and being in a paa^
Bion. "
" I didn't do it all, " said his cousin. " However, we'll be
friends now. And you want me — you would wish to see me
sometimes, really ? "
" I told you I did ! " he replie4 impatiently. " Sit on the set-
•WCTHKRINO HEIOHT0. 2C9
tie, and let me lean on your knee. That's as mamma used to
do, whole afternoons together. Sit quite still, and don't talk,
but you may sing a song if you can sing, or you may say a nice
long interesting ballad^^one of those you promised to teach
me, or a story — ^I'd rather have a ballad though ; begin. "
Catherine repeated the longest she could remember. The
employment pleased both mightily. Linton would have another,
and after that another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections ;
and so they went on until the clock struck twelve, and we heard
Hareton in the court, returning for his dinner.
" And to-morrow, Catherine ; will you be here to-morrow 1 "
asked young Heathcliff, holding her frock, as she rose reluc-
tantly.
" No ! " I answered, " nor next day neither. " She, however,
gave a different response, evidently, for his forehead cleared, bb
•she stooped, and whispered in his ear.
" You won't go to-morrow, recollect, Miss ! " I commenced,
when we were out of the house. *'You are not dreaming of it»
are you V*
She smiled.
" Oh, I'll take good care ! " I continued, " I'll have that lock
mended, and you can escape by no way else. "
" I can get over the wall, " she said, laughing. " The Grange
is not a prison, Ellen, and you are not my jailer. And besides,
I'm almost seventeen. I'm a woman — and I'm certain Linton
would recover quickly if he had me to look afber him. I'm
older than he is, ^ou know, and wiser, less childish, am I not ?
And he'll soon do as I direct him, with some slight coaxing.
He's a pretty little darling when he's good. I'd make such a
pet of him, if he were mine. We should never quarrel, should
we, after we were used to each other 1 Don't you like him,
Ellen r'
" Like him 1 " I exclaimed. " The worst tempered bit of a
sickly slip that ever struggled into its teens I Happily, as Mr.
Heathcliff conjectured, he'll not win twenty ! I doubt whether
he'll see spring indeed — and small loss to his family, whenever
he drops off; and lucky it is for us that his father took him.
The kinder he was treated, the more tedious and selfish he'd
be ! I'm glad you have no chance of having him for a husband
Miss Catherine ! "
My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. To
speak of his death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.
i
210 WUTHEEINO HEI0HT8.
''He's younger than I, " she answered, after a protracced
pause of meditation, " and he ougbt to live the longest, he will —
be must live as long as I do. He's as strong now as when he
first came into the north, I'm positive of that ! It's only a cold
that ails him, the same as papa has. You say papa will get
better, and why shouldn't he 1 "
" Well, well, " I cried, " after all, we needn't trouble our-
selves ; for listen, Miss, and mind, I'll keep my word. If you
attempt going to Wuthering Heights again, with, or without
me, I shall imorm Mr. Linton, and unless he allow it, the inti-
macy with your cousin must not be revived. "
*'It has been revived ! " muttered Cathy, sulkily.
" Must not be continued, then V* 1 said.
" We'll see ! " was her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leav-
ing me to toil in the rear.
W'e both reached home before our dinner-time; my mas-
ter supposed we had been wandering through the park, and
therefore he demanded no explanation of our absence. As
soon as I entered, I hastened to change my soaked shoes and
stockings ; but sitting such a while at the Heights, had done
the mischief. On the succeeding morning I was laid up ; and
during three weeks I remained incapacitated for attending to
my duties — a calamity never experienced prior to that period,
and never, I am thankful to say, since.
My little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait
on me, and cheer my solitude ; the confinement brought me
exceedingly low. It is wearisome to a stirring active body —
but few have slighter reasons for complaint than I had. The
moment Catherine left Mr. Linton's room, she appeared at my
bedside. Her day was divided between us; no amusement
usurped a minute ; she neglected her meals, her studies, and
her play ; and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched ;
she must have had a warm heart, when she loved her & ,ther
so, to give so much to me ! I said her days were divided be-
tween us ; but the master retired early, and I generally needed
nothing after six o'clock, thus her evening was her own.
Poor thing, I never considered what she did with herself
after tea. And though frequently, when she looked in to bid
me good night I remarked a fresh color in her cheeks, and a
pinkness over her slender fingers ; instead of fancying the hue
borrowed from a cpld ride across the moors, I laid it to thti
charge of a hot fire in the library.
CHAPTER XXIV.
At the close of three weeks, I was ahle to quit my chamher,
and move about the house. And on the first occasion of my sit-
ting up in the evening, I asked Catherine to read to me, because
my eyes were weak. We were in the library, the master
having gone to bed ; she consented, rather unwillingly, I fan-
cied ; and imagining my sort of books did not suit her, I bid
her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
She selected one of her own favorites, and got forward stead-
ily about an hour ; then came frequent questions.
" Ellen, are you not tired ? Hadn't you better lie down now 1
You'll be sick, keeping up so long, Ellen. "
" No, no, dear, I'm not tired, " I returned, continually.
Perceiving me immovable, she essayed another method of
shovnng her disrelish for her occupation. It changed to yawn-
ing, and stretching, and —
" Ellen, I'm tired. "
" Give over then, and talk, " I answered.
That was worse ; she fretted and sighed, and looked at her
watch till eight ; and finally went to her room, completely over-
done with sleep, judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the
constant rubbing she inflicted on her eyes.
The following night she seemed more impatient still ; and on
the tl^rd she complained of a head-ache, and left me. I thought
her conduct odd ; and having i-emained alone a long while, I
resolved on going and inquiring whether she were better, and
asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of up-stairs, in
the dark.
No Catherine could I discover up-stairs, and none below.
The servants affiimed they had not seen her. I listened at Mr.
Edgar's door — all was silence. I returned to her apartment,
extinguished my candle, and seated myself in the window.
The moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the
ground, and I reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it
into her head to walk about the garden, for refreshment. I did
detect a figure creeping along the inner fence of the park ; but
it was not my young mistress ; on its emerging into the light, I
214 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
At last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the right weather
came ; and then we kissed each other and were friends. After
sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room with its smooth,
uncaq > eted floor ; and thought how nice it would be to play in,
if we removed the table ; and I asked Linton to call Zillah in to
help us — and we'd have a game at blind-man's buff — she shoald.
try to catch us — you used to, you know, Ellen. He wouldn't ;
there was no pleasure in it, he said; but he consented to play
at ball with me. We found two, in a cupboard, among a Leap
of old toys ; tops, and hoops, and battledoors, and shuttlecocks.
One was marked C, and the other H. ; I wished to have the
C, because that stood for Catherine, and the H. might be i^r
Heathcliff, his name ; but the bran came out of H., and Linton
didn't like it
" I beat him constantly ; and he got cross again, and coughed,
and returned to his chair: that night, though, he easily recov-
ered his good humor ; he was charmed with two or three pretty-
songs — your songs, £llen ; and when I was obliged to go, he
begged and entreated me to come the following evening, and I
promised.
''Minny and I went flying home, as light as air : and I
dreamed of Wuthering Heights, and my sweet, darling cousin,
till morning.
. " On the morrow I was sad ; partly because you were poorly,
and partly that I wished my father knew and approved of my
excursions : but it was beautiful moonlight after tea ; and, as I
rode on, the gloom cleared.
" I shall have another happy evening, I thought to myself,
and what delights me more, my pretty Linton will.
" I trotted up their garden, and was turning round to the
back, when that fellow Earnshaw met me, took my bridle, and
bid me go in by the front entrance. He patted Minny's neck,
and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted
me to speak to him. I only told him to leave my horse alone,
or else it would kick him. He answered in his vulgar accent.
'''It wouldn't do mitch huit if it did ;'and surveyed its legs
with a smile.
" I was half inclined to make it try ; however, he moved ofi'
to open the door, and, as he raised the latch, he looked up to
the inscription above, and said, with a stupid mixture of awk-
wardness and elation :
" < Miss Catherine ! I can read yon, nah.'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 215
"'Wonderful/ I exclaimed.'Pray let us hear you — ^you
are grown clever !'
*'He spelled, and drawled over by syllables, the name-^
**'Hareton Eamshaw.'
"'And the figures V I cried, encouragingly, perceiving that
he came to a dead halt.
"'I can not tell them yet,'he answered.
^ * Oh, you dunce V ** I said, laughing heartily at his failure.
" The fool stared, with a grin hovenng about his lips, and a
scowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might
not join in my mirth ; whether it were not pleasant familiarity,
or what it really was, contempt. I settled his doubts by sud-
denly retrieving my gravity, and desiring him to walk away, for
I came to see Linton, not him.
** He reddened — I saw that by the moonlight— dropped his
hand from the latch, and skulked off, a picture of mortified
vanity. He imagined himself to be as accomplished as Linton,
I suppose, because he could spell his own name; and was
marvelously discomfited that I didn't think the same.
" Stop, Miss Catherine, dear ! " I interrupted. " I shall not
scold, but I don't like your conduct there. If you had remem-
bered that Hareton was your cousin, as much as Master Heath-
cliff, you would have felt how impioper it was to behave in
that way. At least, it was praiseworthy ambition for him to
desire to be as accomplished as Linton : and probably he did
not leam merely to show off; you had made him ashamed of
his ignorance before— I have no doubt; and he wished to
remedy it and please you. To sneer at his imperfect attempt
was very bad breeding — ^had you been brought up in his cir-
cumstances, would you be less rude 1 he was as quick and as
intelligent a child as ever you were, and I'm hurt that he should
be despised now, because that base Heathcliff has treated him
so unjustly. "
" Well, Ellen, you won't cry about it, will you 1 " she ex-
claimed, surprised at ray earnestness. " But wait, and you
shall hear if he conned his a b c, to please me ; and if it were
worth while being civil to the brute. I entered, Linton was
lying on the settle and half got up to welcome me.
" * I'm ill to-night, Catherine, love,'he said, * and you must
have all the talk, and let me listen. Come, and sit by me ; I
was sure you wouldn't break your word, and I'll make you
promise again, before you go.'
216 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
" I knew now that I mustn't tease him, as he was ill ; atB| I
spoke softly and put no questions, and avoided irritating hiils in
any way. I had brought some of my nicest books & > r him ; he
asked me to read a little of one, and I was about to comply,
when Eamshaw burst the door open, having gathered venom
with reflection. He advanced direct to us ; seized Linton by
the arm, and swung him off the seat.
** * Get to thy own room !'he said, in a voice almost inarticu-
late with passion, and his face looked swelled and furious.
'Take her there if she comes to see thee— thou shalin't keep
me out of this. Begone wi'ye both !'
« He swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer, nearly
throwing him into the kitchen ; and he clenched his fist, as I
followed, seemingly longing to knock me down. I was afraid,
for a moment, and I let one volume fiill ; he kicked it after me,
and shut us out.
" I heard a malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and, turning,
beheld that odious Joseph, standing rubbing his bony hands, and
quivering.
" * Aw wer sure he'd sarve ye eht ! He's a grand lad ! He's
gotten t'raight sperrit in him ! He knawis — aye, he knaws as
weel as aw do, who sud be t'maister yonder. £ch, ech, ech !
He mad ye skift properly ! Ech, ech, ech !'
"'Where must we go V I saiid to my cousin, disregarding the
old wretch's mockery.
" Linton was white and trembling. He was not pretty then,
Ellen. Oh, no ; he looked frightful, for his thin face and large
eyes were wrought into an expression of frantic, poweriess
fury. He grasped the handle of the door, and shook it; It
was fastened inside.
" * If you dotf t let me in I'll kill you— if you don't let me in
I'll kill you !'he rather shrieked than said.'Devil ! devil ! I'll
kill you, I'll kill you!'
''Joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.
« * Thear, that'» t'father !'he cried.'That's father ! We^ve
alias Bummut uh orther side in us. Niver heed, Hareton, lad —
dunnut be'feard — ^he can not get at thee !'
" I took hold of Linton's hands, and tried to pull him away ^
but he shrieked so shockingly that I dared not proceed. At last,
his cries were choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood
gushed £rom his mouth, and he fell on the ground.
" I ran into the yard, sick with t^nor, and called Ibr Zillah
WUTHERIN« HEIGHTS. 217
w^^load as I could. She Boon beard me ; sfae was milking the
cows in a shed behind the bam, and, harrying from her work,
she inquired what there was to do 1
" I hadn't breath to explain ; dragging her in, I looked about
£ > r Linton. Earnshaw^ had come out to examine the mischief
he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing up
stairs. Zillah and I ascended after him ; but he stopped me at
the top of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in, I must go
home. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, and I wnud
enter.
'* Joseph locked the door, and declared I should do'no sich
stuff,'and asked me whether I were'bahn to be as mad as
himr
''I stood crying, till the housekeeper re-appeared ; she affirm
ed he would be better in a bit ; but he couldn't do with that
shrieking and din, and she took me, and nearly carried me into
the house.
** Ellen, I was ready to tear my hair off my head ! I sobbed
and wept, so that my eyes were almost blind ; and the ruffian
you have such sympathy with stood opposite, presuming every
now and then to bid me * wisht,'and denying that it was his
fault ; and, finally, fiightened by my assertions that I would tell
papa, and he should be put in prison and hanged, he commenced
blubbering himself, ana hurried out to hide his cowardly agita-
tion. Still I was not rid of him. When at length they com-
pelled me to depart,'and I had got some hundred yards off the
premises, he suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side,
and checked Minny and took hold of me.
** * Miss Catherine, I'm ill grieved,'he began,'but it's rayther
too bad'
" I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking, perhaps he
would murder me. He let go, thundering one of his horrid
curses, and I galloped home, more than half out of my senses.
*'I didn't bid you good-night that evening ; and I didn't go
to Wuthering Heights the next. I wished to exceedingly ; but
I was strangely excited, and dreaded to hear that Linton was
dead, sometimes, and sometimes shuddered at the thought of
encountering Hareton.
" On the third day I took courage — at least I couldn't bear
longer suspense — and stole off once more. I went at five
o'clock, and walked, fancying I might manage to creep into the
house, and up to Linton's room, unobserved. Howev^ " *
K
218 W0THEBINO HEIGHTS.
dogs g^ve notice of my approacb ; Zillah received me, and say-
ing,'the lad was mending nicely/ showed me into a small, tidy,
cai-peted apartment, wbere, to my inexpressible joy, I beheld
Linton laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books. But be
would neither speak to me nor look at me through a whole
hour, Ellen. He has such an unhappy temper ; and what quite
confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was to utter
the falsehood, that I had occasioned the uproar, and Hareton
was not to blame !
" Unable to reply, except passionately, I got up, and walked-
from the room. Ho sent after me a fiimt * Catherine V he did
not reckon on being answered so— but I wouldn't turn back ;
and the morrow was the second day on which I stayed at home,
nearly determined to visit him no more.
** But it was so miserable going to bed, and getting up, and
never hearing any thing about him, that my resolution melted
into air, before it was properly formed. It had appeared wrong
to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong to refrain.
Michael came to ask if he must saddle Minny ; I said'Yes,'
and considered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the
hills. I was forced to pass the front windows to get to the
court ; it was no use trying to conceal my presence.
**'Young master is in the house,'said Zillah, as she saw me
making for the parlor.
" I went in ; Eamshaw was there also, but he quitted the
room directly. Linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep ;
walking up to the fire, I began in a serious tone, partly mean-
ing it to be true.
** * As you don't like me, Linton, and as you think I come on
purpose to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time, this is
our last meeting — ^let us say good bye ; and tell Mr. Heathcliff
that you have no wish to see me, and that he mustn't invent any
more falsehoods on the subject.'
** * Sit down and take your hat off, Catherine,'he answered.
*You are so much happier than I am, you ought to be better.
Papa talks enough of my defects, and shows enough scorn of
me, to make it natural I should doubt myself I doubt whether
I am not altogether as worthless as he calls me, frequently ; and
then I feel so cross and bitter, I hate every body ! I am worth-
less, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, almost always — and
if you choose, you may say good bye — you'll get rid of an an-
noyance. Only, Catherine, do me this justice; believe that if I
WUTHBRlNtf HBiaHTB. 310
might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, I would
be, as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy. And,
believe that your kindness has made me love you deeper than
if I deserved your love, and though I couldn't, and cannot help
showing my nature to you, I regret it, and repent it, and shaU
regret, and repent it, till I die !'
'* I felt be spoke the truth ; and I felt I must forgive him ; and,
though he should quarrel the next moment, I must forgive him
again. We were reconciled, but we cried, both or us, the
whole time I stayed. Not entirely for sorrow, yet I w < i8 Bonj
Linton had that distorted nature. He'll never let his ftiends be
at ease, and he'll never be at ease himself!
" I have always gone to his little parlor, since that night ;
because his father returned the day aUer. About three times,
I think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were the first
evening ; the rest of my visits were oreary and ti'oubled — ^now
with his selfishness and spite ; and now with his suffeiings : but
I've learned to endure the former with nearly as little resent-
ment as the latter.
" Mr. Heathcliff purposely avoids me. I have hardly seen
bim at all. Last Sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, I
heard him abusing poor Linton, cruelly, for his conduct of the
night before. I can't tell how he knew of it, unless be listened.
Linton had certainly behaved provokingly ; however, it was the
business of nobody but me : and I interrupted Mr. Heathcliff's
lecture, by entering, and telling him so. He burst into a laugh,
and went away, saying be was glad I took that view of the
matter. Since then, I've told Linton be must whisper his bitter
things.
** Now, Ellen, you have heard all ; and I can't be prevented
from going to Wuthering Heights, except by inflicting misery
on two people— wbei-eas, if you'll only not tell papa, my going
need disturb the tranquillity of none. You'll not tell, will you 1
It will be very heartless if you do. "
" I'll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow. Miss
Catherine, " I replied. " It requires some study ; and so 111
leave you to your rest, and go think it over.*'
I thought it over aloud in my master's presence ; walking
straight from her room to bis, and relating the whole story with
the exception of her conversations with her cousin, and any
mention of Hareton.
Mr. Linton was alarmed and distressed more than he would
WUTHBRINO HE I « H T 8. *
acknowledge to me. In the morning, Catberine learned my
betrayal of her confidence, and sbe learned also that her secret
visits were to end.
In vain she wept and writhed against the interdict ; and im-
plored her fiither to have pity on Linton : all she got to comfort
ber was a promise that he would write, and give him leave to
come to the Grange when he pleased ; but explaining that be
must no longer expect to see Catherine at Wuthering Heights.
Perhaps, had he been aware of his nephew's disposition and
state of health, he would have seen fit to withhold even that
slight consolation.
CHAPTER XXV.
. These things happened last winter, sir,— -said Mrs. Dean. —
hardly more than a year ago. Last winter, I. did not think, at
another twelve months'end, I should be amusing a stranger to
the family with relating them ! Yet, who knows how long
you'll be a stranger? You're too young to rest always con-
tented, living by yourself; and I some way fancy no one could
see Catherine Linton, and not love her. You smile ; but why
do you look so lively and interested, when I talk about her —
and why have you asked me to hang her picture over your fire-
place? and why —
" Stop, my good friend ! " I cried. " It may be very possible
that I should love her ; but would she love me ? I doubt it
too much to venture my tranquillity, by running into tempta-
tion ; and then my home is not here. I'm of the busy world,
and to its arms I must i-etum. Go on. Was Catherine obedient
to her father's commands ] "
She was, continued the housekeeper. — Her affection for him
was still the chief sentiment in her heart; and he spoke without
anger; he spoke in the deep tenderness of one about to leave
his treasure amid perils and foes, where his remembered words
would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide her.
He said to me, a few days afi:erward,
" I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call. Tell me,
sincerely, what do you think of him ; is he changed for the better,
or is there a prospect of improvement, as ho grows a man 1 "
WUTHBBINO HEIGHT 0. 321
. " He's very delicate, sir, " I replied ; " and scarcely likely to
reacb manhood ; bat this I can say, bo does not resemble his
father ; and if Miss Catherine had the misfortune to marry him,
he would not be beyond her control, unless shawere extremely
and foolishly indulgent. However, master, you'll have plenty
of time to get acquainted with him, and see whether he would
Buit her ; it wants four years and ifiore to his being of age. "
Edgs^ sighed ; and, walking to the window, looked out to-
ward GiTmmerton Kirk. It was a misty afternoon, but the
February sun shone dimly, and we could just distinguish the
two fir-trees in the yard, and the sparely scattered gravestones.
" I've prayed often, " he half soliloquized, " for the approach
of what is coming ; and now I begin to shrink and fear it. I
thought the memory of the hour I came down that glen a bride-
groom, would be less sweet than the anticipation that I was
soon, in a few months, or, possibly weeks, to be carried up and
laid in its lonely hollow ! Ellen, I've been very happy with my
little Cathy. Through winter nights and summer days she was
a living hope at my side— but I've been as happy musing by
myself among those stones, under that old church — ^lying,
trough the long June evenings, on the green mound of her
mother's grave, and wishing, yearning for the time when I
might lie beneath it. What can I do for Cathy 1 How must
I quit her ? I'd not care one moment for Linton being Heath-
cliff's son ; nor for his taking her from me, if he could console
her for my loss. I'd not care that Heathcliff gained his ends,
and triumphed in robbing me of my last blessing ! But should
Linton be unworthy — only a feeble tool to his father — I can
not abandon her to him ! And, hard though it be to crush her
buoyant spirit, I must persevere in making her sad while I live,
and leaving her solitary when I die. Darling ! I'd rather re-
sign her to God, and lay her in the earth before me. "
" Resign her to God, as it is, sir, " I answei-ed, " and if we
should lose you — which may He forbid — under His providence
I'll stand her friend and counsellor to the last. Miss Catherine
is a good girl ; I don't fear that she will go willfully wrong; and
people who do their duty are always finally rewarded. "
Spring advanced ; yet my master gathered no real strength,
though he resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter.
To her inexperienced notions, this itself was a sign of con-
valescence ; and then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes
were bright ; she felt sure of his recoveiing.
222 WUTBERINQ H B I 6 H T 8.
Od her seventeenth birthday he did not visit the churchyard,
it was raining, and I observed —
" You'll surely not go out to-night, sir 1**
" No, I'll defer it, this year, a little longer, " he answered.
He wrote again to Linton, expressing his great desire to see
him ; and, had the invalid been presentable, I've no doubt his
father would have permitted him to come. As it was, being
instructed, he returned an answer, intimating that Mr. Heath-
cliff objected to his calling at the Grange ; but his uncle's kind
remembrance delighted him, and he hoped to meet bira some-
times in his rambles, and personally to petition that his cousin
and he might not remain long so utterly divided.
That part of his letter was simple, and, probably, his own.
Heathclifif knew he could plead eloquently enough for Catherine's
company. Then —
" I do not ask, " he said, " that she may visit here ; but am I
never to see her, because my father forbids me to go to her
home, and you forbid her to come to mine ? Do, now and
then, ride vidth her toward the Heights ; and let us exchange a
few words in your presence 4 we have done nothing to deserve
this separation ; and you are not angry with me— you have no
reason to dislike me— you allow yourself. Dear uncle ! send
me a kind note to-morrow ; and leave to join you any where
you please, except at Thrushcross G-range. I believe an inter-
view would convince you that my father's character is not
mine ; he affirms I am more your nephew than his son ; and
though I have faults which render me unworthy of Catherine,
she has excused them, and, for her sake, you should also. You
inquire after my health — it is better ; but while I remain cut
off from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or to the society
of those who never did, and never will like me, how can I be
cheerful and well 1 "
Edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to grant
his request; because he could not accompany Catherine.
He said, in summer, perhaps, they might meet ; meantime,
he wished him to continue writing at intervals, and engaged to
give him what advice and comfort he was able by letter ; being
well aware of his hard position in his family.
Linton complied; and bad he been unrestrained, would
probably have spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints
and lamentations ; but his father kept a sharp watch over him ;
and, of course, insisted on every line that mv master sent being
WUTBBRINa HEIGHTS.
shown ; so instead of penning his peculiar personal suflferings
and distresses, the themes constantly uppermost in his thoughts,
he harped on the cruel obligation of being held asunder from
his friend and love ; and gently intimated that Mr. Linton must
allow an interview soon, or he should fiaar he was purposely
dec^ving him with empty promises.
Cathy was a powerful ally at home : and, between them,
they, at length, persuaded my master to acquiesce in their
having a ride or a walk together, dbout once a week, under my
guardianship, and on the moors nearest the Grange ; for June
found him still declining ; and, though he had set aside yearly
a portion of his income for my young lady's fortune, he had a
natural desire that she might retain, or, at least, return in a
short time to the house of her ancestors ; and he considered
her only prospect of doing that was by a union with his heir :
he had no idea that the latter was failing almost as fast as him-
self; nor had any one, I believe ; no doctor visited the Heights,
and no one saw Master HeathclifF, to make report of his con-
dition among us.
I, for my part, began to fancy my forebodings were false,
and that he must be actually rallying, when he mentioned riding
and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in pursuing
his object. I could not picture a father treating a dying child
as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterward learned Heathcliff
had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness ; his efibits
redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling
plans were throatened with defeat by death.
CHAPTER XXVL
Summer was already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly
yielded his assent to their entreaties, and Catherine and I set
out on our first ride to join her cousin.
It was a close, sultry day, devoid of sunshine, but with a sky
too dappled and hazy to threaten rain ; and our place of meet-
ing had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads. On
arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, dispatched as a mes-
senger, told us that—
224 WUTHERINe HEIGHTS.
< * Maister Linton wer just ut this side th'Heights, and he'd be
mitch obleeeed to us to gang on a bit further. "
" Then Master Linton has forgot the first injunction of b»
uncle/'I observed : ** he bid us keep on the Grange land, and
here we are, off at once.''
" Well, we'll turn our hones'heads round when we reach
him, " answered my companion ; " our excursion shall lie toward
home. "
But when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter
of a mile from his own door, we found he had no horse, and we
were forced to dismount, and leave ours to graze.
He lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and did not rise
till we came within a few yards. Then he walked so feebly,
and looked so pale, that I immediately exclaimed —
" Why, Master Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ram-
ole this morning. How ill you do look ! "
Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment, and
changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm, and
the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious
inquiry whether he were worse than usual ?
" No— better — ^better ! " he panted, trembling, and retaining
her hand as if he needed its suppoit, while his lai'ge blue eyes
wandered timidly over her, the hollowness round them trans^
forming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once
" But you have been worse, " persisted his cousin, " worse
than when I saw you last— you are thinner, and — " (
" I'm tired, " he interinipted, hurriedly. " It is too hot far
walking : let us rest here. And in the morning I often feel sick
— papa says I grow so fast. "
Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her.
" This is something like your paradise, " said she, making an
effort at cheerfulness. " You recollect the two days we agreed
to spend in the place and way each thought pleasantest ? This
is nearly yours, only there are clouds ; but then, they are so
sofl and mellow, it is nicer than sunshine.- : Next we'ek, if you
can, we*ll ride down to the Grange Park, and try inine. " t .
Linton did not appear to remember what she talked of, and
he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of con-
versation. His lack of interest in the subjects she started, and
his equal incapacity to contribute to her entertainment, were so
obvious that she could not conceal her disappointment. An in-
WUTHERINO HEIGHT 8. 225
.'definite alteration had come over his whole person and manner.
The pettishness that might be caressed into fondness had yielded
to a listless apathy ; there was less of the peevish temper of a
child which frets and teases on purpose to be soothed, and more
of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling
consolation, and ready to regard the good-humored muth of
. others as an insult.
Catherine perceived, as well as I did, that he held it rather a
punishment than a gratification to endure our company ; and
she made no scruple of proposing, presently, to depart. That
proposal, unexpectedly, roused Linton firom his lethargy, and
threw him into a strange state of agitation. He glanced fear-
fully toward the Heights, begging she would remain another
half-hour at least.
" But, 1 think, " said Cathy, " you'd be more comfortable at
home than sitting here ; and I can not amuse you to-day, I see,
by my tales, and songs, and chatter. You have grown wiser
than I, in these six months ; you have little taste for my diver-
sions now ; or else, if I could amuse you, I'd willingly stay. "
" Stay to rest yourself, " he replied. " And, Catherine, don't
think or say that I'm very unwell — ^it is the heavy weather and
heat that make me'dull; and I wieilked about, before you came,
a great deal, for me. .*Tell uncle, I'm in tolerable health, vnll
youl " .'
'* I'll tell him that you say so, Linton. I couldn't affirm that
you are, " observed my young lady, wondering at his pertina-
cious assertion of what was evidiently an untruth.
. " And be here a^in next Thursday, " continued he, shunning
her puzzled gaze. V And give him my thanks for permitting
you to come — my best thanks, Catherine. And — and, if you
did meet my father, and ho asked " ^ you about me, don't lead
him to suppose that I've been extremely silent and stupid —
don't look sad and downcast, * as you are doing — she'll be
angry. "
" I care nothing for his anger, " exclaimed Cathy, imagining
she would be its object.
^ " But.I:do, " said her cousin, shuddering. ** Don't provoke
him'against rae, Catherine, for he is very hard. "
" Is he severe to you. Master Heathcliffl " I inquired.
" Has he grown weary of indulgence, and passed from passive
to active hatred ] "
Linton looked at me, but did not answer ; and, jift^r keeping
-J
S26 WUTHBKIN« HBIQBT8.
her seat by Yob side another ten miniites, during which bis head
fell drowsily on his breast, and he uttered nothing except sup*
pressed moans of exhaustion, or pain, Cathy began to seek
solace in looking for bilberries, and sharing the produce of her
researches with me : she did not offer them to him, & r she saw
further notice would only weary and annoy.
''Is it half an hour now, EUen ! " she whispered in my eai,
at last*'* I can't tell why we should stay. He's asleep, and
papa will be wanting us back. "
" Well, we must ppt leave him asleep, " I answered ; ** wait
till he wakes, and be patient. You were mighty eager to set
off, but your longing to see poor Linton has soon evaporated. "
«* Why did ke wish to see me 1 " returned Catherine. " In
his crossest humors, formerly, I liked him better than I do
in his present curious mood. It's just as if it v^re a task he
was compelled to perform — ^this interview— for fear his father
should scold him. But I'm hardly going to come to give Mr.
Heathcliff pleasure ; whatever reason he may have £: > r ordermg
Linton to undergo this penance. And, though I'm glad he's
better in health, I'm sorry he's so much less pleasant, and so
much less affectionate to me. "
''You think he is better in health, then V* I said.
*'Yes, " she answered ; ** because he always made such a
great deal of his sufferings, you know. He is not tolerably
well, as he told me to tell papa, but he's better, very likely. "
" There you differ with me, Miss Cathy, " I remarked ; " I
should conjecture him to be far worse. "
Linton here started from his slumber, in bewildered terror,
and asked if any one had called his name.
" No, " said Catheiine ; " unless in dreams. I can not con-
ceive how you manage to doze, out of doors, in the morning. "
" I thought I heard my father, " he gasped, glancing up to
the frowning nab above us. " You are sure nobody spoke V*
" Quite sure, " replied his cousin. " Only Ellen and I were
disputing concerning your health. Are you truly stronger,
Linton, thaii when we separated in winter 1 If you be, I'm
certain one thing is not stronger—- your regard for me-Hspeak,
are you 1 "
Tears gushed from Linton's eyes as he answered—
" Yes, yes, I am ! "
And, still under the spell of the imaginaiy voice, his gaxe
wandered up and down to detect its owner. Cathy roae.
WUTBRRINQ HEIGHT fl. 227
" For to-day we must part, " she said. " And I won't con-
ceal that I have been sadly disappointed with our meeting,
though I^]l mention it to nobody but you— not that I stand in
awe of Mr. Heathcliflf ! "
•* Hush, " murmured Linton ; " for God's sake, hush ! He's
coming. " And he clung to Catherine's arm, striving to detain
her ; but, at that announcement, she hastily disengaged herself,
and whistled to Minny, who obeyed her like a dog.
''I'll be here next Thursday, " she cried, springing to the
saddle. " Good bye. Quick, Ellen f "
And so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, ao
absorbed was he in anticipating his father's approach.
Before we reached home, Catherine's displeasure softened
into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended
with vague, uneasy doubts about Linton's actual circumstances,
physical and social ; in which I partook, though I counselled
her not to say much, for a second journey would make us better
judges.
My master requested an account of our ongoings : his neph-
ew's onering of thanks was duly delivered. Miss Cathy gently
touching on the rest : I also threw little light on his inquiries,
for J hardly knew what to hide and what to reveal.
CHAPTER XXVH.
Seven days glided Bvmy, every one marking its course by
the henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton's state. The
havoc that months had previously wrought was now emulated
by the inroads of houi-s. Catherine we would fain have de-
luded, yet but her own quick spirit refused to delude her. It
divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful probability,
gradually ripening into certainty.
She had not the heart to mention her ride, when Thursday
came round ; I mentioned it foi'her, and obtained permission
to order her out of doors ; for the library, where her father
stopped a short time daily, the brief period he could bear to sit
up, and the chamber, had become her whole world. She
grudged each moment that did not find her bending over hia
^4
:228 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
pillow, or seated by his side. Her countenance grew wan
with watching and sorrow, and my master gladly dismissed her
to what he flattered himself would be a happy change of
scene and society, drawing comfort from the hope that she
would not now be left entirely alone after his death.
He had a iixed idea, I guessed by several observations he
let fall, that as his nephew resembled him in person, he would
resemble him in mind ; for Linton's letters bore few, or no in-
dications of his defective character. And I, through pardon-
able weakness, refrained from correcting the eiTor ; asking my-
self what good there would be in disturbing his^last moments
with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to
turn to account.
We deferred our excursion till the afternoon ; a golden after-
noon of August— every breath firom the hills so full of life, that it
seemed whoever respired it, though dying, might- revive. Cath-
'erine's face was just like the landscape^shadows.and sunshine
flitting over it in rapid succession ; but the shadows rested long-
er and the sunshine was more transient, and her poor little
heart reproached itself for even that passing forgetfulness of
its cares.
We discerned Linton watching at the same spot he had se-
lected before. My young mistress alighted, and told me that
as she was resolved to stay a very little while, I bad better
hold the pony and remain on horseback; but I dissented, I
wouldn't risk losing sight of the charge committed to me a min-
ute ; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
'Master Heathclifl* received us with greater animation on this
occasion ; not the animation of high spirits, though, nor yet of
joy ; it looked more like fear.
" It is late ! " he said, speaking short, and with difficulty.
" Is not your father very ill ? I thought you wouldn't come. "
" Why won't you be candid ] " cried Catherine, swallowing
her greeting. " Why can not you say at once, you don't want
me % It is strange, Linton, that for the second time you have
brought me here on purpose, apparently, to distress us both,
and for no reason besides ! "
Linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half
ashamed, but his cousin's patience was not suflicient to endure
this enigmatical behavior.
" My father w very ill, " she said, " and why am I called from
his bedside — why didn't you send to absolve me from my prom-
WUTHERINQ HEIGHTS. 229
- iaOy when you wished I wouldn't keep it ? Come ! I desire an
> explanation — playing and trifling are completely banished out
of my mind ; and I can't dance attendance on your affectations
now ! "
" My affectations! " he murmured, " what are theyl For
heaven's sake, Catherine, don't look so angiy ! . Despise me as
much as you please; I am a woithless, cowardly wretch — I
can't be scorned enough ! but I'm too mean for your anger —
hate my father, and spare me — ^for contempt ! "
" Nonsense ! " cried Catherine, in a passion. ** Foolish, silly
boy ! And there ! he trembles, as if I were really going to
touch him ! You needn't bespeak contempt, Linton ; any body
will have it spontaneously at your service. Get off! I shall re-
turn home— it is folly dragging you from the hearth-stone, and
pretending — what do we pretend 1 Let go my frock — if I
pitied you for crying and looking so very fnghtened, you should
spurn such pity ! Ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is.
Rise, and don't degrade yourself into an abject reptile-^Aw'^. "
With streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton had
thrown his nerveless frame along the ground ; he seemed con-
vulsed with exquisite terror.
" Oh ! " he sobbed, " I can not bear it ! Catherine, Catherine,
I'm a traitor, too, and I dare not tell you ! But leave me and
I shall be killed! Dear Catherine, my life is in your hands;
and you have said you loved me — and if you did it wouldn't
harm you. You'l) not go, then ? kind, sweet, good Catheiine !
And -perhaps you wiU consent — and he'll let me die with you ! "
My young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to
raise faim. • The old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame
her vexation, and she grew thoi-oughly moved and alarmed.
" Consent to* what 1 " she asked. " To stay] Tell me the
meaning of this strange talk, and I will. You contradict your
own'words, and distract me! Be calm and frank, and confess
at once all that weighs on your heart. You wouldn't injure me,
Linton, would you T You wouldn't let any enemy hurt me, if
you could prevent it *? 1*11 believe your are a coward, for your-
self, but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend. "
" But my father threatened me, " gasped the boy, clasping
his attenuated fingers, " and I dread him — I dread him ! I dare
not tell! "
" Oh, well ! " said Catherine, with scornful compassion, " keep
your secret, Fm no coward — save youi-self, I'm not afraid ! "
230 WUTHBRINQ HSIGHT8.
Her magnanimity provoked hia tears ; he wept wildly; kiss-
ing her supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to
speak out.
I was cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined
Catherine should never suffer, .to benefit him or any one else, by
my good will. When, hearing a rustle among the ling, I looked
up, and saw Mr. Heathcliff almost close upon us, descending'
the Heights. He didn't cast a glance toward my companions,
though they were sufficiently near for Linton's sobs to be abdi-
ble ; but hailing me,, in the almost hearty tone he assumed to
none besides, and the sincerity of which I couldn't avoid doubt-
ing, he said,
" It is something to see you so near to my house, Nelly f
How are you at the Grange 1 Let us hear ! The inimor goes,''
he added in a lower tone, *'that Edgar Linton is on his death-
bed — ^perhaps they exaggerate his illness? "
" No ; my master is dying, " I replied, •'it is true enough.
A sad thing it will be for us all, but a blessing for him ! "
** How long will he last, do you think ] " he asked.
" I don't know, " I said.
" Because, " he continued, looking at the two young people,
who were fixed under his eye — Linton appeared as if he could
not venture to stir, or raise his head, and Catherine could not
move, on his account — " because that lad yonder, seems deter-
mined to beat me — and I'd thank his uncle to be quick and go
before him. Hallo ! Has the whelp been playing that game
longi I did give him some lessons about snivelling. Is he
pretty lively with Miss Linton generally 1 "
** Lively 1 no— he has shown the greatest distress ; " I answer-
ed. " To see him, I should say that, instead of rambling with
his sweetheart on the hills, he ought to be in bed, under the
hands of a doctor. "
" He shall be, in a day or two, " muttered Heathcliff *'But
firat — get up, Linton ! Get up ! " he shouted* ** Don't grovel
on the ground there — up this moment ! "
Linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of
helpless fear, caused by his father's glance toward him, I sup-
pose ; there was nothing else to produce such humiliation. He
made several efforts to obey, but his little strength was anni-
hilated, for the time, and he fell back again with a moan. Mr.
Heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean against a ridge of
turf.
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 281
" Now, " said he with curbed ferocity, " I'm getting angry —
and if you don't command that paltry spirit of yours — Damn
you! Get up, directly ! "
'* I will, father 1 " he panted. " Only, let me alone, or I shall
faint ! I've done as you wished, I'm sure. Catherine will tell
you that I — that I — ^have been cheeriuL Ah ! keep by me,
Catherine ; give me your hand. "
''Take mine, " said his father ; « stand on your feet ! There
now — she'll lend you her arm — ^that's right — look at her. You
would imagine I was the devil himself. Miss Linton, to excite
such horror. Be so kind as to walk home with him, will you ?
He shudders if I touch him. "
'* Linton, dear, " whispered Catherine, " I can't go to Wuth-
ering Heights — ^papa has forbidden me. He'll not haitn you,
why are you so afraid ^ "
'* I can never re enter that house, " he answered. *'I am m^
to re-enter it without you. "
" Stop— " cried his father. " We'll respect Catherine's filial
scruples. Nelly, take him in, and I'll follow your advice con-
cei-ning the doctor, without delay. "
" You'll do well, " replied I, " but I must remain with my
mistress. To mind your son is not my business. "
" You are very stiff! " said Heathcliff, " I know that — ^but
you'll force me to pinch the baby, and make \l scream, before it
moves your charity. Come, then, my hero, are you willing to
return, escorted by me 1 "
He approached once more, and made as if he would seize
the fi*agile being ; but shrinking back, Linton clung to his cousin,
and implored her to accompany him, with a frantic importunity
that admitted no denial.
However I disapproved, I couldn't hinder her ; indeed how
could she have refused him herself] What was filling him with
dread we had no means of discerning ; but there he was, pow-
erless under its gripe, and any addition seemed capable of
shocking him into idiocy. We reached the threshold ; Cathe-
rine walked in; and I stood waiting till she had conducted the
invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately, when Mr
Heathcliff, pushing me forward, exclaimed, —
''My house is not stricken with the plague, Nelly ; and I
have a mind to be hospitable to-day ; sit down, and allow me to
shut the door. "
He shut and locked it also. I started.
WUTHBRING HEIGHTS.
" You shall have tea before you go home, " he added.'* " I
am by myself. Hareton is gone with some cattle to the Lees
— ana Zillah and Joseph are off on a journey of pleasura. And,
though Pm used to being alone,. I'd rather have some interesting
company if I can get it Miss Linton, take your seat by kim,
I give you what I have ; the present is hardly woith accepting ;
but I have nothing else to offer— it is Linton I mean. How
she does stare ! It's odd what a savage feeling I have to any
thing that seems afraid of me ! Had I been bom where laws
are less strict, and tastes less dainty, I should treat myself to a
slow vivifisection of those two, as an evening's amusement. "
He drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to him-
self,
" By hell! I hate them. " *
" I'm not afraid of you ! " exclaimed Catherine, who could
not hear the latter part of his speech.
She stepped close up ; her black eyes flashing with passion
and resolution.
•* Give me that key — I will have it ! " she said. " I wouldn't
eat or drink here if I were starving. "
Heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the
table. He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at her
boldness, or, possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the
person from whom she inherited it.
She snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in getting
it out of his loosened fingers ; but her action recalled him to the
present ; he recovered it speedily.
" Now, Catherine Linton, " he said, " stand off, or I shall
knock you down ; and that will make Mrs. Bean mad. "
Regardless of this waniing, she captured his closed hand, and
its contents again.
" We vnll go ! " she repeated, exerting her utmost efforts to
cause the iron muscles to relax ; and finding that her nails made
no impression, she applied her teeth pretty sharply.
Heathcliff glanced at me a glance that kept me from interfeiing
a moment. Catherine was too intent on his fingers to notice his
face. He opened them, suddenly, and resigned the object of
dispute ; but, ere'she had well secured it, he seized her with the
liberated hand, and, pulling her on his knee, administered, vrith
the other, a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head,
each sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to
fall.
WUTHERINO HEIGHTS. 233
At this diabolical violence, I rushed on him furiously,
** You villain ! " I began to cry, " you villain ! "
A touch on the chest silenced me ; I am stout, and soon put
out of breath ; and, what with that and the rage, I staggered
dizzily back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a blood-
vessel.
The scene was over in two minutes; Catherine, released,
put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were
not sure whether her ears were off or on. She trembled like a
reed, poor thing, and leaned against the table perfectly bewil-
dered.
'" I know how to chastise children, yoii see, " said the scoun-
drel^ grimly, as he stooped to repossess himself of the key,
which had dropped to the floor. " Go to Linton now, as I told
you ;. and cry at your ease ! I shall be your father to-morrow
— all the father you'll have in a few days — and you shall have
plenty of that — you can bear plenty — you're no weakling — you
shall have a daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a temper in
your eyes again ! "
Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down, and put
her burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. Her cousin had
shrunk into a corner of the settle, as quiet as a mouse, con-
gi-atulating hinaself, I dare say, that the correction had lighted
on another than him.
'Mr. Heathcliff, perceiving us all confounded, rose, and ex-
peditiously made the tea himself. The cups and saucers were
laid ready. He poured it out, and handed me a cup.
" Wash away your spleen, " he said. " And help your own
naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned, though I prepared it.
I'm going out to seek your horses. "
Our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit
somewhere. We tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened
outside ; we looked at the windows — ^they were too narrow for
even Cathy's little figure.
" Master Linton, " I cried, seeing we were regularly imprison-
ed, " you know what your diabolical father is after, and you
shall tell us, or I'll box your ears, as he has done your
cousin's. "
" Yes, Linton ; you must tell, " said Catherine. " It was for
your sake I came ; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you
refuse. "
" Give me some, tea, I'm thii-sly, and then I'll tell you, "
234 WUTHSRIVa 9«iohtb.
he answered. ** Mm. Dean, go away. I don't like you stand-
ing over me. Now, Catherine, you are letting your tears fall
into niy cup ! " I won't drink that. Give me another. "
Catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. I felt
disgusted at the little wretch's composure, since he was uo
longer in terror for himself The anguish he had exhibited on
the moor subsided as soon as ever he entered Wutheiing Heights ;
80 I guessed he had been menaced with an awful visitation of
wrath, if he failed in decoying us there ; and, that accomplished,
he had no further immediate fears.
*'Papa wants us to be married/'he continued, after sipping
some of the liquid. ** And he knows ^our papa wouldn't let us
mairy now ; and he's afraid of my dying if we wait ; so we are
to be married in the moiiiing, and you are to stay here all night ;
and if you do as he wishes you shall return home next day, and
take me with you. "
** Take you vsdth her, pitiful changeling 1 " I exclaimed.
*'You marry 1 Why, the man is mad, or he thinks us fools,
every one. And do you imagine that beautiful young lady, that
healthy, hearty girl, will tie herself to a little perishing monkey
like you ] Are you cherishing the notion that ant/ body, let alone
Miss Catherine Linton, would have you for a husband % You
want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with your dastardly^
puling tricks ; and — don't look so silly now ! I've a very good
mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery,
and your imbecile conceit. "
I did give him a slight shaking, but it brought on the cough,
and he took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping,
and Catherine rebuked me.
" Stay all night] No! " she said, looking slowly round.
*'Elien, I'll bum that door down, but I'll get out. "
And she would have commenced the execution of her threat
directly, but Linton was up in alarm, for his dear sel^ again. He
clasped her in his two feeble arms, sobbing —
" Won't you have me, and save me — not let me come to the
Grange] Oh! darling Catherine! you mustn't go, and leave
me, after all. You mtist obey my father, you must / "
" I must obey my own, " she replied, " and relieve him from
this cruel suspense. The whole night 1 What would he think %
He'll be distressed already. " I'll either break or burn a way
out of the house. Be quiet I You're in no danger — ^but if you
hinder aie, Linton-'^I love papa better than you ! "
WUTHB & ING HEIOHT6. 295
The mortal terror he felt of Mr. HeathclifiTs anger, restored
to the boy his coward's eloquence. Catheiine was near dis-
traught — still she persisted that she must go home, and tried
entreaty, in her turn, persuading him to subdue his selfish agony.
While they were thus occupied, our jailer re-entered.
** Your beasts have trotted off,''he said ; ** and — now, Lin-
ton 1 sniveling again 1 What has she been doing to you ? Come,
come, have done, and get to bed. In a month or two, my lad,
you'll be able to pay her back her present tyrannies, with a vig-
orous hand — you're pining for pure love, aie you not ? nothing
else in the world — and she shall have you 1 There, to bed !
Zillah won't be here to night— you must undress yourself.
Hush ! hold your noise ! Once in your own room, I'll not come
near you, you needn't fear. By chance, you've managed toler-
ably. I'll look to the rest. "
He spoke these words, holding the door open fi)r his son to
pass ; and the latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might
which suspected the person who attended on it of designing a
flpiteful squeeze.
The lock was re-secured. Heathclifif approached the fire,
where my mistress and I stood silent. Catherine looked up,
and instinctively raised her hand to her cheek — his neighbor-
hood revived a painful sensation. Any body else would have
been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness, but
he scowled on her, and muttered—
" Oh, you are not afraid of me ] Your courage is well dis-
guised — you *eem damnably afraid ! "
" I am afiaid now, " she replied ; " because if I stay, papa
vein be miserable ; and how can I endure making him miserable
— when he— when he — Mr. Heathcliff, let me go home! I
promise to marry Linton — ^papa would like me to, and I love
lum — and why should you wish to force me to do what I'll
willingly do of myself 1 "
** Let him dare to force you ! " I cried. " There's law in the
land, thank God, there is! though we be in an out-of-the-way
place. I'd inform, if he were my own son, and it's felony
without benefit of clergy ! "
" Silence ! " said the ruffian. " To the devil with your clamor !
I don't want you to speak. Miss Linton, I shall enjoy myself
remarkably in thinking your father will be miserable ; 1 shall
not sleep for satisfaction. You could have hit on no surer way
of fixing your residence under my roof, for the next twenty-

236 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
four hours, than informing me that such an event would follow.
As to your promise to marry Linton, I'll take care you shall
keep it, for you shall not quit the place till it is fulfilled.'*
** Send Ellen then, to let papa know I'm safe ! " exclaimed
Catherine, weeping bitterly. " Or marry me now. Poor papa !
Ellen, he'll think we're lost. What shall we do V
" Not he ! He'll think you are tii-ed of waiting on him, and
run off for a little amusement, " answered HeaUicliff. " You
can not deny that you entered my hoiise of your own accord, in
contempt of his injunctions to the contrary. And it is quite
natural that you should desire amusement at your age ; and that
you should weary of nursing a sick man, and that man only
your father. Catherine, his happiest days were over when your
days began. He cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the
world — -I did, at least. And it would just do if he cursed yoa
as he went out of it. I'd join him. I don't love you ! How
should 1 1 Weep away. As far as I can see, it will be your
chief diversion hereafter, unless Linton make amends for other
losses, and your provident parent appears to fancy he may.
His letters of advice and consolation entertained me vastly. In
his last, he recommended my jewel to be careful of. his ; and
kind to her when he got her. Careful and kind — ^that's patej^al !
But Linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for
himself. Linton can play the little tyrant well. He'll under-
take to torture any number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and
their claws pared. You'll be able to tell his uncle fine tales of
his kindness, when you get home again, I assure you.''»
" You're right there 1 " I said, " explain your son's, character.
Show his resemblance to yourself; and then, I hope. Miss
Cathy will think twice, before she takes the cockatrice !*'
" I don't much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now, "
he answered, ^* because she must either accept him, or remain
a prisoner, and you along with her, till your master dies. I
can detain you both, quite concealed, here. If you doubt,
encourage her to retract her word, and you'll have an oppor-
tunity of judging! "
" I'll not retract my word, " said Catherine. ** I'll marry
him, within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange after-
wai-d. Mr. Heathcliff, you're a cruel man, but you're not a
fiend ; and you won't, from mere malice, destroy, irrevocably,
all my hapniness. If papa thought I had left him on purpose ;
and if he died befi > re I returned, could I bear to live ] I've
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS. 237
giy^n over crying ; but I'm going to kneel here, at your knee ;
and I'll not get up, and I'll not take my eyes from your face,
till you look back at mel No, don't turn away! do look!
You'll see nothing to provoke you. I don't hate you. I'm not
angry that you struck me. Have you never.loved any body^ in
all your life, uncle 1 never ? Ah ! you must look once— I'm so
wretched — you can't help being sorry and pitying me. " .
" Keep, your eft's fingers* off j and move, or'I'll kick you ! "
cried Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her. ** I'd rather be hugged
by a snake. How the devU can you dream of fawning on me %
I detect you ! "
He shinigged his shoulders — shook himself, indeed, as if his
flesh crept with aversion — and thrust back his chair : while I
got up, and opened my mouth to commence a downright* tor-'
rent of abuse ; but I was rendered dumb in the middle of the
first sentence, by a threat that'I should be shown into a room
by myself, the very next syllable I uttered.
It was growing dark — we heard a sound of voices at the gar •
den gate. Our host hurried out, instantly ; he had his wits about*
him; we had not. There was a talk of two or three minutes,
and he returned alone. • - .•'f
" I thought it had been your cousin Hateton,'* I observed to
Catherine. " I wish he would arrive! Who knows but he
might take our part ] "'^'
" It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange, "
said Heathcliff, overhearing me. ** You should have opened a
lattice and called out ; but I could swear that chit is glad you
didn't. She's glad to be obhged to stay, I'm certain. "
At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to
pur grief without control ; and he allowed us to wail on till nine
o'clock; then he bid us go up-staire, through the kitchen, to
Zillah's chamber; and I whispered my companion to obey;
perhaps we miglit contrive to get through the window there, or
into a garret, and out by its skylight.
The window, however, was narrow like those below, and the
garret trap was safe from our attempts ; for we were fastened
in as before. We neither of us lay down : Catherine took her
station by the lattice, and watched anxiously for morning — a
deep sigh being t^ only answer I could obtain to my frequent
entreaties that she would try to rest.
I seated myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing
harsh judgment on my many dei*elictions of duty ; from which,
938 WUITHBBINO HEi«HTtf.
itstmck me then, all the misfortunes of all my employers sprang.
It was not the case, in reality, I am aware ; but it was, in roy
imagination, that dismal night, and I thought Heathcliff himself
less guilty than I.
At seven o'clock he came, and inquired if Miss Linton had
risen. She ran to the door immediately, and answered-^
" Yes. "
'* Here, then, " he said, opening it, and pulling her out.
I rose to follow, but he turned the lock again. I demanded
my release.
" Be patient, " he replied ; I'll send up your breakfast in a
while. "
I thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angiily ; and
Catherine asked why I was still shut up 1 He answered, I must
try to endure it another hour, and they went away. I endured
it two or three hours ; at length, I heard a footstep, not Heath-
cliflF's.
" I've brought you something to eat, " said a voice ; " oppen
fdoor! "
Complying eagerly, I beheld Hareton, laden with food enough
to last me all day.
** Tak itt " he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
" Stay one minute, " I began.
" Nay ! " cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayei-s I
jcould pour forth to detain him.
" And there I remained inclosed the whole day, and the
whole of the next night ; and another and another. Five nights
and four days I remained, altogether, seeing nobody but Hare-
ton, once every morning ; and he was a model of a jailer — surly,
and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving his sense of jus-
tice or compassion
CHAPTER XXVIII.
On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step ap-
proached — ^lighter and shorter — and, this time, the person entered
the room.'It was Zillah ; donned in her scarlet shawl, with a
black silk bonnet on her head, and a willow basket swung to
her arm.
WUTHSRIN6 HfilOMTS. 289
" Eh, dear !'» Mrs. Dean, " abe exclaimed. «* Well ! there is
a talk about you atGimmerton. I never thought but you were
sunk in the'Blackhorse marah, and Missy with you, till master
told me you'd been found, and he'd lodged you here! What,
and you must have got on an island, sure 1 And how long were
you in the hole 1 Did master save you, Mrs. Dean ? But
you're not so thin — ^you've not been so poorly, have you V
•* Your master is a true scoundrel ! " I replied. *• But he shall
answer for it. He needn't have raised that tale — ^it shall all be
laid bare ! "
" What do you mean V asked Zillah. " It's not his tale —
they tell that in the village— about your being lost in the marsh ;
and I calls to Eamshaw, when I come in —
" * Eh, they^s queer things, Mr. Hareton, happened since I
went ofif. It's a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant
Nelly Dean.'
" He stared. I thought he had not heard aught, so I told him
the rumor.
" The master listened, and he just smiled to himself, aiid said —
" * If they have been in the marsh, they are out now, Zillah.
Nelly Dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room. You can
tell her to flit, when you go up ; here is the key. The bog-
water got into her head, and she would have run home, quite
flighty, but I fixed her, till she came round to her senses. You
can bid her go to the Grrange at once, if she be able, and carry
a message fi'om me, that her young lady will foUow in time to
attend the squire's funeral.'"
" Mr. Edgar is not dead 1 " I gasped. •* Oh ! Zillah, Zillah ! "
" No, no — sit you down, my good mistress, " she replied,
" you're right sickly yet. He's not dead : Doctor Kenneth
thinks he may last another day — ^I met him on the road and
asked. "
Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things, and
hastened below, for the way was free.
On entering the house, I looked about lor some one to give
information of Catherine.
The place was filled with sunshine, and the door stood wide
open, but nobody seemed at hand.
As I hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek
my mistress, a slight cough drew my attention to the hearth.
Linton lay on the settle, sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-
candy, and pursuing my movements with apaOietic eyes.

240 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
*'Where is Miss Catherine V* I demanded sternly, suppoaingf
I could frighten hun into giving intelligence, by catching hia &
thus alona
He sucked like an innocent.
" Is she gone V I said.
" No, " he replied; " she's up-stairs— she's not to go; wo
won't let her. "
" You won't let her, little idiot ! " I exclaimed. " Direct ma
to her room immediately, or I'll make you sing.out sharply. "
" Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get
there, " he answered. " He says I'm not to be sofb.with Cath-
erine—she's my wife, and it's shameful that .she should wish to
leave me 1 He says, she hates me, and wants me to die, that
she may have my money, but she shan't have it ; and she shan't
go home! she never shall I she may cry, and be sick as much as
diie pleases! "
He resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if he
meant to drop asleep.
. " Master Heathcliff, " I resumed, " have you forgotten all Cath-
erine's kindness to you, last winter, when you affirmed -you
loved her, and when she brought you books, and sung you
songs, and came many a time through wind and snow to see
you ] She wept to miss one evening, because you would be
disappointed; and you felt then that she was a hundred times
too good to you ; and now you believe the lies your father tells,
though you know he detests you both ! And you Join him
against her. That's fine gratitude, is it not 1 "
The comer of Linton's mouth fell, and he took the sugar-
candy from his lips.
" Did she come to Wuthering Heights, because she hated
you 1 " I continued. " Think for yourself I As to your money,
she does not even know that you will have any. And you say
she's sick ; and yet, you leave her alone, up there in a strange
house! You, who have felt what it is to be so neglected!
You could pity your own sufferings, and she pitied them, too,
but you won't pity hers ! I shed tears Master Heathcliff, you
see — ati elderly woman, and a servant merely — and you, after
pretending such affection, and having reason to worship her, al-
most, store every tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite
at ease.. Ah ! you're a heartless, selfish boy ! "
" I can't stay with her, " he answered crossly. " I'll not stay,
by myself. She cries so I can't bear it. And she won't give
WUTHBEINO BEIGHTS. 241
over, though I say I'll call my father. I did call him once ;
and he threatened to ati*ang1e her, if she was not quiet ; hut she
began again thein stant, he left the room ; moaning and griev-
ing all night long, though I screamed for vexation that I couldn't
sleep. "
" Is Mr. Heathcliff out, " I inquired, perceiving that the
wretched creature had no power to sympathize with his cous*
in's mental tortures.
" He's in the court, " he replied, •« talking to Doctor Kenneth
who says uncle is dying, truly, at last. I'm glad, for I shall be
master of the Grange after him — Catherine always spoke of it
as her Tumse. It isn't hers ! It's mine — papa says every thing
riie has is mine. All her nice books are mine — she offered to
give me them, and her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I
would get the key of our room, and let her out : but I told her
she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. And then she
eriedy and took a little picture ftt)m her neck, and said I should
have that — two pictures in a gold case— -on one side her mother,
and on the other, uncle, when they were young. That was
yesterday. I said they were mine, too ; and tried to get them
from her. The spitefhl thing wouldn't let me ; she pushed me
off, and hurt me. I shrieked out — that ftightens her — she heard
papa coming, and she broke the hinges and divided the case,
and gave me her mother's portrait ; the other she attempted to
hide ; but papa asked what was the matter, and I explamed it.
He took the one I had away ; and ordered her to resign hers to
me ; she refused, and he — ^he struck her down, and wrenched
it off the chain, and crushed it with his foot. "
" And were you pleased to see her struck 1 " I asked : having
my designs in encouraging his talk.
" I winked, " he answered. " I wink to see my father strike
a dog, or a horse, he does it so hard — ^yet I was glad at first —
she deserved punishing for pushing me : but when papa was
gone she made me come to the window and showed me her
cheek cut on the inside against her teeth, and her mouth filling
with blood : and then she gathered up the bits of the picture
and went and sat down with her face to the wall, and she has
never spoken to me since; and I sometimes think she can't
speak for pain. I don't like to think so ! but she's a naughnr
thing for crying continually ; and she looks so pale and wilo.
I'mafiraidofher! "
. " And you can get the k«y,if you choose 1 " I said. il^

942 WUTHSRINO HBIGHT0.
** Yes, when I am up-staire, " he answered, " but J can't walk
ap*8tairB now. "
** In what apartment is it V I asked.
** Oh, " he cried,'* I shan't tell you where it is ! It is out
secret. Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, are to know.
There! you've tii*ed me — go away, go away! " Atid he turned
his face upon his arm, and shut his eyes again.
I considered it best to depait without seeing Mr. Heathcliff ;
and bring a rescue for my young lady from the Gh:^nge.
On reaching it, the astonishment of my fellow^ servants to see
me, and their joy also, was intense ; and when they heard that
their little mistiness was safe, two or three were about to hurry
up, and shout the news at Mr. Edgar's door: but I bespoke
the announcement of it myself.
How changed I found him, even in those few days ! He laj
an image of sadness and resignation, waiting his death. Very
young he looked : though his actual age was thirty*nine ; one
would have called him ten yeare younger, at least. He thought
of Catherine, for he murmured her name. I touched his hand
and spoke.
" Catherine is coming, dear master! " I whispered;'* she ia
alive and well, and will be hera I hope to-night. "
I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence : he half rose
up, looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sunk back hi
a swoon.
As soon as he recovered I related our compulsory visit and
detention at the Heights : I said Heathcliff forced me to go in,
which was not quite true ; I uttered as little as possible against
Linton ; nor did I describe all his father's brutal conduct — ^my
intenrions being to add no biUemess, if I could help it, to his
already overflowing cup.
He divined that one of his enemy's pui^oses was to secure
the personal property as well as the estate to his son, or rather
himself; yet why he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle
to my master ; because ignorant how nearly he and his nephew
would quit the world together.
However, he felt his will had better be altered; instead
of leaving Catherine's fortune at her own disposal, he de*
termined to put it in the hands of trustees, for her use during
^fe ; and for her children, if she had any, after her. By that
means it could not fall to Mr. Heathcliff, should Linton die.
Having k^ceived his ordexs I dispatched fi man to fetch the
.WUTHJBEIN0 HBIOHTS. M3
attorney, and four more, provided with Bervieeable weapooB, to
demand my young lady of her jailer. Both partieB were de-
layed very late. The single servant returned first.
He said Mr. Green, the lawyer, was out when he arrived at
ina house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance ; and
then Mr. Green told him he had a little business in the village
that must be done, but he would be at Thrushcross Grange be-
fore morning.
The four men came back unaccompanied also. They brought
word that Catherine was ill ; too ill to quit her room : and Heath-
cliff would not suffer them to see her.
I scolded the stupid fellows well, for listening tu that ta]e,
which I would not carry to my master, resolving to take a
whole bevy up to the Heights, at daylight, and storm it literally,
unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us.
Her father sIuiU see her, I vowed, and vowed again, if that
4evil be killed on his own door-stones in trying to meyent it !
Happily I Mras spared the journey and the trouble.
I bad gone down stairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of wa-
ter ; and was passing through the hall vnth it in my haiMJ, when
a sharp knock at the firont door made mo jump.
" Ob I it is Green, " I said, recollecting myself;''only Green "
— ^nd I went on, intending to send somebody else to open it ;
but the knock was repeated, not loud, and still importunately.
I put the jug on the bannister, and hastened to admit him
myself.
The harvest moon shone clear outside. It was not the at-
torney. My sweet little mistress sprung on my neck, sobbing,
" Ellen! Ellen 1 is papa alive V*
** Yes, " I cried, " yes my angel he is. God be thanked, you
are safe with us again ! "
She wanted to run, breathless as she was, up-staire to Mr.
Linton's room ; but I compelled her to sit down on a chair, and
made her drink, and washed her pale face, diafing it into a faint
color with my apron. Then I said I must go first, and tell of
her arrival ; imploring hw to say she would be happy with
young Heathcliff. She stared, but soon comprehending why I
counselled her to utter the & ]sehood, she assured me she would
not complain.
I couldn't abide to be present at their neetmg. I stood out*
side the chamberndoor a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured
near the bed then.
244 WUTBBftiNG BEI€HTfl.
Ail was composed, however ; Catherine's despair was as si-
lent as her father's joy. She supported him calmly, in appear-
ance ; and he fixed on her features his raised eyes, that seemed
dilating with ecstasy.
He died blissfully, Mr. Lockwood; he died so; kissing her
cheek, he murmured,
" I am going to her, and you, darling child, shall come to us ;*'
and never stirred or spoke again, but continued that rapt, ra-
diant gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped, and his soul
depaited. None could have noticed the exact minute of his
death, it was so entirely without a struggle.
Whether Catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief
were too weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till
the run rose— she sat till noon, and would still have remained,
broodine over that death-bed, but I insisted on her coming away
and taking some repose.
It was well I succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time
appeared the lawyer, having called at Wuthering Heights to
eet his instructions how to behave. He had sold himself to Mr.
Jneathcliff, and that was the cause of his delay in obeying my
master's summons. Fortunately, no thought of worldly affairs
crossed the latter's mind, to disturb him after his daughter's ar-
rival.
Mr. Green took upon himself to order every thing and every
body about the place. He gave all the servants but me notice
to quit. He would have canied his delegated authority to the
point of insisting that Edgar Linton should not be buried beside
his wife, but in the chapel with his family. There was the will,
however, to hinder that, and my loud protestations against any
infringement of its directions.
The funeral was hurried over ; Catherine, Mrs. Linton Heath*
cliff now, was suffered to stay at the Orange, till her father's
corpse had quitted it
She told me that her angubh had at last spurred Linton to
incur the risk of liberating her. She heard the men I sent dis-
puting at the door, and Ae gathered the sense of Heathcliff's
answer. It drove her desperate. Linton, who had been con-
veyed up to the little parlor soon after I left, was terrified into
fetching the key before his father re-ascended.
He had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
shutting it ; and when he should have; gone to bed, he begged
to sleep with Haretoo, and his petition was granted, for once.
WUTHSBIN6 BSIGRT8. 345
'Catherine stole out before break of day. She dare not try
the doors^ lest the dogs should raise an alarm ; she visited the
empty chambers, and examined their windows; and, luckily^
lighting on her mother's, she got easOy out of its lattice and to
the ground, by means of the fir-tree close by. Her accomplice
suffered for his share in the escape, notwitfaetanding his tmud
contrivances.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Th« eveninff after the funeral, my young lady and I were
seated in the library ; now musing mournfully, one of us despair*
ingly, on our loss ; now venturing conjectures as to the gloomy
future.
We had just agreed the best destiny which could await Cath-
erine would be a permission to continue resident at the Grange,
at least during Linton's life ; he being allowed to join her there,
and I to remain as housekeeper. That seemed rather too fa«
voidable an arrangement to be hoped for ; and yet I did hope,
and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my
home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young
mistress, when a servant— one of the discarded ones, not yet
departed — ^rushed hastily in, and said,''that devil Heathcliff**
was coming through the court — should he fasten the door in
his face ]
If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we
had not time. He made no ceremony of knocking, or announc*
ing his name ; he was master, and availed himself of the mas-
ter's privilege to walk straight in, without saying a word.
Tlie sound of our informant's voice directed him to the
library ; he entered, and, motioning him out, shut the door.
It was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a
guest, eighteen years before ; the same moon shone through the
window, and the same autumn landscape lay outside. We had
not yet lighted a candle, but all the apartment was visible, even
to the poitraits on the wall — ^the splendid head of Mrs. Linton,
and the graceful one of her husband.
Heathcliff advanced to the hearth. Time had liu^ altered
246 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
his person either. There was the same inaii^*-his dark face
rather sallower and more composed, his frame a stone or two
heavier, perhaps, and no*other difference.
Catherine had risen, with an impulse to dash out, when she
saw him.
** Stop !'* he said, arresting her by the arm. " No more run-
nings away I Where would you go 1 I'm come to fetch you
home ; and I hope you'll be a dutiful daughter, and not encour-
age my son to further disobedience. I was embarrassed how
to punish him, when I discovered his part in the business — ^he's
such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him — ^but you'll see by
his look that he has received his due. I brought him down one
evening, the day before yesteiday^ and just set him in a chair,
and never touched him afterward. I sent Hareton out, and we
had the room to ourselves. In two hours I called Joseph to
carry him up again, and since then ray presence is as potent on
his nerves as a ghost ; and I fancy he sees me often, though I
am not near. Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night
by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me ;
and, whether you like your precious mate or not, you must
come-*he's your concern now ; I yield all my interest in him
to you. "
" Why not let Catherine continue h«re ? " I pleaded, " and
send Master Linton to her. As you hate them both, you'd not
miss them-— they can only be a daily plague to your unnatural
heart. "
** I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange, " he answered ; " and
I want my children about me, to be sure. Besides, that lass
owes me her services for her bread : I'm not goin^ to nurture
her in luxury and idleness af):er Linton is gone. Make haste
and get ready now, and don't oblige roe to compel you. "
** I shall, " said Catherine. ** Linton is all I have to love in
the world ; and, though you have done what you could to make
him hateful to me, and me to him, you can not make us hate
each other ; and I defy you to hurt him when I am by, and I
defy yon to frighten me. "
** You are a boastful champion, " replied Heathcliff ;'^ but I
don't like you well enough to hurt him — you shall get the full
benefit of the torment, as long as it lasts. It is not I who will
make him hateful to you— - > it is his own sweet spirit. He's as
bitter as gall at your desertion and its consequences : don't ex-
pect thanks for Uiis noble devotion* I heard him draw a pleas-'
WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 347
ant picture to Zillah of what he would do if he wei'e as strong
as I. The inclination is there, and his very weakness will
sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength. "
** I know he has a bad nature, " said Catherine: " he*s your
son. But I'm glad I've a better, to forgive it ; and I know ha
loves me, and for that reason I love him. Mr. Heathcliff, you
have nobody to love you ; and, however miserable you make ub,
we shall still have the revenge of thinking that your cruelty rises
from your greater misery ! You are miserable, are you not t
Lonely, like the devil, and envious like him] Nobody loves
you — nobody will cry for you when you die ! I wouldn't be
you. "
Catheiine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph : she seemed
to have made up her mind to enter into the spiiit of her future
family, and draw pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
" You shall be sori-y to be yourself presently, " said her father-
in-law, ** if you stand there another minute. Begone, witch«
and get your things. "
She scornfully withdrew.
In her absence, I began to beg for Zillah's place at the
Heights, offering to resign her mine ; but he would suffer it on
no account. He bid me be silent, and then, for the first time^
allowed himself a glance round the room and a look at the pic-
tures. Having studied Mi's. Linton, he said^
" I shall have that at home. Not because I need it, but — "
He turned abruptly to the fire, and continued, mih what, for
lack of a better word, I must call a smile —
" I'll tell you what I did yesterday ! I got the sexton, who
was digging Linton's grave, to remove the earth off her coffin
lid, and I opened it. I thought, once, I would have stayed
there, when I saw her face again — it is hers yet — ^he had hard
work to stir me ; but he said it would change if the air blew
on it, and so I struck one side of the coffin loose— and covered
it up — not Linton's side, damn him ! I wish he'd been soldered
in lead — and I bribed the sexton to pull it away, when I'lp laid
there, and slide mine out too, I'll have it made so, and then, by
the time Linton gets to us, he'll not know which is which I "
" You were very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff ! " I exclaimed
" were you not ashamed to disturb the dead 1 "
" 1 disturbed nobody, Nelly, " he replied ; " and I gave some
ease to myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable now ;
and you'll have a better chance of keeping me underground,
5248 WUTHBEIN4} HKIOHT8.
when I get there. Disturbed her 1 No ! she has disturbed me,
night and day, through eighteen years — ^incessantly — remorse-
lessly — ^till yesternight — and yesternight, I was tranquil. I
dreamed I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with my
heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers. "
" And if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what
would you have dreamed of then 1''I said.
« Of dissolving with her, and being more happy still ! " he
answered.'* Do you suppose I dread any change of that sort 1
I expected such a transiormation on raising the lid, but I'm
better pleased that it should not commence till I share it. Be-
sides, unless I had received a distinct impression of her passion-
less features, that strange feeling would hardly have been re-
moved. It began oddly. You know I was wild after she died,
and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to mo
«— her spirit — I have a strong faith in ghosts; I have a conviction
that they can and do exist among us i
" The day she was buried there came a fall of snow. In the
evening I went to the churchyard. It blew bleak as virinter —
all around was solitary : I didn't fear that her fool of a husband
would wander up the den so late — and no one else had business
to bring them there.
" Bemg alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
sole barrier between us, I said to myself—
"'I'll have her in my arms again ! If she be cold, I'll think
it is this noith wind that chills me; and if she be motionless, it
is sleep.'
" I got a spade from the tool-house, and began to delve with
all my might — ^it scraped the coffin: I fell to work with my
hands ; the wood commenced cracking about the screws, I was
on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that I heard
a sigh n'om some one above, close at the edge of the graver and
bending down. * If I can only get this off,'I muttered, * I wish
they may shovel in the earth over us both !'and I wrenched at
it more desperately still. There was another sigh close at my
ear. I appeared to feel the warm breath of it, displacing the
sleet-laden wind. I knew no living thing in flesh and blood was
by — ^but as certainly as you perceive the approach to some sub-
stantial body in the dark, though it can not be discerned, so
certainly I felt that Cathy was there, not under me, but on the
earth.
" A sudden sense of relief flowed from my heart, through
W0THBRINO HSIOBTS. 249
every limb. I relinquished my labor of agony, and turned
consoled at once, unspeakably consoled. Her presence was
with me ; it remained while 1 refilled the grave, and led me
home. You may laugh, if you will, but I was sure I should
see her there. I was sure she was with me, and I could not
help talking to her.
** Having reached the Heights, I rushed eagerly to the door.
It was fastened ; and I remember that accursed Eamshaw and
my wife opposed my entrance. I remember stopping to kick
the breath out of him, and then hurrying upHStairs to my room,
and hers — I looked round impatiently — I felt her by me— I
could almost see her, and yet I could not I I ought to have
sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning, from the
fervor of my supplications to have but one glimpse ! I had
not one. She showed herself, as she often was in life, a devil
to me ! And since then, sometimes more, and sometimes less,
IVe been the sport of that intolerable torture! Infernal-—
keeping my neives at such a stretch, that, if they had not re-
sembled catgut, they would, long ago, have relaxed to the
feebleness of Linton's.
''When I sat in the house with Hareton, it seemed that on
foing'out, I should meet her ; when I walked on the moors,
should meet her coming in. When I went from home, I
hastened to return, she must be somewhere at the Heights,
I was certain ! And when I slept in her chamber — I was
beaten out of that — I couldn't lie there ; for the moment I
closed my eyes, she was either outside the window, or sliding
back the panels, or entering the room, or even resting her
darling head on the same pillow as she did when a child.
And I must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed
them a hundred times a night — ^to be always disappointed !
It racked me ! I've often groaned aloud, till that old rascal
Joseph, no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the
fiend inside of me.
" Now since I've seen her, I'm pacified — ^a little. It was a
strange way of killing, not by inches, but by fractions of hair-
breadths, to beguile me with the specter of a hope through
eighteen years ! "
Mr. Heathcliff paused, and wiped his forehead — ^his hair
clung to it, wet with perspiration ; his eyes were fixed on the
red embers of the fire ; the brows not contracted, but raised
next the temples, diminishing the grim aspect of his counter
350 WUTHEEINO HBIOBTS.
nance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and a painful
appearance of mental tension toward one absorbing subject.
He only half addressed me, and I maintained silence — ^I did
not like to hear him talk.
After a short period, he resumed his meditation on the
picture, took it down, and leaned it against the sofa to con-
template it at better advantage ; and whale so occupied Cathe-
rine entered, announcing that she was ready, when her pony
should be saddled.
*'Send that over to-morrow,'* said Heathcliff to me ; then
turning to her, he added,'* You may do without your p < Hiy—
it is a fine evening, and you'll need no ponies at Wutheriug
Heights, for what journeys you take your own feet will serve
you. Come along. "
*'Grood-bye, Ellen ! " whispered my dear little mistress. As
9he kissed me, her lips felt like ice.''Come and see me, Ellen,
don't forget. "
" Take care you do no such thing, Mrs. Dean ! " said her
new & ther.''When I wish to speak to you, I'll come here. I
want none of your prying at my house ! "
He signed her to precede him ; and easting back a look that
cut my heart, she obeyed.
I watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
Heathcliff fixed Catherine's arm under his, though she disputed
the act at first, eridently, and with rapid stiides he hurried her
into the alley, whose trees concealed them.
CHAPTER XXX.
I HAVE paid a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen her
since she lefi; ; Joseph held the door in his hand, when I called
to ask after her, and wouldn't let me pass. He said Mrs.
Linton was *'thrang, " and the roaster was not in. ZiUah has
told me something of the way they go on, otherwise I should
hardly know who was dead, and who living.
She thinks Catherine haughty, and does not like her, I can
guess by her talk. My young lady asked some aid of her, when
she first came, but Mr. HeathclijOf told her to follow her owa
WUTHBmiNO HEIOHTS. 251
business, and let his daughter-in-law look after herself, and
Zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded, selfish wo-
man. Catherine evinced a child's annoyance at this neglect;
repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among
her enemies, as securely as if she had done her a great wrong.
I had a long talk with Zillah, about six weeks ago, a little
before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor;
and this is what she told me.
'* The first thing Mrs. Linton did, " she said, *'on her arrival
at the Heights, was to run up-stairs without even wishing good-
evening to me and Joseph ; she shut herself into Linton's room,
and remained till morning — then, while the master and Eam-
shaw were at breakfast, she entered the house and asked, all in
a quiver, if the doctor might be sent £)r 1 .her cousin was very ill.
" • We know that !'answered Heathcliff, * but his life is not
worth a fanhing, and I won't spend a farthing on him.'
•'* But I can not tell how to do,'she said. * If nobody will
help me, he'll die I'
" * Walk out of the room !* cried the master,'and let me never
hear a word more about him ! None here care what becomes
of him ; if you do, act the nurse ; if you do not, lock him up
and leave him.'
*'Then she began to bother me, and I said I'd had enough
plague with the tiresome thing ; we each had our tasks, and
hers was to wait on Linton. Mr. Heathcliff bid me leave that
labor to her.
" How they managed together, I can't tell. I fancy he fret-
ted a great deal, and moaned hisseln, night, and day ; and she
had precious little rest, one could guess by her white face and
heavy eye— she sometimes came into the kitchen all wildered
like, and looked as if she would fain beg assistance; but I was
not going to disobey the master — I never dare disobey him,
Mrs. Dean; and though I thought it wrong that Kenneth should
not be sent for, it was no concern of mine, either to advise or
complain ; and I always refused to meddle.
" Once or twice, after we had gone to bed, I've happened^ ta

pity
to lose my place, you know !
" At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and
frightened me out of my wits by saying,
J
25d WUTHBRING HBIOBT8.
**'Tell Mr. Heathcliff that his son is dying — ^I*m sure he if
this time. Get up instantly, and tell him i'
''Having uttered this speech, she vanished again. I lay a
quarter of an hour, listening and tremhling. Nothing stirred —
the house was quiet.
"'She's mistaken,'I said to mysel£'He's got over it. I
needn't disturh them.'And I began to doze. But my sleep
was marred a second time, by a sharp ringing of the bell — ^the
only bell we have, put up on puqpoee for Linton ; and the mas-
ter called to me to see what was the matter, and infbrm them
that he wouldn't have that noise repeated.
''I delivered Catherine's message. He cursed to himself^
and in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle, and pro-
ceeded to their room ; I followed. Mrs. Heathcliff was seated
by the bedside, with her hands folded on her knees. Her father*
in-law went up, held the light to Linton's face, looked at him,
and touched him : afterward he turned to her.
** * Now — Catherine,'he said, *how do you feeH'
** She was dumb.
" * How do you feel, Catherine V he repeated.
**'He's safe, and I'm free,'she answered ;'I should feel well
-^but,'she continued, with a bitterness she couldn't conceal,
'You have left me so long to struggle against death, alone, that
I feel and see only death ! I feel like death I'
** And she looked like it, too ! I gave her a little wine. Hare-
ton and Joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing, and the
sound of feet, and heard our talk from outside, now entered.
Joseph was fain, I believe, of the lad's removal : Hareton seem-
ed a thought bothered, though he was more taken up with
fitaring at Catherine than thinking of Linton. But the master
bid him get off to bed again — we didn't want his help. He af-
terward made Joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told
me to return to mine, and Mrs. Heathcliff remained by herself.
" In the morning he sent me to tell her she must come down
to breakfast. She had undressed, and appeared going to sleep ;
and said she was ill — at which I hardly wondered. I informed
Mr. Heathcliff, and he replied,
" ♦ Well, let her be till after the funeral, and go up now and
then to get her what is needful : and as soon as she seems bet-
ter, tell me.'"
. 9**y " tayed up stairs a fortnight, according to Zillah, who
Tisited her twice a day, and would have been rather more
WCTHEKIVC BCIGBTS. 251

fiiendly, but her attetnpCB at increasing Lin d iie aB were proodlj
and promptly repelled. Heariirfiff went np onee, to thaw hct
Linton's wilL He had bequeathed the wfa^ of hii and what
had been her morable ptup ei tj to his & her. The poor cxea-
ture was threatened or coaxed into that act, daring her week's
absence, when his nnde died. The lands, being a minar, he
could not meddle with. However, Mr. HeathrJiff has claimed,
and kept them in his wife's tight, and his also— I soppoae legaDj,
at any rate Catherine, destitute of cash and friends, can not d»-
turb his possession.
" Nobody, " said Zfllah,
that once* but I ; and nobody
first occasion of her coming <
day afternoon.
** She had cried out, when I carried up her dinner, diat she
couldn't bear any longer being in the cold ; and I tdld her the
master was gmng to Thrushcroas Grrange ; and Eamahaw and
I needn't hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she heaxd
HeathcliflPs horse trot cff, she made her appearance, donned in
black, and her yellow curls combed back oehind her ears — as
plain as a Quaker she couldn't comb them out. Joseph and I
generally go to chapel on Sundays. " (The kiric, you know, has
no minister, now, explained Mrs. Dean, and they call the Meth*
odists'or Baptists'place, I can't say which it is, at Gimmerton,
a chapel.) " Joseph had gone, " she continued, ** but I thought
proper to bide at home. Young folks are always the better for
an elder's overlooking, and Hareton, with all his bashfiilness,
isn't a model of nice beharior. I let^him know that his cousin
would very likely sit with us, and she had been always used to
see the Sabbath respected, so he bad as good leave his guns
and bits of in-door work alone, while she staid.
''He colored up at the news ; and cast his eyes over his hands
and clothes. The train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of
sight in a minute. I saw he meant to give her his company ;
and I guessed, by his way, he wanted to be presentable ; so,
laughing as I durst not laugh when the master is by, I offered
to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion. He grew
sullen, and began to swear.
" Now, Mrs. Dean, " she went on, seeing me not pleased by
her manner, " you happen think your young lady too fine for
Mr. Hareton, and happen you're right — I own, I should love well
to bring her pride a peg lower. And what will all her learning

2M WUTHSRINO HBIOHTS.
and all her daintiness do for her, now! She's as poor as you,
or I — ^poorer. I'll be bound, you're saving — ^and I'm doing my
litde all that road. "
Hareton allowed Zillah to give him her aid ; and she flattered
him into a good humor ; so, when Catherine came, hatf fbi^t-
ting her former insults, he tried to make himself agreeable, by
the housekeeper's account
** Missis walked in, " she said, ^* as chill as an icicle, and as
high as a prmcess. I got up and offered her my seat in the
arm-chair. No, she turned up her nose at my cnvility. Earn-
•haw rose too, and bid her come to the settle, and sit close by
the fire ; he was sure she was starved.
"'I've been starved a month and more,'she answered, rest*
ing on the word, as scornful as she could.
** And she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance
firom both of us. Having sat till she was warm, she began to
look round, and discovered a number of books in the dresser ;
she was instandy upon her feet again, stretching to reach them,
but they were too high up. Her cousin, after watching her en-
deavors a while, at last summoned courage to help her; she
held her firock, and he filled it with the first that came to hand.
** That was a great advance for the lad — she didn't thank him ;
still he felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance, and
ventured to stand behind, as she examined them, and even to
stoop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pictures
which they contained — ^nor was he daunted by the saucy style
in which she jerked the page from his finger; he contented
himself with going a bit farther back, and looking at her, instead
of the book.
'* She continued reading, or seeking for something to read.
His attention became, by degrees, quite centered in the study
of her thick, silky curls — ^her face he couldn't seb, and she
couldn't see him. And, perhaps, not quite awake to what he
did, but attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded
from staring to touching ; he put out his hand and stroked one
curl, as gently as if it were a bird. He might have stuck a
knife into her neck, she started round in such a taking.
" * Gret away, this moment ! How dare you touch nae 1 Why
are you stopping there V she cried, in a tone of disgust.'I
can't endure you 1 I'll go up-staiiis again, if you come near me.'
** Mr. Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do ; he
sat down in the settle, very quiet, and she continued turning over
WUTHBRINO HKI6HT & 265
her volumes another half-hour — ^finally, Eanishaw croased over
and Vi'hispei'ed to me.
"'Will you ask her to read to us» Zillah 1 I'm stalled of do«
ing naught — ^and I do lik^— I could like to hear her ! dunnot say
I wanted it, bat ask of yourseln/
*'* Mr. Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am,'I said,
immediately.'He'd take it very kind — ^he'd be much obliged.'
'* She frowned ; and, looking up, answered—-
" * Mr. Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough
to understand that I reject any pretense at kindness you have
the hypociisy to offer ! I demise you, and will have nothing
to say to any of you ! When I would have given my life for one
kind word, even to see one of your faces, you all kept off. But
I won't complain to you | I'm driven down here by the cold,
not either to amuse you, or enjoy your society.'
'* * What could I ha'done V began Eamshaw.'How was I
to blame V
* " Oh ! you are an exception,'answered Mrs. HeathcliS'I
never missed such a concern as you.'
*''But I offered more than once, and asked,'he said, kindling
up at her pertness —'I asked Mr. Heathcliflfto let me wake for
you —'
*''Be silent ! I'll go out of doors, or any where, rather than
have your disagreeable voice in my ear !'said my lady.
" Hareton muttered, she might go to hell, for him ! and un«
slinging his gun, restrained himself from his Sunday occupations
no longer. He talked now, freely enough ; and she presently
saw fit to retreat to her solitude : but the frost had set in, and,
in spite of her pride, she was forced to condescend to our com < *
pany more and more. However, I took care there should be
no further scorning at my good nature. Ever since, I've been
as stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us, and
she does not deserve one — ^for, let them say the least word to
her, and she'll curl back without respect of any one ! She'll
snap at the master himself, and as good as dai'es him to thrash
her ; and the more hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows. "
At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined to
leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to come
and live with me ; but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon permit that
as he would set up Hareton in an independent house : and I can
see no remedy at present, unless she could many again ; and
that scheme, it does not come within my province to arrange.
BS6 WUTBSRINO HEIGHTS.
Thus ended Mrs. Dean's story. Notwithstanding the doctor's
prophecy^ I am rapidly recovering strength, and though it be
only the second week in January, 1 propose getting out on
horseback in a day or two, and riding over to Wuthering
Heights, to inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six
months in London ; and, if he likes, he may look out for another
tenant to take the place after October. I would not pass another
winter here for much.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Yesterbat was bright, calm, and frosty. I went to the
Heights, as I proposed ; my housekeeper entreated me to bear
a litue note from her to her young lady, and I did not refuse,
for the worthy woman was not conscious of any thing odd in
her request.
The fix > nt door stood open, but the jealous gate was fastened,
as at my last visit ; I knocked and invoked Eamshaw from
among the garden beds ; he unchained it and I entered. The
fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen. I took particu-
lar notice of him this time ; but then be does his best, apparent-
ly, to make the least of his advantages.
1 asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home t He answered, no ;
but he would be in at dinner-time. It was eleven o'clock, and
I announced my intention of going in and waiting for him, at
which he immediately flung down his tools, and accompanied
me, in the office of watch-dog, not as a substitute for the host.
We entered together ; Catherine was there, making herself
useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal ;
she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I had seen
her first. She hardly raised her eyes to notice me, and con-
tinued her employment with the same disregard to common
forms of politeness as before, never returning my bow and good-
morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
" She does not seem so amiable, " I thought, " as Mrs. Dean
would pei-suade me to believe. She's a beauty, it is tiiie, but
not an angel. "
Eamshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen.
WUTHBrniNO R BIGHTS. S5T
'** Remove them yourself, " she said, pushing them from her,
as soon as she had dove ; and retiring to a stool hy the window,
.where she hegan to carve %ures of birds and beasts, out of the
turnip-parings in her lap. I approached her, pretending to de*
sire a view of the garden, and, as I fancied, adroitly dropped
Mrs. Dean's note upon her knee, unnoticed by Hareton, but she
asked aloud^
" What is that V* and chucked it off.
" A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the
Grange, " I answered, annoyed at her exposing my kmd deed,
and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my own.
She would gladly have gathered it up at this information, but
Hareton beat her ; he seized and put it in his waistcoat, saying
Mr. Heathcliff should look at it first.
Thereat, Catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very
stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to
h^r eyes ; and her cousin, after struggling a while to keep down
his softer feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor
beside her, as ungraciously as he could. Catherine caught and
perused it eagerly; then she put a few questions to me con-
cerning the inmates, rational and irrational, of her former home,
and, gazing toward the hills, murmured in soliloquy —
. *'I should like to be riding Minny down there ! I should
like to be climbing up there ! Oh, I'm tired ! — I'm stalled,
Hareton ! "
And she leaned her pretty head back against the sill, with
half a yawn and half a sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of ab-
stracted sadness, neither caring nor knowing whether we re*
marked her.
" Mrs. Heathcliff, " I said, after sitting some time mute, " you
are not aware that I am an acquaintance of youra ; so intimate,
that I think it strange you won't come and speak to me. My
housekeeper never wearies of talking about and praising you ;
and she'll be greatly disappointed if I retm-n with no news of,
or from you, except that you received her letter, and said
nothing ! "
She appeared to wonder at this dpeech and asked,
« Does Ellen like you V
" Yes, very well, " I replied unhesitatingly.
" You must tell her, " she continued,'* that I would answer
her letter, but I have no materials for writing,'not even a book
from which I might tear a leaf. "

J
258 WUTHBSINO HBIGBT8.
" No books I " I exclaimed. " How do you contrive to Kve
here without them 7 if I may take the libeity to inquire.
Though provided with a large library, I'm frequently very duU
at the Grange— ^ke my l^oks away, and I should be dee-
perate ! "
" I was always reading, when I had them ; " said Catherine,
** and Mr. Heathcliflf never reads ; so he took it into his head to
destroy my books. I have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.
Only once, I searched through Joseph's store of theology, to
his great irritation : and once, Hareton, I came upon a secrst
stock in your room — some Latin and Greek, and some tales and
poetry; all old friends. I brought the last here-^— and you
gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere
love of stealing ! They are of no use to you*-or else you con-
cealed them in the bad spirit, that as you can not enjoy them,
nobody else shall. Perhaps your envy counseled Mr. Heafih-
cliif to rob me of my treasures 1 But, I've most of them written
on my brain and printed in my heart, and you can not deprive
me of those! "
Eamshaw blushed crimson, when his cousin made this reve-
lation of his private literary accumulations, and stammei^ed an
indignant denial of her accusations.
*• Mr. Hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowl-
edge, " I said, coming to his rescue. ** He is not emnofu but
emulous of your attainments. He'll be a clever scholar in a few
years ! "
" And he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime, " an-
swered Catherine. " Yes, I hear him trying to spell and read
to himself, and pretty blunders he makes ! I wish you would
repeat Chevy Chase, as you did yesterday. It was extremely
funny ! I heard you ; and I heard you turning over the dic-
tionary, to seek out the hard words, and then cursing because
you couldn't read their explanations ! "
The young man evidently thought it too bad that he should
be laughed at for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying
to remove it. I had a similar notion, and, remembering Mrs.
Dean's anecdote of his first attempt at enlightening the dark-
ness in which he had been reared, I observed,
" But, Mrs. HeathcHff, we have each had a commencement,
and each stumbled and tottered on the threshold, and had our
teachers scorned, instead of aiding ns, we should stumble and
totter yet. "
WUTHBRINO HEIOHTB. 259
** Ob ! " she replied, " I don't wish to limit his acqairements—*
still, he has no right to appropriate what is mine, and make it
ridicaloos to me with his vile mistakes and mis*pronunciations !
Those books, both prose and verse, were consecrated to me by
other associations, and I hate to have them debased and pro*
faned in his mouth ! Besides, of all, he has selected my favorite
pieces that I love the most to repeat, as if out of deliberate
malice ! "
Hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute ; he labored under
a severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy
task to suppress.
I rose, and from a gentlemanly idea of relieving his embar-
rassment, took np my station in the door-way, surveying the ex-
temal prospect, as I stood. He followed my example, and left
the room, but presently reappeared, bearing half-a-dozen
volumes in his hands, which he threw into Catherine's lap, ex-
^iming,
''Take them i I never want to hear, or read, or think of
them again ! "
" I won't have them, now I " she answered. " I shall connect
them with you, and hate them ! "
She opened one that had obviously been often turned over,
and read a portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then
laughed, and threw it fit > m her.
" And listen ! " she continued provokingly, commencing a
TeiBe of an old ballad in the same fashion.
But his self-love would endure no fuither torment — I heard,
and not altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to her
saucy tongue. The little wretch had done her utmost to hurt
her cousin's sensitive though uncultivated feelings, and a physical
argument was the only mode he had of balancing the account,
and repaying its effects on the iuflicter.
He afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
fire. I read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer
that sacrifice to spleen. I fancied that as they consumed, he
recalled the pleasure they had already imparted ; and the tri-
umph and ever increasing pleasure he had uiticipated from
them — and I fancied I guessed the incitement to his secret
studies, also. He had been content with daily labor and rough
animal ei^oyments, till Catherine crossed his path. Shame at
her scorn and hope of her approval were his lirst prompte» to
higher puzmuta ; and instead of guarding him from one, and
J
860 WUTHERINO HEIGHTS.
winning^ him the other, his endeavors to raise himself had pro-
duced just the contrary result.
" Yes, that's all the good that such a brute as you can get
from them !''cried Catherine, sucking her damaged lip, aod
watching the conflagration with indignant eyes.
*'You'd better hoM your tongue now ! " he answered fiercely.
And his agitation precluding further speech, he advanced hastily
to the entrance, wliere I made way for him to pass. But, ere
he had crossed the door-stones, Mr. Heathcliff, coming up the
causeway, encountered him, and laying hold of his shoulder,
asked,
«• What's to do now, my lad V
** Naught, naught ! " ho said, and broke away, to enjoy his
grief and anger in solitude. Heathcliff gazed after him, and
sighed.
** It will be odd, if I thwart myself! " he muttered, uncon-
scious that I was behind him. ** But when I look for his father
in his face, I find her every day more ! How the devil is he
so like 1 I can hardly bear to see him. "
He bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in.
There was a restless, anxious expression in his countenance I
had never remariied there before, and he looked sparer in per-
son. His daughter-in-law on perceiving him through the
window, immediately escaped to the kitchen, so that I remained
alone.
" I'm glad to see you out of doors again, Mr. Lockwood, "
he said in reply to my greeting, " from selfish motives partly,
I don't think I could readily supply your loss in this desolation.
I've wondered, more than once, what brought you here. "
" An idle whim, I fear, sir, " was my answer, " or else an
idle whim is going to spirit me away. I shall set out for
London, next week, and I must give you warning, that I feel
no disposition to retain Thrushcix)ss Grange beyond the twelve-
month I agreed to rent it. I believe I shall not live there any
more.
" Oh, indeed ! you're tired of being banished from the world,
are you 1 " he said. " But if you be coming to plead off pay-
ing for a place you won't occupy, your journey is useless— I
never relent in exacting my due fVom any one. "
" I'm coming to plead off nothing about it ! " I exclaimed,
considerably irritated. " Should you wish it, I'll settle with
you now, " and I drew my notebook from my pocket.
WUTBERING HKI6HTS. S6|
" No, no, " he replied, coolly, " you'll leave sufficient behind
to cover your debts, if you fail to return. I'm not in such a
hurry — sit down and take you dinner with us—- a guest that is
aafe from repeating his visit, can generally be made welcome.
Catherine ! bring tibe things in — ^where are you V
Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.
''You may get your dinner with Joseph, " muttered Heath-
eliff aside, " and remain in the kitchen till he is gone. "
She obeyed his directions very punctually — ^perhaps she had
no temptation to transgress. Living among clowns and misan-
thropbts, she probably can not appreciate a better class of
people, when she meets them.
With Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on one hand, and
Hareton absolutely dumb, on the other, 1 made a somewhat
cheerless meal, and bid adieu eai*ly. I would have departed
by the back way, to get a last glimpse of Catherine and annoy
old Joseph ; but Hareton received orders to lead up my horse,
and my host himself escorted me to the door, so I could not ful*
fill my wish.
" How dreary life gets over in that house ! " I reflected, while .
riding down the road. " What a realization of something more
romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for Mrs. Linton
Heathcliff, had she and I struck up an attachment, as her good
nurse desired, and migrated together into the stirring atmos-
phere of the towni "
CHAPTER XXXn.
1802. — This September, I was invited to devastate the moors
of a friend, in the north ; and, on my journey to his abode, I
unexpectedly came within fifteen miles of Gimmerton. The
hostler, at a roadside public-house, was holding a pail of water
to refi-esh my hoxses, when a cart of very green oats, newly
reaped, passed by, and he remarked —
" Yon*s frough Gimmeiton, nah ! They're alias three wick'
after other folk wi'ther harvest. "
" Gimmerton V* I repeated, my residence in that locality had
already grown dim and dreamy. " Ah ! I know ! How far is
itfix)mthisr
m WUTHERIHro HEIOBT0.
en fbaiteen mile'o'er th'hills, and a rough road/'he
answer
A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange.
It was scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as well pass
the night under my own roof as in an inn. Besides, 1 could
spare a day easily, to arrange matters with my landlord, and
thus save myself the trouhle of invading the neighboriiood again.
Having rested a while, I directed my servant to inquire the
way to the village ; and, with great fatigue to our beasts, we
managed the distance in some three hours. I left him there,
and proceeded down the valley alone. The g^y church
looked grayer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. I distin-
guished a moor sheep cropping die short turf on die graves.
It was sweet, ivarm weather — ^too warm for traveling ; but the
heat did not hinder me from enjoying the delightfiil scenery
above and below; had I seen it nearer August, I am sure it
would have tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes.
In winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold
swells of heath.
I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for ad-
mittance ; but the family had retreated into the back premises,
I judged by one thin, blue wreath curling from the kitchen
chimney, and they did not hear. I rode into the court. Under
the porch a girl of nine or ten sat knitting, and an old woman
reclined on the horse-steps, smoking a meditative pipe.
" la Mi's. Dean within? " I demanded of the dame.
" Mistress Dean ? Nay T'she answered, " shoo doesn^t bide
here ; shoe's up at th'Heights. "
** Are you the housekeeper, then V* I continued.
" Eea, aw keep th'hause, " she replied.
" Well, I'm Mr. Lockwood, the master. Are there any
rooms to lodge me in ] I wish to stay here all night. "
" T'maister! " she cried in astonishment, " Whet, whoiver
knew yah wur coming 1 Yah sud ha'send word! They's
nowt norther dry nor mensful abaht t'place— nowt there isn't I "
She threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed,
and I entered too ; soon perceiving that her report was true
and, moreover, that I had almost upset her wits by my unwel-
come apparition.
I bid her be composed — I would go out for a walk ; and,
meantime, she must try to prepare a comer of a sitting-room
WUTHEKINO HEI6BT8. 808
Ibr me to sup in, and a bed-room to sleep in. No sweeping
and dusting, only good fires and dry sheets were necessary.
She seemed willing to do her best; thoagh she thrust the
beaith-brush into the grato in mistake for the poker ; and roal-
appropriated several other articles a£ her craft : but I retired,
con & dmg in her energy for a resting-place against my return.
Wuthering Heights was the goal of my proposed excursion*
An after-thought brought me b^k, when I had left the court.
'* All well at the Heights ] " I inquired of the woman.
" £ea, f'r owt aw knaw! " she answered, skurrying away
with a pan of hot cinders.
I would have asked why Mrs. Dean had deserted the
Grange ; but it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis,
Bo I turned away and made my exit, rambling leisurely along
with the glow of a sinking sun behind, and the mild glory of a
rising moon in front ; one fading and the other brightening, as
I quitted the park and climbed the stony by-road branching
oft* to Mr. HeathcHiF'a dwelling. Before I anived in sight
of it, all that remained of day was a beamless, amber light
along the west; but I could see every pebble on the path, and
every blade of grass, by that splendid moon.
I had neither to climb the gato, nor to knock— it yielded to
my hand. That is an improvement, I thought. And I noticed
another, by the aid of my nostrils ; a fragrance of stocks and
wall flowers, wafted on the air from among the fruit trees.
Both doors and lattices were open ; and yet, as is usually the
case in a coal district, a fine, red fire illuminated the chimney ;
Uie comfort which the eye derives firom it renders the extra heat
endurable. But the house of Wuthering Heights is so large,
that die inmates have plenty of space for withdrawing out of its
influence ; and, accordingly, what inmates there were had sta-
tioned themselves not far from one of the vrindows. I could
both see them and hear them talk before I entered ; and looked
and listened in consequence, being moved thereto by a mingled
sense of curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.
** Con^ary /** said a voice, as sweet as a silver bell. " That
for the third time, you dunce ! I'm not going to tell you again.
Recollect, or 1 pull your hair 1 "
**'Contrary, then, " answered another, in deep, but softened
tones. *'And now, kiss me, for minding so well.*'
'* No, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake. "
The male speaker began to read^—he was a young man, re-
spectably dressed, and seated at a table, having a book before
d64 WUTHBRING H. B I G H T Jl.
him. His handsome features glowed with pleasure, and his
ay OS kept impatiently wandering from die page to a small white
hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a smart slap on
the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of inattention.
Its owner stood behind ; her light shining ringlets blending at
intervals with his brown locks, as she bent to superintend his
studies ; and her & ce— it was lucky he could not see her face,
or he would never have been so steady — I could, and I bit my
lip in spite, at having thrown away the chance I might have
had, of doing something besides starinff at its smiliog. beauty.
The task was done, not free from fiirther blunders, but the
Eupil claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses, which,
owever, he generously returned. Then they came to the door,
and from their conversation I judged they were about to issue
out and have a walk on the moors. I supposed I should be
condemned in Hareton Eamshaw's heart, u not by his mouth,
to the lowest pit in the infernal regions, if I showed my unfor-
tunate person in his neighborhood then : and feeling very mean
and malignant, I skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.
There was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at
the door sat my old friend Nelly Dean, sewing, and singing a
song, which was often interrupted from within, by harsh words
of scorn and intolerance, uttei«d in far from musical accents.
" Aw'd rayther, by th'haulf, hev'em swearing i* my lugs
frough mom tub neeght, nur hearken yah, hahsiver!''said the
tenant of the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's.
''It's a blazing shaime, ut aw cannut oppen t'Blessed Book,
bud yah set up them gloiies tuh Sattan, un* all t'flaysome
wickednesses ut iver wer bom intuh t'warld ! Oh ! yah're a
raight nowt ; un'shoo's another ; un'that poor lad'ull be lost,
at ween ye. Poor lad ! " he added, with a groan, " he's witched,
aw'm saitin on't ! Oh, Lord, judge'em, for they's norther law
nur justice amang wer ruUers ! "
** No ! or we should be sitting in flaming fagote, I suppose, "
retorted the singer. " But wisht, old man, and read your Bible,
like a Christian, and never mind me. This is * Fairy Annie's
Wedding'- — a bonny tune — ^it goes to a dance. "
Mrs. Dean was about to recommence when I advanced ; and^
recognizing me dii*ectly, she jumped to her feet, crying —
" Why, bless you, Mr. Lock wood, how could you think of
r^tuming in this way ? All's shut up at Thmshcross Grange.
You should have given us notice. "
" I'va aiTanged to be accommodated thn:« for u kmg as- 1
Bhall stay/* I anawored. " I depart again to-morrow. And
how are you traasplanted here, Mm. Dean 1 tell me that. "
" ZiHah left, and Mr. Heathcliff wished me to come, soon
after you went t« London, and stay t91 you returned. But step
in, pray. Have you walked from Gimmerton this evening V*
** From the Grrange/'i repHed ;'* and, while they make me
lodging zoom diere, i want to finish my husiness with your
master — ^I don't think of havine* another opportunity in a hurry. "
''What business, sir 1 " said NeDy, conducting me into the
house. " He's gone out at present, and won't return soon. "
** About the rent, " I answered.
'* Oh \ then it is with Mrs. HeathcM* you must settle, " she
observed, *'< xt tBXheat with me. She has not learned to manage
her i^irs yet, and I act fer her—- there's nobody dse. "
I looked suifprised.
*'Ah ! you have not hraxd ai Heathcliff's death, I see, " she
continued.
''Heathcliffdisad! " I excfaimed, astonished. " How long ago 1 "
^ Three raont^ since;! But sit down, and let me take your
bat, and 111 tell ysu aU about it. Stop, you h«ve had nothing
to eat, have you V*
** I want nothing. I h«ve orderod sui^ttar at home. You sit
down too. I never dreamed of bis dying. Let me hear how it
came to pass. You say you don't expect them back for some
time — ^the young people 1 "
''No. I have to scold them every evening for their late ram^
hies ; but they don't care for me. At least, have a drink of our
old ale : it will do you good — you seem weary. "
She hastened to fetch it before I could realise ; and I heard
Joseph asking whether " it wam't a crying scandal that she
should have iellies at her time of life ] And then, to get them
jocks out uh t* maister's cellar \ He & iv shaamed to'bide still
and see it. "
She did not stay to ratatiate, but re^^ntered in a minute, bear-
ing a creaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with becom-
ing earnestness ; and afterward i^e furnished me with the sequel
of Heathcl^s history. He had a " queer " end, as she express-
ed it.
I was summoned to Wuthering Hfdd^ts wil^n a fortnight of
your leaving, she said, and I obeyed jcwSillyfer Catherine's sake.
My first interview with her grieved «id shocked me, she had
altered so much since our e^parMien. Mr. HeadMsliff did not
M
266 WUTHERINO HEIGHT B.
explain his reafloiiB for taking a new mind about mj coming
here ; he only told me he wanted me, and he was tired of see-
ing Catherine; I must make the little parlor my sitting-room,
and keep her with me. It was enough if he were obliged to
see her once or twice a day.
She seemed pleased at this aitangement ; and, by degrees, I
smuggled over a great number of books and other articles that
had formed her amusement at the Grange, and flattered myself
we should get on in tolerable comfort.
The delusion did not last long. Catherine, contented at first,
in a brief space grew irritable and restless. For one thing, she
was forbidden to move out of the garden, and it fretted her sadly
to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ; for an-
other, in following the housd, 1 was forced to quit her frequently^
and she complained of loneliness ; she preferred quarreling with
Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude.
'* t did not mind their skirmishes ; but Hareton was often
obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to
have the house to himself; and though, in the beginning, she
either left it at his approach, or quietly joined in my occupations,
and shunned remancmg or addressing him — atid though he wa^
always as sullen and silent as possible-rafter a while she changed
her behavior, and became incapable of letting him alone. Talk-
ing at him ; commenting on his stupidity and idleness ; express^
ing her wonder how he could endure the life he lived — how he
could sit a whole evening, staring into the fire and dozing.
*'He's just like a dog, is he not, Ellen V* she once observed,
** or a cart-horse ? He does his work, eats his food, and sleeps,
eternally I What a blank, dreary mind he must have I Do you
ever dream, Hareton 1 And, if you do, what is it about? But,
you can't speak to me ! "
Then she looked at him; but he would neither open his
mouth, nor look again.
^ ** He's perhaps, dreaming now, " she continued. He twitched
his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him, £llen. "
** Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you up stairs, if
you don't behave! " I said. He had not only twitched his
shoulder, but clenched his fist, as if tempted to use it.
" I know why Hareton never speaks when I am in the kitch-
en, " she exclaimed, on another occasion. " He is afraid I shall
laugh at him. Ellen, what do you think 1 He l > egan to teach
hiinself to read once ; and, because I laughed, he bymed his
books, and dropped it---was he not a fool 1 "
WUTBERING HEIGHTS. 367
" Were not you naughty] " I said ; ** answer me that "
" Perhaps I was/'she went on,''but I did not expect him
to be so siily. Hareton, if I gave you a book, would you take
it now? riltry! "
She placed one she had been perusing on his hand ; he flung
it ofiT, and muttered if she did not give over he'd break her neck.
" Well, I shall put it here,*'she said,''in the table drawer,
and am going to bed. "
Then she whispered me to watch whether he touched it, and
departed. But he would not come near it, and so I informed
her in the morning, to her great disappointment. I saw she was
sorry for his persevering sulkiness and indolence — ^her conscience
reproved her for frightening him off improving himself. She
had done it effectually.
But her ingenuity was at work to remedy the injury ; while I
ironed, or pursued other stationary employuents I could not well
do in the parlor — she would bring some pleasant volume, and
read it aloud to me. When Hareton was there, she generally
paused in an interesting part, and left the book lying about—
that she did repeatedly ; but he was as obstinate as a mule, and,
instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to smo-
king with Joseph, and they sat like automata, one on each side
of the firO) the elder happily too deaf to understajid her wicked
nonsense, as he would have called it; the younger doing his
best to seem to disregai'd it. On fine evenings the latter followed
his shooting expeditions, and Catherine yawned and sighed, and
teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the court or garden,
the moment I began; and, as a last resource, cried, and said
she was tired of living, her life was useless.
Mr. Heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to soci-
ety, had almost banished Eamshaw out of his apartment. Owing
to an accident, at the commencement of March, he became for
some days a fixture in the kitchen. His gun burst while out on
the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm, and he lost a good
deal of blood before he could reach home. The consequence'
was, that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and tran«
quillity till he made it up again.
It suited Catherine to have him there ; at any rate, it made
her hate her room up stairs more than ever ; and ahe would
compel me to find out business below, that she might accompa-
ny me.
On Easter Monday, Joseph went to Gimmerton fair with
some cattle ; and in the afternoon I was busy getting up lineu.
^'
M§ WUTHSKIira BBtCBT &
in the kitchen^ Banfthsv^ sat^ morate as noual, at the chimney
corner, and my little miatresa viraa beguiling an idle hour with
drawing picturas on the window panes,'varying her anausement
by srooUiered bursts of songs, and whispering ejaculations, and
quick g^iancoB of annoyance and impatience in the direction of
her consin, who steadfiiedy snoked, and looked into the grate.
At a notice that I could do with her no longer, intereepting
my light, she removed to the hearth-stone. I bestowed little at»
teation on her prottieiiiags^ bat, prssendy, I heard her begin —
«'I've found out, HaraCon, tiuLt I waat-«.that Tm glad--4hat
I idiottld like you to be my cousin, now, if you had not grows
ao erosa to > me, and so xoagh.'^ Hareton returned no answer.
** Hareton, Haieton, Haxeton ( do you hear V* she cootmaed.^
" Get off wi'ye ! " he growled, with uncompromiaiBg gruffiDese^
** Let me take iJiat pipe,** she said, cantioasly advancing her
hand, and abstractxag it from his mouth.
Before he could attempt to recover it, it vrae brokoi and be»
hind the fire. He swwe at her and seized anotherr
''Stop, " she cried, " jou most listen to me, fint ; and I can't
iq > eak while those doucfs are floating in my fiuse. "
** Will you go to the devil ! " he exclaimed, " and let me be !**
" No,'* she persisted, ** I wont. I can't tell what to do ta
make you talk tfy me, and you are determined not to under-
stand. When I call you stupi^ I don " t mean any thing — I
don't mean that I despise you. Come, you shall take notice c^
me, Hai^Bton-— you are my coesin and you shall own me.'*
** I shall have naught to do wi'you, and your mucky pnde,
and your damned, mocking'tricks I " he answered. ** i'U go ta
hell, body and soul, before I look sideways after you again!
side out of t'gait, how; thia rainuee f*
Catheriae ftowned, and retreated to the window-seat, chew*
ittg her hp, and endeavoring^ by humming an eccentric tune, to
conceal a gprowing tcodeiiey to sob^
*• You i^ottld be friends with yomf cousin, Mr. Hareton, " I
interrupted, " since i^ repents of her saueiness! it would do
Tou a gveat deal of good— 4t weotd make you another man, te
have her for a companion. "
''A companion 1'*^ he cried j^ ^when she hates me, and does
not think me fit ta vr^e her sheen \ Nay, if it made me a king,
Fd not be scorned for seeking her good wifi any more.*^
" It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me ! " wept
Cathy, no longer disgniBing her trouble. ** You hate me as
much 9» Mr. Heathcliff dees, and mme.'*
WUTBBBIN6 BBI8HT8. M9
" Yoa're a damned liar/'began Earnshaw; ^'wfay haye I
made bim angry by taking your part, tben, a hundred times 1 and
that, when you sneered at* and despised me, and-—. Gk > on
plaguing me, and I'll step in yonder, and say you woiried me
out of the kitchen! "
" I didn't know yon took my part,^* she answered, drying her
eyes ; " and I was miserable and bitter at erery body ; but, now
I thank you, and beg you to fi > rgive me ; what can I do besides 1 "
She retmmed to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.
He blackened, and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept his
fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground.
Catherine, by instinct, must have divined it was obdurate
perrersity, and not dislike, that prompted this dogged conduct ;
fer, after remtuning an instant, undecided, she stooped, and im*
pressed on his cheek a gentle kiss. The little rogue thought I
had not seen her, and, drawing bade, she took her former sta*
tion by the window, quit^ demurely. I shook my head reprove
mgly ; and then she blushed, and whi^iered,
" Well, what should I have dooe, Ellen 1 He woukb't shake
bands, and he woukin't look. I must show him some way that
I like him — ^that I want to be friends. "
Whether the kiss conviikced Hareton, I can not tell ; he was
very careful, for some minutea, that his face should not be seen t
find when he did raise it, he was sadly puzxled where to turn
his eyes.
Catherine employed hers^ in wrapping a handsome book
neatly in white paper ; and having tied it with a bit of ribbon,
and addressed it to " Mr. Hareton Earnshaw, " she desired me
to be her embassadress, and convey the present to its destined
recipient.
'* And tell him, if he'll take it, I'll come and teach him to
read it right, " she said, " and, if he refuse it, I'll go up stairs,
and never tease him again. "
I carried it, and repeated the message, anxiously watched by
my employer. Hareton would not open his fingers, so I laid it
on his knee. He did not stiike it off, either. I returned to my
work : Catherine leaned hw head and arms on the table, till she
heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed ; then she
stole away, and quietly seated herself beside her cousin. He
trembled, and his face glowed— -all his rudeness and all his
surly harshness had deserted him— he could not summon coup >
age, at first, to utter a syilabk, in reply to her questioning look,
and her muimiued petition^ »
S70 WUTHEBINO HEIGHTS.
** Say you foreive ine, Hareton, do ! You can make roe so
happy, by speaking that little word. " He muttered something.
** And you'll be ray fiiend 1 " added Catherine, interrogatively.
" Nay ! you'll be ashamed of me every day of your life ; and
the more, the more you know me, and I can not alnde it. "
" So you won't be my friend ] " she said, smiling as sweet as
honey, and creeping close up.
I overheard no further distinguishable talk ; but on looking
round again, I perceived two such radiant countenances bent
over the page of the accepted book, that I did not doubt the
treaty had been ratified on both sides, and the enemies were
thenceforth sworn allies.
The work they studied was full of costly pictures ; and those
and their position had charm enough to keep them unmoved, till
Joseph came home. He, poor roan, was perfectly aghast at the
spectacle of Catherine seated on the same bench viith Hareton
Eamshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder ; and confounded
at his favorite's endurance of her proximity. It affected him
too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.
His emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew,
as he solemnly spread his large Bible on the table, and overlaid
it with dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of
the day's transactions. At length he summoned Hareton.
" Tak* these in tuh t'maister, lad,'^ he said, ** un bide theare ;
aw's gang up tuh my awn rahm. This hoile's norther mensfld
nor seemly fur us — we mun side aht, and seearch another ! "
" Come, Catherine, " I said, " we must'side out,'too — ^I've
done my ironing, are you ready to go 1 "
" It is not eight o'clock ! " she answered, rising unwillingly.
** Hareton, I'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and I'll
bring you some more to-morrow. "
" Ony books ut yah leave, aw shall tak'intuh th'hahse, "
said Joseph, " un'it'ull be mitch if yah find'em agean; soa,
yah muh plase yourseln ! "
Cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers ; and,
smiling as she passed Hareton, went singing up-stairs, lighter
of heait, I venture to say, than ever she had been under that
roof; except, perhaps, during her earliest visits to Linton.
The intimacy, thus commenced, grew rapidly ; though it en-
countered temporary interruptions. Eamshaw was not to be
civilized with a wish ; and my young lady was no philosopher,
and no paragon of patience ; but both their minds tending to
the same point— one loving and desiring to esteem ; and the
WUTBBftlNO HEIGHTS. 271
Other loving and desiiing to be esteemed — ^they contrived, in
tbe end, to reach it.
You see, Mr. Lockwood, it was easy enough to win Mrs.
Heathcliff's heart; but now, I'm glad you did not try — the
crown of all my wishes will be the union of those two ; I shall
envy no one on their wedding-day — ^there won't be a happier
woman than myself in England !
CHAPTER XXXIII.
On the morrow of that Monday, Eamshaw being still unable
to follow his ordinary employments, and, therefore, remaining
about the house, I speedily found it would be impracticable to
retain my charge beside me, as Heretofore.
She got down stairs before me, and out into the grarden;
where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work ;
and when I went to bid them come to breakfast* I saw she had
persuaded him to clear a large space of ground from currant
and gooseberry bushes, and mey were busy planning together
an importation of plants from the Grange.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished
in a brief-half hour; the black currant trees were the apple of
Joseph's eye, and she had just fixed her choice of a flower bed
in the midst of them !
" There ! That will be all shown to the master, " I exclaimed,
" the minute it is discovered. And what excuse have you to offer
for taking such liberties with the garden ] We shall have a
fine explosion on the head of it : see if we don't ! Mr. Hare-
ton, I wonder you should have no more wit than to go and
make that mess at her bidding ! "
**rd forgotten they were Joseph's, " answered Eamshaw,
rather puzzled, " but I'll tell him I did it. "
We always ate our meals with Mr. HeathclifT. I held the
mistress's post in making tea and carving ; so I was indispensa-
ble at table. Catherine usually sat by me; but to-day she
stole nearer to Hareton, and I presently saw she would have no
more discretion in her friendship than she had in her hostility.
*'Now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too
much, " were my whispered instructions as we entered tbe
room ;''It wDl certainly annoy Mr. Heathcliff, and he'U }m
mad at you both. "

S78 WUTHERINQ BSIOHT8.
** I'm not going to/'she anBwered.
The minute met, she had eidled to him, afid was sticking
primroses in his plate of porridge. He dared not speak to her,
there ; he dared nardiy lo < ^ ; and yet she went on teasing, till he
twice was on tlie point of being proToked to laugh % and I frown-
ed, and then she glanced toward tJw master, whose mind was
occupied on other subjects than his company, as bis oowintenanoe
evinced, and she grew serious for an mstant, scrutinizing him
with deep gravity. Afterward she turned, and recommenced
her nonsense ; at last Hareton uttered a smothered laugh.
Mr. Heathcliff stalled } his eyes rapidlv surveyed our faces.
Catherine met it with her accustomed look of nervousness, and
yec defiance, which be abhorred.
'^ it as well yoo are out of my reach ; " be exclaimed. ** What
fiend poasesses you to atsre back at me, coi^nually, with those
infernal eyes 1 Down with them ! and don't remind me of your
existence again. I Chouffht I had cured you of laughmg ! "
** It was me, " muttered Hareton.
** What do you say ) " demanded the master.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confes-
sion. Mr. Headicliff looked «t him a Ut, and then silently re-
sumed his breakfast, and his intemipted musing.
We had nearly finished, and the two younff people prudently
shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated no ftirtfaer disturbance
during that sitting ; when Joseph appeared at the door, reveal-
ing by his quivenng lip and ftinous eyes, that the outrage com-
mitted on his precious shrubs was detected.
He must have seen Cadiy and her cousin about the spot,
before be examined it, for wrhile his jaws worked like those of a
cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech, difficult to under-
stand, he began :
" Aw mun hev my wage, and aw man goa I Aw hed aimed
tuh dee, wheare aw'd sarved fur sixty year ; un'aw tbowt aw'd
lug my books up intuh t'garret, un'all my bits uh stuff, un'tbey
sud hev t'kitchen tub tbeirseln ; fur t'sake uh quietness. It
wur hard tuh gie up my awn heaTtshua, but aw diowt aw could
do that 1 But, nah, shoo's taan my garden fiv > ugh me, un'by
th'heart ! Maister, aw can not stand it ! Yah muli bend tuh
th'yoak, an ye wilL Aw noan used to't and an ow'd man
doesn't sooin get used tuh new barthens*— aw'd rayther am my
bite an'my sup wi'a hammer in th'road ! "
" Now, now, idiot! " interrupted Headieliff, " cut it short!
What's youi- grievance ? I'll interfere in no quarrels between
WUTBBEINO fiBI«BTt < 878
jou and Nel]y. Sh^ may ttirtuft jpu into the coal-hofe for any
thing I care. "
" It'« nooD Nelly ! " amweied Joaeph. *'Aw aiidii't shift fur
Nelly. Naaty, ill*nowt as riioo la. Thank God ! skoo can not
stale t^aowl uh nob'dy 1 Sheo war niver aoa handsome, bud
whet a body mud look at her'b^ wuikine. It's yon fla3r8f > nie,
gi*acele88 quean, ut's witched ahr lad^ wi'her bold een, un her
jforrard ways — tilL Nay I I fair bniata my heart ! He'a for-
getten all aw done fi > r him, un made on him, un'goan un'riven
up a whole row ut t'grandeat currant trees, i't'garden P and
here* he lamented outright, unmanned by a sense a£ his bitter
injuries, and Eamshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.
«« Is the fool drunk V* asked Mr. HeathcliK «« Hax«ton is it
you he's finding fault with I "
" Iv'e pulled up two or three bushes/'repHed ihe young
man, " but I'm going to set'em again. "
" And why have you pulled them up 1 " said the master.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
'< We wanted to plant some flowers these, " she cried. ^ I'm
tiie only person to blame, for I wished him to do it "
" And who the devil gave ^/ou leave to touch a stick about
the place 1 " demanded ber lather*iii*law* much surpriaed*
" Ajid who ordered yem to obey herl " he added, turning to
Hareton. The latter was speechless, his cousin replied-^
" You shouldn't grudge a few yards of eavth fur me to oma*
ment, when you have taken aQ my land I "
*'Your land, insolent skit 1 you never bad any ! " said Heath < <
clifl^
** And my money, " she continued, returning his Utgry choo^
and, meantime, biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her
breakfast.
'* Silence! " he exclaimed. " Get done, and begone ! "
''And Hareton's land and his money, " pursued the reckless
thing. ** Hareton and I are friends now ; and I shall teU him
ail about you I "
The master seemed confounded a moment, he grew pale,
and rose up, eyeing ber aU the while with an expression of
mortal hate.
''If you strike me, Hareton will strike you I " she said, **wo
you may as well sit down. "
" If Hareton does not turn you out of the ro^~ ^'
him to hell, " thundered HeathcMl ^'Dattina^'
you pretend to rouse him against mel Off #
274 WUTHEKINO HEIGHTS.
hear 1 Fling her into the kitchen! Ill kill her, Ellen Dean^
if you let her come into my sight again ! "
tiareton tried, under his hreath, to persuade her to go.
*• Drag her away ! " he cried savagely. " Are you staying to
talk V* And he approached to execute his own command.
" He'U not ohey you, wicked man, any more !''said Cath-
erine, * < and he'll soon detest you as much as I do ! "
" Wisht ! wisht I " muttered the young man reproachfully.
** I will not hear you speak so to him. Have done !''
*'But you won't let him strike me V* she cried.
'* Come then ! " he whispered earnestly.
It was too late — HeathcHff had caught hold of her.
•* Now you go ! " he said to Eamshaw. " Accursed witch !
this time she has provoked me when I could not bear it ; and
I'll make her repent it for ever ! "
He had his hand in her hair ; Hareton attempted to release
the locks, entreating him not to hurt her, that once. His black
eyes flashed, he seemed ready to tear Catherine in pieces, and
I was just worked up to risk going to the rescue, when, of a
sudden, his fineers relaxed, he shifted his grasp from her head,
to her arm, and gazed intently in her face. Then he drew hw
hand over his eyes, stood a moment to collect himself, appa-
rently, and turning to Catherine, said, with assumed calmness,
" You must learn to avoid putting me in a pas & ion, or I shall
really murder you some tim^! go with Mrs. Dean, and keep
with her, and confine your insolence to her ears. As to Hare-
ton Eamshaw, if I see him listen to you, I'll send him seeking
his bread where he can get it 1 your love will make him an
outcast and a beggar. Nelly, take her; and leave me, all of
you ! Leave me ! "
I led my young lady out ; she was too glad of her escape
to resist ; the other followed, and Mr. Heathcliff had the room
to himself till dinner.
I had counseled Catharine to get hers up-stairs; but as soon
as he perceived her vacant seat, he sent me to call her. He
spoke to none of us, a,te very little, and went out directly after-
ward, intimating that he should not return before evening.
The two new friends established themselves in the house
during his absence, where I heard Hareton sternly check his
cousin, on her offering a revelation of her father-in-law's con-
duct to his father. He said he would not suffer a word to be
uttered to him in his disparagement ; if he were the devil, it
did not signify, h© would stand by him ; and he had rather
WUTHEHIN6 HEIGHTS. 275
she would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on Mr.
Heathcliff.
Catherine was waxing cross at this ; but he found means to
make her hold her tongue, by asking how she would like him
to speak ill of her father] and then she comprehended that
Eai'nshaw took the master's reputation . home to himself: and
was attached by ties stronger than reason could break — chains,
forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to loosen.
She showed a good. heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both com-
plaints and expressions of antipathy concerning Heathcliff;
and confessed to me her sorrow that sh6 had endeavored to
raise a bad spirit between him and Hai*eton — indeed, I do not
believe she has ever breathed a syllable, in the latter's hearing,
against her oppressor since.
When this slight disagreement was over, they were thick
again, and as busy as possible in their several occupations of
pupil and teacher. I came in to sit with them, after I had
done my work, and I felt so soothed and com^rted to watch
them, that I did not notice how time got on. You know they
both appeared, in a measure, my chUdren : I had long been
proud of one, and now I was sure the other would be a source
of equal satis & ction. His honest, warm, and intelligent nature
shook off rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in
which it had been bred ; and Catherine's sincere commendations
acted as a spur to his industry. His brightening mind brightened
his features, and added spirit and nobility to their aspect. I
could hardly fancy it the same individual I had beheld on the
day I discovered my little lady at Wuthering Heights, after her
expedition to the Crags.
While I admired, and they labored, dusk drew on, and with
it i^tumed the master. He came upon us quite unexpectedly,
entering by the front way, and had a full view of the whole
three, ere . we could raise our heads to glance at him.
" Well, " I reflected, " there was never a pleasanter, or more
harmless sight ; and it will be a burning shame to scold them. "
The red firelight glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed
their faces, animated with the eager interest of children ; for
though he was twenty-three, and she eighteen, each had so
much of novelty to feel and Jeairn, that neither experienced nor
e\inced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
They lifted their eyes together to encounter Mr. Heathcliff —
perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely
similar, and they are those of Catherine JSai-nshaw. The
376 WT7THERIN6 HEtaHTB.
preaent Cadierine haa no other l^eneaB to ber except a breadth
of forehead and a certain arch of the nostril, that makes her
«ppear rather haughty, whether she will or not With Hare-
ton the resemblance is carried ferdier, it is singular at all times-
then it was particularly striking ; because his senses were alezt
and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity.
I supposed this resemblance disarmed Mr. Heatbcliff! be
walked to Um heartb in evident agitation, but it quickly sub*
sided as he looked at the young man ; or, 1 should say, altered
its character, for it was there yet.
He took die book iarom his hand, and glanced at the open
page, then returned it without any observation ; merely signing
Catherine away. Her companion lingered very little behind
her, and I was about to depart also, but he bid me sit still.
''It is a poor conclusion, is it noti " he observed, having
brooded a while on the scene he had just witnessed. *'An ab-
Buxd termination to my violent exertions 1 I get levei-s and
mattocks to demolish the two houses, and train myself to be
capable of working like Hercules, and when every thing is
ready and in my power, I find the will to lift a slate oiT either
foof has vanished i My old enemies have not beaten me— now
would be the predse time to revenge myself on their repre-
sentatives. I could do it, and none could hinder me ; but
where is the use 1 I don't care for striking«-«-I can't take the
trouble to raise my hand ! That sounds as if I had been la-
boring the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity.
It is far from being the case. I have lost the faculty of enjoying
their destruction, and I am too idle to destroy for nothing.
** Nelly, there is a strange change approadiiag ,• I'm in its
shadow at present. I take so little interest in my daily life,
tbat I hardly remember to eat and drink. Those two, who
have left the room, are die only objects which retain a distinct
material appearance to me; and that appearance causes me
pain, amounting to affony. About her I won't G^'eak, and I
don't desire to think ; but I earnestly wish i^ were invisible-*
her presence invokes only maddening sensations. Ste moves
me differently ; and yet if I could do it without seeming insane,
I'd never see him again I You'll perhaps think me rather in-
clined to become so, " he added, mddng an dSort to smile, " if
I try to describe the thousand forms of past associations and
ideas he awakens or embodies. But you'll not talk of what I
t^ you, and my mind is so etemaHy secluded in itself, it is
twnpti^g at last to turn it out to another.
WUTHESING HKI«HTS. S77
''Five minutes ago HaretDii seeaied a penonificatioa of mj
youth, not a human being. I felt to him in sndi a Tariet j of
ways, that it would have bent imposoble to haTO aceoated him
isationally.
^ In the first place, hia ataitting likeaeia to Catherine con*
neeted him learlally with her. That, howerer, which you may
suppose the most potent to arrest my imaginaliaa is actually
the least ; £c3it what is not connected wtdi her to me I and what
does not recall her 1 I can not look down to this floor but her
fealaires are shaped on the flags I In erery doud, in erery
t toe ■ fi ning l3ie air at night, and caught by glimpaes in every
object by day — ^I am surrounded widi her image ! The most
oidanary fiices of men and womei^--my own features mock me
witii a resemblance. The entire world is a dreadfiii edlectton
of memoranda that she did exist, and dmt I hav« loat her 1
** W^l, Hareton's aspect was the ghost of my immortal love,
«ff my wild endeavors to hold my right; my degradation, ray
foide, my happiness, and my anguish. But it is Irenzy to re*-
peat these thoughts to you ; only it will let you know why, widi
m reluctance to be always alone, his society is no benefit, rather
im aggravation of the constant torment I sufieiv-and it partly
contributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin go
on together. I can give them no attention any more.
** But what do you mean by a change, Mr. HeathclifTI " I
said, alarmed at his manner, though he was neither in danger
of losing his senses nor dying ; according to my judgment, he
was quite strong and healthy ; and aa to Us reason, from child-
hood he had a delight in dwelling on dark things, and enter-
laining odd fbncies :he might have had a monomania on the
4Ribject of his departed idol ; but on every other point his wits
wwe as sound as mine.
" I shall not know tbat tall it comes,''he said, ^* Vm otAf half
•conscious of it now. "
" You have no feeling of illness, have you V* I asked*
" No, Nelly, I have not, " he answered.
** Then, you are not afraid of death %** 1 pursued.
" Afiraid 1 No I " he replied. " I have neitiber a fear, nor a
presentiment, nor a hope of death. Why sbeuld 1 9 With my
hard CGSistitution, and temperate mode of living, and unperilous
occupations, I ought to^ and prebably ahaU remain above ground,
till there is scarcely a black hair on my head. And yet I can
not continue in tins condition ! I have to remind myself to
breathe-Hiknost to remind my bewt to beat ! And it ia Mke
278 VrUTHBBlNG HEIGHTS*
bending back a stiff epring— -it is by compulsion that I do the
slightest act, not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion
that I notice any thing alive or dead, which is not associated
with one uniyersal idea. I have a single wish, and my whole
being and faculties are yearning to attain it. They have
yearned toward it so long and so unwaveringly, that I'm con-
vinced it tpill be reached*— and < oo»^-because it has devoured
my existence. I am swallowed in the anticipation of its fulfill-
ment My confessions have not relieved me — but, they may
account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humor
which I show. Oh, God ! It's a long fight, I wish it were over ! "
He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things ta
himself, till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph did»
that conscience had turned his heait to an earthly helL I won-
dered greatly how it would end.
Though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind,
even by looks, it was his habitual mood, I had no doubt : he
asserted it himself^but not a soul, firom his general bearing,
would have conjectured the fact. You did not, when you saw
him, Mr. Lockwood — and at the period of which I speak he
was just the same as then, only fonder of continued solitude,
and perhaps still more laconic in company.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
For some days after that evening Mr. Heathcliff shunned
meeting us at meals; yet he would -not consent ibrmally to
exclude Hareton and Cathy. He had an aversion to yielding
so completely to his feelings, chodsing, rather, to absent himself;
and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed sufficient suste-
nance for him.
One night, afier the family were in bed, I heard him go down
stairs, and out at the front door : I did not hear him re-enter,
and in the morning I found he was still away. We were in
April then, the weather was sweet and warm, the grass as green
as showers and sun could make it, and the two dwarf apple
trees near the southern wall in full bloOm.
After breakfast, Catherine insisted on my bringing a chair,
and sitting, with my work, under the fir-trees at the end of the
house ; and she beguiled Hareton, who had recovered fit)m his
WUTHERIN6 HEIGHTS. 270
accident, to dig and arrange her little gardeii, which was shifted
to that comer by the inflaence of Joseph's complaints.
I was comfortably revelling in the spring fragrance around,
and the beautiful sofl blue overhead, when my young lady, who
had run down near the gate, to procure some primrose roots
for a border, . returned only, half laden, and informed us that
Mr. HeathcHff was coming in.
" And he spoke to me, " she added with a perplexed look.
" What did he say r asked Hareton.
** He told me to begone as fast as I could, " she answered.
'*But'he looked so different from his usual look that I stopped
a moment to stare at him. "
" How ? " he inquired.
" Why, almost bright and cheerful — ^no, almost nothing —
very much excited, and wild and elad ! " she replied.
'* Night-walking amuses him, uien, " I remarked, affecting a
careless manner ; in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious
to ascertain the truth of her statement, for to see the master
looking glad would not be an eveiy-day spectacle, I framed an
excuse to go in.
Heathcliff stood at the open door ; he was pale, and he trem-
bled ; yet, certainly, he had a strange joyful glitter in his eyes,
that alterad the a^ > ect of his whole face.
** Will you have some breakfast V I said. " You must be
huuCTy, rambling about all night! "
''I wanted to discover where he had been ; but I did not like
to ask directly.
" No, I'm not hungry, " he answered, averting his head, and
speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed I was trying
to divine the occasion of his eood humor.
I felt perplexed — I didn't know whether it were not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
''I don't think it right to wander out of doors, " I obseiTed,
** instead of being in bed : it is not wise, at any rate, this moist
aeason. I dare say you'll catch a bad cold, or a fever — you
have something the matter with you now ! "
" Nothing but what I can bear, " he replied, " and with the
greatest pleasure, provided you'll leave me alone — get in, and
don't annoy me. "
I obeyed ; and, in passing, I saw he breathed as fast as a cat.
'* Yes ! " I reflected to myself, " we shall have a fit of illness
I can not conceive what he has been doing ! "
That noon, he sat down to dinner with us, and received a
980 WlJTBEBIlfO HSIGHTfl*
lieaped-np plate from mj bands, as if fae intended to mdce
amends for prev i o us fiMiting.
** Vre nei^er cold nor fever, Nelly, " lie lemarked, in allusion
to my moming'B speedi. " And rm leady to do jostioe to tbe
food yon give me. "
He to & his knife and fork, and was going to commence
eating, when the inclination appeared to become suddenly ex-
tinct He laid them on the table, looked eageiiy toward the
window, then rose and went out. We saw him walkmg, to and
fio, in ^ garden, while we concluded our meal ; and Earn*
sbaw said Wd go and ask why be would not dine ; he thought
we had grieved him some way.
*'Well, is he coming 1 " cried Catherine, when he returned.
** Nay, " he answered, ** bat he's not angry ; be seemed rare
and pleased indeed ; only I made him impatient by fipec^ieg
to him twice ; and then be bid me be off to you ; he wondered
bow I could want the company of any body eke. "
I set bis plate t-b keep warm on tbe fender ; and after an hour
or two he re-entered, when the room was clear ; in no degree
calmer — the same unnatural — it was unnatural— appearance d
joy under hii bla < ^ brows ; the same bloodless hue ; axid his
•teedi visible now and then in a kind of smile ; bis fhime shiver
ing, not as one shivers vrith < ^ill or woakn esD, but as a tight-
stretched cord vibratos — a strong thrilling rather than trem-
bling.
" I will tA vrhat is the matter, " I thought, ** or who should 1 "
And I exclaimed — " Have you heard any good news, Mr.
Heatbcliff ! You look uncommonly i^mated. "
" Where should good news come from to met*'he said.
** I'm animated with hunger ; and, seemingly, I must not eat. "
" Your dinner is here, " I returned j " viiiy won't you get it 1 "
" I don't want it now, " be muttered hastily. « 111 wait tiU
supper. And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn
Hareton and the other away from me. I vdsh to be troubled
by nobody— I wish to have this place to myself^
'* Is there some new reason for this banishment V* I inquired.
** Tell me why you are bo queer, Mr. Heathetiff t Where were
you last night t I'm not putting the question through idle cu*
rioflity, but " —
" You are putting the question through very idle curiosity, "
he interrupted, with a laugh. " Yet I'll answer it. Last night
I was on the threshold of hell. To-day I am within sight of my
heaven — I have my evee on it — ^hardly three feet to sever me I
WV^TMBMIVQ H BIGHT*. SSI
Afkd SOW you'd better ^. Yoa'U ndther see nor hear any
Umg to frighten you, if you refiraia from prying. "
Havistg swept ^ heaith Bxtd wiped tbe tab^ I departed,
flaeire peiplexed tban ever. He did not quit tiie house again
that aftecnooB, and no one intruded on his solitude tiU, at eight
^'clocky I deemed k proper, tliough Bffwummened, to carry a
casdle, and his suf^per to biiB.
He was leaning-aigainst fhe ledge of an open laltice» but not
looking oui; his face was turned to the inteiior gloom. The
iii^ had smoldered to ashes; the room was filled with the damp,
nAd ak of the «^oisdy eirening; and so still, that not only the
nsuFmur of the beck down Gimmerton was distinguishable, but
its ripples, and its gui^ag over tiie pebbles, or through the
large stoues which it could not cover.
I uttered an emulation of discontent at aeeing the dismal
grate, and oommeaced ehutting the casemenia, one after an-
other, till I came to his.
" Must I close this i " I asked, in onobr to rouse him, for he
would not stir.
The light flawed on his featuxies, as I spoke. Oh, Mr* Lock-
wood, I can not express what a terrible start I got, by the myo-
mentary ^ew 1 Those deep black eyes 1 That smile, and ghast-
ly paleness ! It appeared to me, not Mr. Healhcliff^ but a goblin ;
and, in my terror, I let the eandle bend toward the wall, and it
left me in daricness.
" Yes, close it,'* he replied, in his familiar voice. " Thers,
that is pure awkwardness ! Why did you hdd the candle faori-
leontally? Be quick, and bring another.'*
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Josepl^^
*^ The master wishes you to take him a light, and rekindle the
fire. " For I dare not go in myself again just then.
Joseph rattied some fire into'the shovel, and went; but he
brought it back immediately, with the supper tray in his olher
hand, explainiag that Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed, and he
wan(»d nothing to eat till moraing.
We heard him mount the stairs diiecdy; he did not proceed
to his ordinary chamber, but turned into that vrith die paneled
bed — ^its vnndow, as I mentioned before, is wide enough £ar
any body to get through, and it strack me that he plotted an-
other midnight axcursioD, which he had rather we had no sua-
picion of.
'* Is he a ghoul, or a vampire f''I mused. I had read of
such hideous, incarnate demons. And then, I set myself to r»
WUTHBRINO HEIGHTS.
fleet how I bad tended him in infancy; and watched him grow
to youth ; and followed him almost through his whole course;
and what nonsense it was to yield to that sense of horror.
** But, where did he come from, the little dark thing, harbor-
ed by a good man to his bane? " muttered superstition, as I
dozed into unconsciousness. And I began, half dreaming, to
weary myself with imagining some fit parentage for him ; wad
repeating my waking meditations, I tracked his existence over
again, with grim variations; at last, picturing his death and
funeral; of which, all I can remember is, being exceedingly
▼exed at having the task of dictating an inscription for his montt-
ment, and consulting the sexton about it ; and, as he had no
surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to
content ourselves with the single word, " Heathcliff. " That
came true — ^we were. If you enter the kirkyard, you'll read on
his headstone only that, and the date of his death. Dawn re-
stored me to common sense. I rose, and went into the garden,
as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any foot-marks
under his window. There were none.
*'He has staid at home,''I thought, ** and he'll be all right
to-day! "
I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my usual
custom, but told Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the
master came down, for he lay late. They preferred taking it
out of doors, under the trees, and I set a little table to accom-
modate them.
On my re-entrance, I found Mr. HeathclilF below. He and
Joseph were conversing about some fanning business; he gave
clear, minute directions concerning the matter discussed, but
he spoke rapidly, and turned his head continually aside, and
had the same excited expression, even more exaggerated.
When Joseph quitted the room, he took his seat in the place
he generally chose, and I put a basin of coffee before him. He
drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked
at the opposite wall, as I supposed, surveying one particular
portion, up and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with
such eager interest, that he stopped breathing, during half a
minute together.
** Come, now, " I exclaimed, pushing some bread against bis
band. " Eat and drink that while it is hot. It has been wait-
ing near an hour. "
He didn't notice me, and yet he smiled. I'd rather have
seen him gnash his teeth than smile so.
WUTHERING H B I 6 H T 8.
** Mr. Heatfaclilf ! master ! " I cried. " Don't, for God's sake,
stare as if you saw aa unearthly vision. "
" Don't, for God's sake, shout so loud, " he replied. <'Turn
rottnd, and tell me, are we by ourselves V*
" Of course, " was my answer, " of course we are ! "
Still I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I were not quite sure.
With a sweep of his hand, he cleared a vacant space in front
among the breakfast things, and leaned forward to gaze more
^t his ease.
Now I perceived he was not looking at the wall, for when I
regarded him alone, it seemed, exactly, that he gazed at some-
thing within two yards distance. And, whatever it was, it
communicated, apparently, both pleasure and pain, in exquisite
extremes ; at least the anguished yet raptured expression of his
countenance suggested that idea.
The fancied object was not fixed either ; his eyes pursued it
with unwearied vigilance, and, even in speaking to me, were
never weaned away.
I vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food.
If he stirred to touch any thing in compliance with my entreaties
—if he stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread — ^his fingers
< ;lencbed before they reached it, and remained on the table, for-
getful of their aim.
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed at-
tention fi*om its engrossing speculation, till he grew irritable and
got up, asking why I would not allow him to have his own time
in taking his meals ? and saying that on the next occasion I
needn't wait — I might set the things down and g^o. Having
uttered these words, he lefi; the house, slowly sauntered down
the garden path, and disappeared through the gate.
The hours crept anxiously by : another evening came. I did
not retire to rest till late, and when I did I could not sleep. He
returned after midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut him-
self into the room beneath. I listened and tossed about, and
finally dressed and descended. It was too irksome to lie up
there, harassing my brain with a hundred idle misgivings.
I distinguished Mr. Heathcliff's step, restlessly measuring the
floor ; and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration,
resembling a groan. He muttered detached words also; the
only one I could catch was the name of Catherine, coupled
with some wild tei*m of endearment or suffering, and spoken as
one would speak to a person present-— low and earnest, and
wrung fix > m the depth of his souL «

I famd not county to walk straight iato the i^Mxtment; but I
desired to divert bun from big teverj, wad therefore Ml fcnl of
tbe kitchen fire ; tfirred it and began to aorapo the ciudeia. It
drew bim fortb sooner tkaa i expected. He opeaed ibe door
immediately, and s a i d
*'Nelly, come beie^*ia it morning t C«me in with your li^^t. "
^It is striking fear, " I answered;''you wast m candle to
take up-staii»«-yoa migfat bave ligbted one at ibis fine.^
'< No, I don't wisb to go up-stairs, " be said. ** Ocrae in, and
kindleifiea fire,anddo aay^ingtbereas to doaboatdie room. "
** I must blow the coals red fimt, before I can eairy any, " I
replied, getdng « chair and tbe bellows.
lie roamed to and fro, meantiflM, in a state appnmcbiBg d3»-
traction, bis heavy sigfas svcceediBg each other so tbiek as ts
leave no space for common breatUng between.
« When day breaks, PE send for Green,^'be said; ^I wish to
make some legal inquiries of bim, while I can bestow a thought
on those matters, and while I can act cabnly. i bave not
written my will yet, and bow to leave my psopetty I can not
determinei I wisb i could araiibflate it frcnn tbe face of the
earth. "
'M would net talk so, Mr. Headidifi; " I infivrposed. ** Let
your will be a while—'you'll be spared to repontof your many in-
justices yet ! I never expected that your nerves would be dis-
ordered-^-'tbey are, at present, marv^ously so, however; and
almost entirely through ^onr own fault. The way you've passed
these three last days might knock up a Titan. Do take some
food and some repose. You need only look at yourself in a
glass to see bow jtm require both. Your cheeks are hoUow
and your eyes bloodshot, bke a person starnng witb banger and
going bbnd with lorn of sleep. "
''It 18 not my fault, ibat I can not eat or rest, " be replied.
** I assure you it is dvough no settled desigsa. i'il do bodi as
soon as I possibly can. But you might as well bid a stian
struggling in the water, rest within arms-length of ibe diore 1 I
roust reach it Unt, and then I'll rest. Well, never annd Mr.
Cireen ; as to repeitting of my injustices, I've done no injustice,
and I repent of uodung. I'm too bamy, and yet I'm not happy
enou^ My soul's bliss kills my body, bat does not satisfy it-
self. "
*'Happy, master ? " I cried. " Strange happiness! If yoa
would hear me without being angry, I might offer some advice
that would make you happier. "
WtJTBEEING H BIGHTS. 265l
.'* What 18 that riieaftked. ** Give it. "
f ^ You are aware^ Mr. Heathdiff, " I said, <'that from the tkna
you were thirteen years old, yoa huTe Inred a selfish, unchrist-
ian life : and prohably hardly had a Bible ia your hands, during
all that period. You must have forgotten the contents of the
boekf and you may not have space to seardi it now. Could it
be hurtful to aend for some one — some mmater of any denomi-
nation,, it does not matter which^ to explain it, and show you
how very far you have erred from its precepts, and how unfit
yott w^ be lor its heaven^ unless a change takes place before
you diel "
" I'm rather obliged than angry, N^ly, " he said, *• for you re-
mind me of the manner that I desire to be buried in. It is to
be eaxried to the churchyard in the evening. You and Hareton
may, if you please, aceompony me-^and mind, particularly, to
notice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two
coffins! No minister need come; nor need any thing be said
ever me. I teU you, I have nearly attained my heaven ; and
that of (^ers is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me ! "
** And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and
died by that means, and they recused to bury you in the pre-
cincts of the kirk V* I said, shocked at his godless indifference.
" How would you Kke it 1 "
" They won't do that, " he replied, " if they ^d, you must
have me removed secretly ; and if you neglect it, you shall
prove, practically, that the dead are not annihilated ! "
As soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring*
he retured to his den, and I breathed freer. But in the afler-
nooD, while Joseph and Hareton were at their work, he came-
into the kitchen again, and, with a wild look, bid me come and
ttt iu the house-— he wanted somebody with him.
I declined, telling him plainly that his strange talk and man-
ner frightened me, and I had neither the neirve nor the will to
be his companiea alone.
** I believe you think me a fiend ! " he said, with hui dismal;
laugh, " something too horrible to live under a decent roof t "
Then turning to Catherine, who was there^ and who drew
behind me at his approach, he added, half sHeeringly,
•* Will you come, chuck 1 " I'D not hurt you. No ! to you,
Fve made myself worse than the devil. Well; there is one who
won't shrink fix > m my company t By God ! she's relentless.
Ob, damn it ! It's unutterably too much for flesh and blood to
bear, even mine. "
286 WUTHERIITG HBI6BT8.
He solicited the society of no one more. At dusk he went
into his chamber. Through the whole night, and far into the
morning* we heard him groaning and murmuring to himself
Hareton was anxious to enter, but I bid him fetch Mr. Kenneth,
and he should go in and see him.
When he came, and I requested admittance and tried to open
the door, I found it locked ; and Heathcliff bid us be damned.
He was better, and would be left alone; so the doctor went
away.
The following evening was very wet, indeed it poured down
till day-dawn; and, as I took mv morning walk round die
house, I observed the master's vnndow swinging open, and the
rain driving straight in.
*'He can not oe in bed, " I thought, " those showers would
drench him through 1 He must be either up or out. But I'll
make no more ado, I'll go boldly, and look 1 "
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I
ran to unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant— -quickly
pushing them aside, I peeped in. Mr. HeathcliiT was there-
laid on his back. His eyes met mine, so keen and fierce that I
started ; and then he seemed to smile.
I could not think him dead — ^but his face and throat were
washed with rain ; the bed-clothes dripped, and he was per-
fectly still. The lattice, flapping to and i^o, had grazed one
hand that i^ested on the sill — no blood trickled from the broken
skin, and when I put my fingers to it I could doubt no more —
he was dead and stark !
I hasped the window ; I combed his long, black hair from
his forehead ; I tried to close his eyes — ^to extinguish, if pos-
sible, that frightful, life-like exultation, before any one else
beheld it. They would not shut — ^they seemed to sneer at my
attempts, and his parted lips and sharp, white teeth sneered too !
Taken with another fit of cowardice, I cried out for Joseph.
Joseph shufHed up, and made a noise, but resolutely refused to
meddle with him.
" Th'divil's harried off his soul, " he cried, " and he muh hev
his carcass intuh t'bargin, for ow't aw care ! Ech ! what a
wicked un he looks, grinning at death ! " and tlie old sinner
grinned in mockery.
I thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed ; but
suddenly composing himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his
hands, and returned thanks that the lawful master and the
ancient stock were restored to their rights.
WUTBERINO HEIGHTS. 287
I felt stunned by the aw & l event ; and riiy memory unavoid-
ably recurred to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness.
But poor Hareton, the most wronged, was the only one that
really suffered much. He sat by the corpse all night, weeping
in bitter earnest. He pressed its hand, and kissed the sarcastic,
savage face that every one else shrank.from contemplating ; and
bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs naturally
from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.
Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the
master died. I concealed the fact of his having swallowed
nothing for four days, fearing it might lead to trouble ; and then,
I am. persuaded, he did not not abstain aa purpose : it was the
consequence of his strange illness, not the cause.
We buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighborhood,
as he had wished. . Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six men to
carry the coffin, comprehended the whole attendance.
The six men departed .when they had let it down into the
grave : we stayed to see it covered. Hareton, with a streaming
face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mold him-
self. At present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion
mounds — and I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. But the
country folks, if you asked them, would swear on their Bibles
that he vxdks. There are those who speak to having met him
near th6 church, and on the moor, and even within this house.
Idle tales, you'll say, and so say T. Yet that old man by the
kitchen fire affirms he has seen''two on'em*'looking out of his
chamber window, on every rainy night, since his death — and an
odd thing happened to me about a month ago.
I was going to the Grange one evening — a dark evening ,
threatening thunder — ^and, just at the turn of the Heights, I en
countered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before him.
He was crying terribly, and I supposed the lambs were skittish,
and would not be guided.
<'What is the matter, my little man ? " I asked.
" They's HeathcliS* and a woman yonder, under t'nab, " h^
blubbered,''un'aw damut pass'em. "
I saw nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would go on, so
I bid him take the road lower down. He probably raised the
phantoms from thinking, as he traversed the moora alone, on
the nonsense he had heard his parents and companions repeat ;
yet, still, I don't like being out in the dark now, and I don't like
being left by myself in this grrim hoiise. I can not help it ; 1
shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the Qrange 1
S§8 WOTHBRINO HBiaKT &
** They are goidg to the Qnsmgt, then f^ I mcL
** Yes " answered Mm. Dean, ** as eoon as thetf are ttairied ;
and that will be an New Year's day. "
** And who will live here then V
** Why, Joseph will take care of the hotne, and, peftiape, a
lad to keep him company. They will liye in the kicchcn^ ssd
the rest will be riiut up.''
'* For the use of such ghosts as choose tb kihabit ii, " I obsenred.
** No, Mr. Lockwood, " said Nelly, shaking her head.'< I
beHeve the dead are at peace, bat it ia net right to speak of
them with leyity. "
At that moment the garden gate " swuiig to ; the ramblers
were returning.
** They are afraid of nothing, " I grumbled, watching their
approach through the window. " Together they would brav«
Satan apd all his legions. "
As they stepped upon the door-stones, and halSisd to take a
last look at the moon, or, more correctly, at eaeh odwr» by her
light, I felt irresistibly impelled to escape diem a^dn; and,
pressing a remenbrance into the hands of Mrs. Dean, and disre-
garding her expostulations at my radeness, I Tanished through
3ie kitchen, as they opened the house^door ; and so sh€mld have
confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his lellow-servant's gay indis-
cretions, had be not, fortunately, recognised me fer a respectable
character, by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his IbeC
My walk home was lengthened by a divenion in the direction
of the kirk. When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had
made progress, even in seven months^-many a vrindow showed
«black gaps deprived of glass ; and slates jutted off, here and
there, beyond the right line of the roof^ to be graduaUy worked
off in coming autumn storms.
I sought, and soon discovered, the three head-stones on the
slope next the moor — the middle one, gray, and half buried in
the heath — ^Edgar Linton's only harmonized by the turf and
moss creeping up its ^t-^Heat^cliff's still bare.
I lingered round them, under that benign sky ; watched the
moths fluttering among the heath and harebells; listened to
the soft wind breal^ing through the grass ; and wondered how
any one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepeni
in that quiet eardi»
THE E]IB«
J
^4t ■ ■ ■
• " • • •

tf*
I f
I

l* •••-
•• . -•
THE NEW YORK PUBLIC UBBARY
REFERENCE DEPARTMENT
TW. book i. uaa«r -o cirou»..t^« " " *-
tak«a from the Buildmf

1 ::

THTB COttECTIOXOF
PR£H£NTEDBir
HIS " WTDfirW
HIS HAIJGHTER
HIS BAtTGHTKR-IX-IiAW
TO THE
Di^lp guriiBibUrlrilnnti^ir
TOR.LKNOX: AJO) THiDEX FOCNStATIOI^H
IX MEMORY OF
AXBHIS80N ^
^^i(eitjiaKri^Bfilb|flD||»^ " ^J
UEUTEXAXT-COMMAXDER'#
ITNTTED STATES XAVT
•J
r
i-
I
. f
■

